3604 S119868 99855074 20546
THE APOLOGIE OF THE ROMANE CHVRCH, DEVIDED INTO THREE SEVE∣rall Tractes whereof 1. The first, Concerneth the Antiquitie and conti∣nuance of the Catholike Romane Re∣ligion ever since the Apostles time. 2. The second That the Protestantes Religion was not so much as in being, at or before Luthers first appearing. 3. The thirde That Catholickes are no lesse Loyall and dutifull to their Soveraigne, then Protestantes. All which are vndertaken and proved by testimonies of the learned Protestantes themselues. Esay. 19, 2. And I wll sette the Aegyptians against the Aegyptians, so everie one shall fight against his brother. Jesuit seal IHS Printend with licence Anno Domini 1604.
AN ADVERTISEMENT to the Reader. FRENDLY (Reader) thou art hereby to be aduertised, that in regard of the many and great difficulties which accompany Catholickes in the impressiō of their bookes in Eng∣land, it was houlden the safest course to committe this worke to straingers laboure, by reason of whose ignorance in our lan∣guage, and want of due asistance to him in his printing hereof, it falleth out that many wordes are mistaken and other errors committed, of all which thou art to afford thy fauourable and patient consideration. And wheras the letters or other marks of reference occurring in the text, are not (for the reason afore∣said) asserted alwaies in their due and proper place. Let thus much serue once for all to admonish thee, that if at any time thou parceiue by the sence of the place, that the said letters or markes of reference, cannot (as they should) relate to the wordes next following in the text, then art thou in such places to referre them to the other wordes of the text going there next before. And where also the foresaid letters or markes of reference, haue not somtimes their answerable citation or authoritie alledged in the margent of that page or folio, thou art then to enquier therefore in the margent of the folio which is next before or next following. Thus much but remembred and well obserued will be sufficient to deliuer thee from many mistakings. Thus wishing thy Good as mine owne, I bidd thee most hartely fare∣well, This first of Aprill. 1604 I. B.
A TABLE OF CERTAINE PROTESTANT WRI∣TERS AND THEIR PARTICVLER WRITINGS WHOSE folio, or page are (for more readie and certaine direction) specially alledged in this discourse, and of their severall editions or yeare of Printe, according to which they bee so alledged, vnlesse it be otherwise noted in the margent. A ACCADEMIAE Nemausensis bre∣vis & modesta responsio ad professorū Turnoniorum societatis Iesu assertio∣nes: Londini Anno 1584. Adamus Francisci (his) Margarita theolo∣gica &c. VVotebergae, 1602. Anthonie Sadel de rebus gravissimis dispu∣tationes theologicae &c. Cantabrigia, 1584. Acta Colloquij Aldeburgēsis Lipsiae 1570. Alison his cōfutation of Brownisme Prin∣ted 1590. Anthonie de Adamo (his) Anatomie of the Masse, printed anno 1556. Amandus Polanus professor in Basile (his) Sillogethesium theologicarum &c. Basiliae, M.D.XCV.II. Amandus Polanus (his) Partitiones theolo∣gicae, Basiliae M.IC.CI. Andraeas Crastouius (his) duo libelli de opi∣ficio missae &c. contra Bellarminum Basiliae, M.D.XCIV. Antichristus siue prognostica finis mundi Basileae per Petrum Pernam. Apologia ad acta conuentus quindecem theologorū torgae nuper habit. Genevae. 1575. Aretius (his) Loci Comunes Geneuae 1589. Andraeas Althamerus (his) Conciliationes locorum Scripturae qui specie tenus pugnare videntur Norimbergae. Anno, 1535. Abraham Scultetus (his) Medulla theologiae Patrum Ambergae 1603. Acta Theologorum Wirtembergensiū & Patriarchae Constantinop. D. Hieremiae &c. Witerbergae 1584. B Baro (his) Treatize of Gods providēce &c. Englished by I.L. printed by Iohn Woulfe. Baro (his) foure sermons and two questiōs disputed ad clerum in S. Maries Church in Cambridge Englished by I.L. printed by Iohn Woulfe. Bale (his) pageant of Popes printed 1574. Bertrā de loque his discourse of the church trāslated into English by T.W. printed 1582. Bale Scriptorum illustriū maioris Britan∣niae &c. Catallogus &c. Basileae apud Ioh∣nem Oporinum. Bancrofte (now Bishope of London) his Sur∣vey of the pretented holy discipline printed 1593. Beacon the second part of his bookes sette forth Anno 1560. Benedict. Morgenstern. (Pastor Grandenti∣nus in Prussia) tract. de Ecclesia &c. Franco∣furtie M.D.XCVIII. Beza ad acta colloquij Montisbegardensis responsio Anno 1589. Beza in his sermōs vpō the Canticles Eng∣lished 1587. Bilson (now Bishope of Winchester) his true difference betweene Christian subiection, & vnchristian rebellion Anno 1586. Bilson his perpetual Governmēt of Christs Church Anno 1593. Bilson of the full Redemption of mankind, by the death and bloode of Christ Anno 1599. Bridges his defence of the Government &c. Anno 1587.
Bullinger his sermons devided into decades and translated into English Anno 1587. Bullinger his hundreth sermons vpon the Apocalippes Englished and printed 1573. Brocard vpon the Revelations Englished and printed Anno 1582. Barlowe (his) defence of the Articles of the Protestants religion &ce. printed 1601. Bartholomeus Keckermanus (his) Systema SS. Theologiae: Hanoutae 1602. Bell (his) Motiues printed 1593. Bucanus (his) Loci Comunes printed M.D.CII. C Carlile his booke that Christ descēded not into hell printed 1582. Chemnitius (his) Examen Concilij Triden∣tini Anno 1578. Chemnitius (his) Enchiridion &c. An. 1590. Cowper (late Bishoppe of Winchester) (his) Chronicle printed Anno 1565. Chitraei Chronicon Anni 1593. 1594. &c. printed Lipsiae Anno 1595. Camden (his) Britanniae &c. printed Fran∣cofurti 1590. Carion (his) Chronicon expositum & au∣ctum à Melācthone & Peucero printed Ber∣nae 1601. Couel (his) examinatiō of some things vsed in the Church of England &c. printed 1604. Cassiāder de officio Pij viri in hoc religio∣nis dissidio Anno 1562. Coelius Secundus Curio de amplitudine regni Dei Anno 1554. Caluin Institutio impress. Argētorat. 1539. Colloquium Altenburgense Anno 1570. Centuria Epistolarum theologicarum &c. à Melancthone, Bucero, Peano, & alijs ab An∣no 1519. vs{que} 1540. printed 1597. Centurie writers their Centuries printed at Basile per Iohannem Oporinum the 6. Centu∣rie being printed there 1562. the 7. printed there 1567 and thother uormer Centu∣ries being printed there certaine severall yeares beore. Castalio (his) defensio suarum translationū &c. Basileae per Iohannem Oporinum. Conspiracie for pretended reformation printed 1592. Crispinus (his discourse) of the estate of the Church, Englished and printed 1602. Couel (his) defēce of M. Hooker printed 1603. D De Russorū Muscouitarum & tartarorum religione &c. spiae libera ciuitate veterum nemetum. 1582. Deering (his) readings vpon the Epistle to the Haebrewes. Dent (his) Exposition vpon the Revelati∣ons Anno 1603. Danaeus (his) Isagoges Christianae parte quarta Geneuae Anno 1586. Dangerous Positions published in this I∣land vnder petence of reformation and for the presbiteriall discipline 1595. Downham (his) treatize concerning Anti∣christ 1603. Danaeus (his) responsio ad disput. Bellarmi∣ni part. 1. Geneuae 1596. Dresserus (his) pars secunda millenarij sexti Lipsiae 1597. Dresserus (his) Millenar. 5. printed Lipsiae 1595. David Pareus de Simbolis Sacramentali∣bus &c. Ambergae. F Fenton (Preacher at Grayes Inne) his book against Alablaster 1599. Foxe (his) Acts & Monumēts printed 1563. Fulke against Heskins, Sanders Rastell &c. 1579. Fulke (his) answere of a true Christian to a counterfeite Catholike 1577. Fulke (his) Confutation of Purgatorie 1577. Fulke against the Rhemiss testament prin∣ted 1589.
Fulke his defence of the English translati∣ons of the Bible &c. 1583. Functius Chronologia &c. Witebergae. Fulke (his treatize) against Stapleton and Martiall printed 1580. Foxe (his) meditations in Apocalipsin prin∣ted 1596. Forth (his) Apocalipsis Iesu Christi &c. ex∣posit. 1597. Fulke (his) retentiue against Bristowes mo∣tiues & discourse against Sanders, Rocke, 1580. Franciscus Gomarus (his) speculum verae Ec∣clesiae Hannouiae 1603. Fulke de successione Ecclesiastica &c. con∣tra Stapleton Londini 1584. G Gibbens (his) questions and disput. vpon Genesis 1601. Gifford vpon the Revelations 1596. Gfford (his) demōstration that our Brow∣nistes be full Donatistes &c. 1590. Georgius Millius (his) Augustana confessio∣nis explicatio Ienae. 1596. Gerhards Gesekenius de veritate corporis Christi in caena adversus Pezelium printed Francofurti 1598. Godwine (his) Catalogue of the Bishoppes of England 1601. Gesnerus (his) disputationes xvij. pro san∣ctissimo libro concordiae Anno 1597. Gasper Oliuianus (his) expositio simboli A∣postolici Francofurti Anno 1584. Gomaru see Franciscus Gomarus Gabriell Powell (his) Consideration of the Papistes Reasons &c. printed at Oxford 1604. H Harmonie of Confessions Englished and printed 1586. Hemingius vpon the 84. Psalme Englished 1581. Henoch Clapham his soveraigne remedie a∣gainst Schisme &c. 1600. Hiperius (his) method. theolog. 1574. Humfredus (his) Iesuitismi pars secunda cō∣tra Edm. Camp. 1584. Hooker of Ecclesiasticall Policie printed at London by Iohn Windet Hill (his) defence of the Article Christ des∣cended into Hell 1592. Hamelmannus de traditionibus apostolicis &c. 1568. Hospinianus (his) Historia Sacramentaria &c. Tiguri 1598. Hemingius de gratia vniuersali 1591. Hayward (his) answere to R. Dolman 1603. Haffenrefferus (his) Loci Theologici 1600. Hierom Zanelius in Epistolas Pauli ad Phi∣lip. Colloss. & Thessall. &c. printed Neosta∣dij 1595. Huberus (his) Theses Christum Iesum esse mortuum pro peccatis totius mundi. Tubin∣gae 1602. I Iacobus Andraeas (his) Confutatio disput. Io∣hannis Iacobi Grinaei de caena dom. 1584. Iacobus Andraeas (his) Epitom. Colloquij Montisbelgardensis 1568. Iacobus Acontius Stratagematum Satanae libri octo Basiliae 1565. Iacobus Heilbrunerus (his) Schwenfeldio Caluinismus, 1597. Iacob (his) defence of the Church and mi∣nistrie of England, Midleburgh 1599. Iohn Napeire vpon the Revelations London. 1594. Iuel (late Bishop of Salisburie) his defence of the Apoligie &c. 1567. Iuel (his) replie vnto M. Hardings answere 1566. Iohn Knoxe (his) answere against the adver∣sarie of Gods Predestination printed at Lon∣don 1591. Illiricus (his) Catalogus testium veritatis Basileae 1556. Iohannes Regius (his) liber Apolegeticus pro Ecclesia Augustinae cōfessionis vere &c. cō∣tra Bellarm. &c. Mulhusij Thuringog. 1603.
L Lascicius see de Russorū muscouitarū &c. Luc. Osiander (his) Epitom. hist. Eccles. Cē∣turia 1. 2. & 3. Tubingae 1592. Luc. Osiander (his) epitom. hist. &c. centur. 4. Anno 1595. Luc. Osiander epitom. &c. Centur. 6. Anno, 1598. Luc. Osiander epitom. &c. cent. 7. An. 1599. Luc. Osiander epitom. &c. cent. 8. An. 1602. Lutheri loc. Comunes Magdebur. An. 1594. Luther (his) Comentarie vpon the Epistle to the Galathians Englished Anno. 1575. Lubbertus de principijs Christian. dogma∣matum &c. M.D.XCI. Lobechius (D. and professor in the Vniver∣sitie of Rostoch) (his) Disputationes Theo∣logicae in Accademia Rostochiensi M.D.IC. Laconici Antisturmij spongia adversus Lamberti Danae Annosiandrū Tubing. 1580. Luc. Osiander epitom. &c. centur. 16. Tubin∣ga 1602. & 1603. Luc. Osiander epitom. &c. centur. 9, 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. Tubingae 1604. Lithus see Simon Lithus. M Manlij Loci Comunes Basileae 1562. Melancthon (his) Loci Comunes 1536. Melancthon epistolarum liber primus 1570. Melancthon (his) Apologia Confessionis Augustan. 1541. Melancthon Consilia Theologica &c. 1600. Musculus (his) Loci Comunes Basileae 1573. Marloret (his) Novi Testamenti catholica expositio ecclesiastica editio quinta 1593. Mathias Hoe (his) Tractatus duo &c. prin∣ted Francofurti ad Maenum 1603. Marbecke (his) comon places printed 1581. P Parkins (his) Goulden Chaine printed by Iohn Legat. Parkins (his) Exposition vpon the Creede Anno 1596. Parkins (his) Reformed Catholicke 1597. Piscator (his) Analysis Epistolarum Pauli Londini 1591. Penrie (his) treatise entituled M. Some laide open in his colours. Piscator (his) Volumen Thesium Theolo∣gic. M.D.XCVI. Propositions and Principles disputed in the Vniversitie of Genevae, Edenburgh 1591. Pareus. see Dauid Pareus. Peter Martir (his) Comon places &c. eng∣lished & gathered by Anthonie Marten prin∣ted 1583. Parkins (his) foure Treatises &c. 1588. Pantaleon (his) Chronographia printed Ba∣sileae 1568. Peter Martir de Coelibatu & votis printed Basileae 1559. R Raynolds (his) Conference with Harte &c. 1584. Rider (his) freindly Caveat to Irelands Ca∣tholickes, Dubline 1602. Rungius (his) Disputationes septemdecem ex Epistola Pauli ad Corinth. &c. propositat in Accademia Wittebergensi &c. 1599. S Sarcerius (his) Loci Comunes tom. 1. Franc. apud Chroferum Egenolphum. Sarauia of the diverse degrees of Ministers 1592. Spangenburg. (his) Margarita Theologica &c. Witeberge 1541. Symon Pauli Method locorum doctrina &c. 1573. Sleydan (his) Historie Englished 1560. Some (his) Defence against M. Penrie and refutation of manie absurdities &c. in M. Penries treatise printed 1588. Sparke (his) Answere to M. Iohn de Albines 1591.
Sutclyffe de Praesbiterio &c. 1591. Sutclyffe (his) Answere to a certaine Libell Supplicatorie &c. 1592. Sutclyffe de Vera Catholica Christi Eccle¦sia Anno M.D.XCII. Sauaria (his) Defensio Tractationis de di∣versis ministrorum gradibus contra respons. Beze, 1594. Suinglij & Oecolampadij Epistolarum li∣bri quatuor. Basileae M.D.XCII. Smith of Praier in general for all mankind against those that teach that all men are not to be praied for, 1595. Symon de Voyon (his) Discourse vpon the Catalogue of Doctors Englished 1598. Schlusselburg. (his) Theologia Calvinista∣rum 1594. Schlusselburg. (his) Catalog. Haereticorum liber 23. & vlt. 1599. Szegedenus (his) Tabula Analiticae: Londi∣ni, 1593. Sigwartus (his) 23. Disputationes Theo∣logicae &c. Tubingae 1603. Simon Lithus (his) Responsio altera ad al∣teram Iacobi Greitseri Apologiam &c. Heidel∣bergae M.D.C.III. Suinglius (his) Workes printed Tig. 1581. T The Disputation had in the Tower with Edm Camp. 1583. The Conspiracie for pretended reforma∣tion 1592. Timotheus Kirchmerus (his) Thesaurus ex∣plicationum omnium articulorum &c. ex re∣verendi &c. D. Martini Lutheri operibus col∣lect. 1566. The Christian letter of certaine English Protestants &c. to that reverend man R. Hoe. 1599. The treatise against the defence of the Censure printed by Thomas Thomas. V Vrsinus (his) Doctrinae Christianae Com∣pēd. sive Comētarij Catechetici Lond. 1586. Vrsinus (his) booke entituled Comonefa∣ctio cuiusdam Theologi de S. caena & eius∣dem Comonefactionis consideratio M.D.LXXXIII. Vrbanus Rhegius (his) Loci Comunes 1545. W Willet (his) Synopsis Papismi 1592. Whitaker contra Duraeum: Londini 1583. Whitaker de Sacra Scriptura contra Bellar∣minum Herbonae M.D.XC. Whitaker de Ecclesia contra Bellarminum 1599. Whitguift (now Lord Archbishop of &c.) his defence of the answere to the admoniti∣on against the reply of T. C. 1574. Willet (his) Tetrastilon Papismi &c. 1599. Whitaker (his) Responsio ad Rationes Edm. Campiani &c. printed Lichae 1604. Wicelius (his) Methodus concordiae Eccle∣siasticae printed 1537.
A TABLE OF CERTAINE FATHERS. and of the Anno Domini in which they liued. Anno Dom. Fathers. 880. Adouiennensis. 670. Agatho. P. 120. Alexander Primus. 140. Algerus. 730. Alcuinus. 380. Ambrosius. 870. Anastasius Bibliothee. 1080. Anselmus. 300. Arnobius. 430. Augustinus Hipponēses. 600. August. Ang. Episcopus 379. Athanasius. 1450. Antoninus. 130. Athenagoras. 370. Basilius Ephesim. 700. Beda Venerabilis. 1120. Bernardus. 1460. Bessarion. 605. Bonifatius tertius P. 840. Bertram Presbiter. 560. Cassiodorus. 390. Chrisostomus. 430. Cirrill Alexandrinus. 510. Cirill Hierosol. 240. Ciprian. 80. Clemens P. 1. 180. Clemens Alexandrinus. 1220. Cesarius Hesterbach. 240. Cornelius, P. 370. Damasus. P. 720. Damascen. 90. Dionisius Ariopagita. 380. Epihanius. 520. Eusebius Emissen. 520. Euagrius. 520. Eusbius Caesariensis. 500. Ennodius. 490. Gelasius P. 590. Gregorius Magnus. 340. Gregorius Nazianzen. 340. Gregorius Nissenus. 570. Gregorius Turonensis. 1060. Guitmundus. 540. Gildas. 1120. Glycas. 790. Haymo. 430. Hierom. 370. Hillarius Pictauensis. 240. Hippolitus. 1216. Honorius P. tertius. 1320. Iohannes Zonaras. 100. Ignatius. 400. Inocentius P. 1. 170. Ireneus. 630. Isidorus 130. Iustinus Martir. 800. Ionas Aurelianensis. 1100. Iuo Carnotensis. 320. Lactantius. 1050. Lanfrancus. 440. Leo 1. P. 1300. Lyra. 540. Liberatus. 50. Martialis. 1440. Marcus Ephesinus. 250. Methodus. 580. Michaell Singelus. 1060. Marianus Scotus. 1250. Matheus Paris. 230. Minutius Foelix. 1300. Nicephorus Calixtus. 1230. Nicholaus Methonens. 860. Nicholaus 1. P. 230. Origen. 350. Optatus. 1170. Otho Frisnigensis. 1170. Odo Parisiensis. 390. Pacanus. 140 Poli rates. 380. Prudentius. 880. Paschasius. 770. Paulus Diaconus. 350. Philastrius. 450. Prosper. Rhegiensis. 460. Proclus Constantinop. 420. Paulinus Nolanus. 860. Photius Constantinop. 390. Possidonius. 30. Philo. 1140. Petrus Lombardus. 440. Primasius. 1150. Petrus Cluniacensis 1050. Petrus Damianus. 390. Rufinus. 850. Rabanus Maurus. 1120. Rupertus Tuitiens. 380. Siricius Papa. 1100. Sigebert. Gemblacēsis. 420. Sozimus P. 430. Socrates Hist. 450. Sozomen Hist. 1482. Sabellicus. 460. Sedulius. 980. Suidas. 320. Silvester Papa. 220. Tertullian. 370. Theodoret. 880. Theophilact. 1380. Thomas Waldensis. 1260. Thomas Aquinas. 1490. Trithemias. 390. Theophilus Alexander. 170. Theophilus Antioch. 180. Tatianus. 420. Vincentius Lyrinensis. 1220. Vispergensis Abbas. 1482 Volateran. 160. Victor Papa. 480. Victor Vticensis.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS▪ of everie severall Section. TRACT 1. SECT. (1) THAT Englishmen were aboue 1000. yeares since converted to the now professed Ca∣tholike faith, pag. 2. SECT. (2) That the same faith was vniuersally professed for sundrie ages then before: and was also a∣greeable to that first faith whereto the Brit∣taines of Wales were converted in the Apo∣stles times, pag. 4. SECT. (3) A further Demonstration by cōfessed testimo∣nie from the Fathers that it was taught in the Apostles times, pag. 9. SECT. (4) Another like Demonstration thereof by testi∣monies from the auncient Iewes, pag. 23. SECT. (5) That true miracles make a stronge argument, and that the foresaid faith, whereto the Eng∣lish were converted was confirmed with such miracles, pag. 34. SECT. (6) That his Maiesties Auncestors liued and died in that faith, and that it is acknowledged by Protestants for sufficient to salvation, pag. 39. SECT. (7) That Protestants cannot proue that the Ro∣mane Church did change her religion, sine her first conversion thereto in the Apostles times, pag. 45. SECT. (8) That Catholikes are able to proue the contra∣rie by testimonie even from the learned Pro∣testants, pag. 60. TRACT. 2. deuided into two chapters. CAP. 1. SECT. (1) THAT Christs Church was by the predicti∣ons of the Prophets foretolde to become
vniuersall, and to convert with great encrease, the Kings and nations of the Gentiles, pag. 73. SECT. (2) That the same was not performed by Prote∣stants during either the first or second 300. yeares after Christ, pag. 76. SECT. (3) That Constantine our first Christian Emperour was not of the Protestants but of the Catho∣like faith, pag. 77. SECT. (4) That after the second 300. yeares after Christ the foresaide predictions were not performed by the Protestants Church, and were yet ac∣complished by the Catholike Church, pag. 81. SECT. (5) That the knowne defect thereof in the Prote∣stants Church advantageth the Iewes against them: made Sebastian Castalio, doubtfull of his faith, and David George an Apostata, pag. 84. SECT. (6) A confutation of the Protestants obiections & answeres concerning their Churches not ac∣complishment of the said predictions, pag. 87. CAP. 2. SECT. (1) THAT the true Church must haue her Pa∣stors, administration of the Word and Sa∣craments evermore to continue, pag. 91. SECT. (2) That Protestants to proue the answerable per∣formance thereof (for former ages) in their Church, doe alledge promiscuously both Ca∣tholikes and knowne heretikes as members of their Church, pag. 95. SECT. (3) That Waldo who liued Anno Domini 1220. was no Protestant & that therefore the examples of Waldo and his followers is not sufficient to proue (but so much as for their times) a conti∣nuance of the Protestant Churhes, admini∣stration of the Word and Sacraments, pag. 98. SECT. (4) The like is shewed of Wiclyffe (who liued Anno
Domini 1370.) and his followers, pag. 105. SECT. (5) The like is shewed of Husse (who liued An. Dom. 1400.) and his followers, pag. 109. SECT. (6) That though Waldo, Wiclyffe, and Husse, had bin Protestants, yet their examples are insufficiēt in this behalfe, pag. 111. SECT. (7) That the examples of Bertram, Berengarius, and others (who liued before Waldo) are also insuf∣ficiēt to answere in this behalfe for their times pag. 115. SECT. (8) A confutation of those Protestantes who an∣swere that their churches administratiō of the Word and Sacraments did during all those times continue in being, and yet withall re∣maine as then invisible or vnknowne: with so∣lution to the vsuall obiectiō of Elias complaint that he was left alone, pag 120. SECT. (9) A confutation of those who answere that their Churches administration of the Word and Sa∣craments continued during all those severall ages in being, and also knowne, & that as now through the iniurie of latter times no testimo∣nie or notice thereof is to vs at this day remai∣ning, pag. 124. SECT. (10) That even Luther himselfe was no member of the English Protestants Church, nor professor of their religion, pag. 126. SECT. (11) That also during the twentie yeares nexte be∣fore Luther (which are yet in memorie of this present age) no example can bee alledged of the Protestants (but onely of the Catholike) Churches administation of the Word and Sa∣craments, pag. 141. SECT. (12) A short plaine and vnanswerable further de∣monstration of the Protestant Churches de∣fection, and the Catholikes Churches conti∣nuance, pag. 150.
SECT. (13) That therefore Protestants for the preservati∣on of Christs Church in being, doe acknow∣ledge the Catholike Church to haue beene the true Church & the religion therof for suf∣ficient to salvation, pag. 154. SECT. (14) A briefe repetition of the premisses of this se∣cond chapter, pag. 156. TRACT. 3. SECT. (1) CONCERNING the confessed antiquitie of Catholike Priesthood, Confession, Abso∣lutiō, Masse &c. and of the Penall lawes made against them pag. 158. SECT. (2) The Protestants obiection of Catholickes dis∣loyaltie retorted vpon them selues pag. 163. SECT. (3) A repetition of confessed examples prouing the loyaltie of English Catholickes pag. 168. SECT. (4) A like repetition of confessed examples pro∣ving the loyaltie of forraine Catholickes pag. 173. SECT. (5) A protestatiō of the now English Catholickes pag. 175. SECT. (6) That the argument drawne from the confessiō of the aduersaries is strong, with a breife repe∣tition of the principall points throughout all these seuerall tractes, proued all of them by testimony and cōfession of learned protestants: with an humble petition for priuate tolleratiō pag. 177. SECT. (7) Concerning the euident incertainety and disa∣grement of Protestants in theire faith, and the reason and perticuler examples thereof: with a like humble petition thereupon, for disputa∣cion: pag. 183.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORDES AND OTHER THE KNIGHTS AND BVR∣GESSES, ASSEMBLED IN THE HIGH AND MOST HONORBLE Court of Parliament houlden this present yeare. 1604. FOR so much (right Honora∣ble) as the Catholickes sub∣iectes of this Nation beeing, though distressed members, yet truely members of that po∣liticke Body, which this high and honorable court of Parli∣ament doth represent, haue now for a great part of this last declining age, bene (contrarie to all example of former times) excluded from their accustomed places and voices therin: and continuing yet vnder such estate, are therby depri∣ued of all ordinary meanes to moue or answere for them selues, when and where it doth most concerne them: It cannot (I hope) seeme iustly greeuous or offensiue to any, that being in these straights, and destitute of all other aduocates they should mediate the appeasing of their former pressures and calami∣ties, by their owne most humble and earnest inter∣cession. Amongst which their sundry endeuours thus vndertaken to be made knowen vnto his Ma∣iestie, (as to a most Roiall and euer flowing fountaine of all grace and mercie.) The treatise hereunto an∣nexed
was specially one, being at first penned with intention to haue the same deliuered vp to his High∣nes: But wheras afterwards (his Highnes being in the meane time ouercharged with multitude of petitions so formerly exhibited by Catholickes and others) his princely pleasure was thereupon at last signified not to be further troubled or impotuned in that kind; the author of this treatise did thervpon not only alter his first intention cōcerning the deliuery therof vp to his Highnes, but also seriously laboured by all carefull meanes & direction for the vtter sup∣pressing therf: In whih ourse of his said labour, whē I perused ouer the orginal writen copie hereof, which casuallye and without his knowledge came vnto my handes, and had fully considered the so∣brietie of stile therein so carefully obserued and con∣tinued without all occasion of offence, and the pe∣culer and choice methode therof; togither with the sundie important reasons, enlarged and set downe therein, not so much with ornamente o riches of wordes, as with correspondence & sequell of mat∣ter, and that somewhat (perhaps moreThe Author hath signifi∣ed his painefull allegation of testimonies, to haue bene vndertaken, not am¦bitiously to paint his mar¦gent with multitude of au¦thorities, but only in re∣garde of the aduersaries tergiuersation and bould deniall concerninge any pointe not plētifully and plainly proued: and to the end that what is through his affected breuitie wan¦tinge in the text, may in further satisfactiō (wher it sall seeme needfull,) be founde more fully in the margent. paine∣fully endeuoured in this, then in some other like trea¦tise formerly published; howsoeuer I could not but commend his foresaid care and good discretion, in not presuming (by deliuerye of this treatise to his Highnes) to become offensiue or further tedious to so great a Maiestie. Yet could I not but censure his other intendment of suppressing the same for no lesse then extreame, and fitt to be preuented: as houlding it vnworthy, that so great paines & of such publicke profite, should for his priuate satisfaction be wholly suppressed and buried in silence. For which cause I haue aduentured though (in regard of the reason before signified) not to offend or trouble his Maie∣stie therwith; yet to dispose therof in an other course and so publishing the same (without the Authors
assent) to offer it (with all humble and due respecte) to your most honorable and graue considerations. For whom other may we in the cōfidence and equi∣tie of our cause importune rather then your selues, being the honorable Peers, and graue Sages of our noble Nation? vpon whom (next vnto his MA∣IESTIE the charge of redressing our miseries is most properly incumbent. Vouchsafe therfore I hum∣bly beseech you, to view euen with charitable and Christian commiseration, our present estate & con∣dition described to you in this treatise, and in like maner to waigh the reasons and motiues to the con∣trarie therin set downe, which are many and impor∣tant. As first that our affliction heretofore for so ma∣ny yeeres susteyned, hath bene for persisting con∣stant in that Faith wherto we Englishmen were a∣boue a thousand yeeres sinceSee hereafter tract. 1. sect. 1. conuerted: that also the same faith isibid. sect. 2. initio & sect 3. confessed to haue bene the ge∣nerally receaued faith of all Christian countries for sundrie hundreth yeeres before those times: that likewise it was onfirmedtract. 1. sect. 5. with true and vndoub∣ted miracles, and those reported not from the Apo∣criphall testimonie of any pretended fabulous Le∣gend, but from the constant assertion of learned Protestants them selues: That also the same faith is deducedtract. 1. sect. 2. circa & post med. & tract. 1. sect. 3 subdiuision. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. &c. vp to the Apostles times: In more full demonstratiō wherof it is likewise yet further shew∣ed, as well that Protestants are not abletract. 1. sect. 7 to proue that the Romane Church hath changed her Religion since her first profession therof in the Apostles times, as also that Catholickes haue prouedtract. 1. sect. 8 the contra∣rie euen by sundry arguments demonstratiuely vn∣answerable. Furthermore that wheras (according to S. AustinesAug. in Psal. 30. con. 1. faith. obscurius dixrunt Prophetae de Christo quā de ecclesia. Puto propte∣rea quia videbant in spi∣ritu, contra ecclesiam ho∣mines facturos esse parti∣culas, & de Christo non tantam litem habituros, de ecclesia magnas con∣tētiones excitaturos, ideo illud vnde maiores lites futurae erant, planius pre¦dictū est apertius prophe∣tatum est. &c. assertion) the holy Ghost foreseeing the contentions that would arise about the Church, did therefore by his Prophets speake more plainelye
therof then of our Sauiour him selfe, there is in this treatise accordingly describedtract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 1. & cap. 2 sect. 1. the propheticall historie of the true Church: with like proofe of the succeeding answerable euent therof to be most eui∣dently wantingtract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. & tract. 2. ca. 2. sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. & 10. in the Protestants Church, and yet fulfilledtract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 3. & 4 in ours. In so much has the more so∣ber and learned Protestants in preseruatiō of Christs true Church vpon earth for many former ages in which theirs was wanting, are enfoced to acknow∣ledgetract. 1. sect. 6. post med. & tract. 2. ca. 2 sect. 13 cir∣ca & post medium. our now Catholicke Romane Church to be the true Church, and the profession therof for suf∣ficient to saluation, charging therfore their other in∣considerate and headstrong brethren who affirme the contrarie, euen with ignoranttract. 2. ca. 2. sect. 13. fine. zeale. These (with sundry other important reasons) being con∣tained in this treatise, and all of them made plaine and confessed, not by doubtfull ambagie of words, neither by onely sentences of Scriptures or Fathers, though in them selues neuer so manifest, (for that course is specially and of purpose forborne, as being in regard of our aduersaries endles tergiuersation no other (then as it were) a vast Ocean wherin we can hardly restraine them to any cert intie of fight) But (for their more full conuincing) by those spe∣ciall testimonies (whether of Scriptures or Fathes) whose euident sense on our behalfe, is accordingly, and for such acknowledged euen by their owne learned writers, and those not fewe or vulgar, but many and of great estimation; I haue in respect of such their frequent and plane testimonies, so fully alleaged in iustificacion of our Church and religion, entitled this treatise: The Protestants Apollogie of the Ro∣mane Church. How effectuall that kind of argument is which is thus taken frō the confession of the aduer¦saries, I shall not need to shew, seing the force therof is not onely acknowledgedhereof see hereafter tract. 3. sect. 6. initio. by Mr. D. Whit∣taker and other Protestant writers, but is also of it
selfe manifest euen to common vnderstanding; For how can it be denied but that they, who in liking of their owne opinion, doubt not to preferre and main∣taine the same against the vniforme and confessed iudgement to the contrarie, of the auncient Fathers, of our now Catholike writers, and of their owne lear¦ned brethren, are to be giuen ouer as being despe∣rately incureable, & much more worthie of contēpt then answere. These thinges being thus premised, the conclusion of my most humble request is, that you will not forget to remēber these knowne prin∣ciples of your owne schooles, as namely that you are but men, and subiectetract. 3. sect. 7. paulo post initium. (no lesse then the Fathers were, or then we yet are) to error, ouer-sight, and misvnderstandinge of the Scriptures, that therfore you would resolue to1. Iohn. 4, 1. trie the spiritts if they be of God, and1. Thessal. 5, 21 proue all things houlding that which is good. And that accordingly you would read ouer this trea¦tise, not being trāsported with preiudicateDauid Pareus (a Prote∣stant writer) in libro de simbolis sacramentalibus. p. 17. post med. cōfesseth the preiudicate conceit of many Protestants saying. illud vero ego intelligo, multos doctrinam Papae damnare qui eam non in∣telligunt: damnant vero tantum nominis odio. con∣ceit of your former opinions, but as led the to with indifferent and equall censure. Let not the sway of times, or our miseries preuaile to make you so re∣gardles, or vs dispiseabe, that therfore you should be vnmindfull either of your owne soules or our pre¦sent onditon. Thus much but obtained, I doubt not but you will in the end, awake from all former spirituall drousines of opinion, & therupon confesse & say of our Cathol ke Church, as Iacob at his bodily awaking said of the place where he dreamedGenesis. 28, 12, 16 Surely the Lord was in this place and I was not aware. The eternal God according to whose will all lawes shold be made direct you accordingly in your making of lawes, and incite or stirre vp,act. 5, 34, 35, 38, 39. if any (as God forbid) not yet satisfied with our former troubles, shoulde vrge or moue for our further continued calamitie) some one or other well enspired hart, to perswade and preuaile as did the honorable Gamaliel when he
vpon the like occasion said,Act. 5, 34.35, 38, 39. Men of Israel take heede what you intend to do touching these men: &c. refraine your selues and let them alone, for of this work of theirs be of men it will fall a∣way, but if it be of god, you are not able to dis∣solue it.
TRACT 1. TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAIESTIE. IHS AMONG so ma∣ny and so im∣portant reasons (most Gratious Soueaigne as are preuailing more thn or∣dinary in questi¦on of the truth ther doth none occur of grea∣ter satisfaction, then such as is graced with answerableMr. Whitaker. de ecclesia cōtrou. 2. quaest. 5. cap. 14. initio. pag. 366. saith fir∣mum sit necesse est argu∣mentum illud quod sumi∣tu ex aduersariorum con¦fessione: &c. efficax enī erit aduersariorum ipsorū contra ipsos testimonium &c. et quidem fateor ve∣ritatem etiam e suis inimi¦cis testimonium extorque re. &c. acknowledgement of the learned aduersarie: And seeing it is the honou∣rable priuiledgeHereby wee vnderstand the Puritane preachers & their complices. of our CATHOLICKE faith, to be so Iustified by her enimies, of whom neuerthe∣lesse many (to make vs more odious and deiected) haue (of their inueterate hatred) busied them selues in their daily Sermons and other-wise neuer more then now of late, publikely to depraue our professed religion with all vnworthy and scandalous calum∣niation, perplexing so against vs, euen the more so∣ber and quiet iudgements, with a dispersed conta∣gion of their sophisticated (& to vs most dangerous) incantations; we cannot therfore in so greate neces∣sity of times, (in our owne defence) vse either a more proper Antidote to expell the poison of such their in∣temperate and impurest language, or lesse offensiue
meanes to your MAIESTIE, for the appeasing of our former continued calamities, so farre as to your PRINCELY and Christian wisdome may seeme re∣quisite, then if in this our needfull Apologie vnderta∣ken wholly to that end, we do professe purposely to abstaine from all such matter as remaineth questio∣nable, contenting our selues only with that, which is in it selfe euident or otherwise acknowledged for true by learned Protestants them selues. The which also we will accodingly endeuour hereby to accom∣plish, not with insulting against them in matter of vnnecessary and vnkinde exprobration nor yet with affected entertainement of prolonged discourse,1. Cor. 2, 4. Neither in the persuasible words of humane wisdome: but humbly, breifly, and plainely, as being very confi∣dēt, that naked truth, presented thus to your HIGH∣NES though but in her natiue and simple habitt, shall yet neuerthelesse, appeere in vewe of so vndestan∣ding a minde, both gratious and regardable: THAT ENGLISH MEN VVERE aboue 1000 yeares since conuerted to the now professed Catholicke faith. §. 1. PLEASETH it therfore your most excellent Ma∣iestie to call to mind, that it is now somewhat aboue oneMr. Couper late Bishop of Lincolne, in his chronicle fol. 156. a. affirmeth our conuersion to haue bene Anno Do. 599. and Mr. Foxe in his actes & monu∣ments, printed 1576. pag 117. a. prope finem affirmeth the like. thousand yeares since Gregorie then Bishoppe of Rome, for his vertue and learning surna∣med the Great, a man highly commended both by FathersS. Gregorie is commended by Damascen in orat. de defunctis: by Isodore. de scriptoribus ecclesiasticis cap. 27. and by the Fathers of the eight Toletane Councell. can. 2. and by S. Bede hist. l. 2. c. 1. andMr. D. Humfrey in Iesuitissimi. part. 2. rat. 5. pag. 624. saith: Gregorius nomine quidem magnus & reuera mag¦nus, vir magnis & multis diuinae gratiae dotibus ex∣ornatus: &c. And Mr. God¦wyne in his catalogue of the Bishopps of England. p. 3. ante med. saith: That Blessed & holy Father S. Gre¦gory was the occasion of re∣planting the Christian faith in our country: and Mr. Wi¦taker cōtra Duraeum. l. 5. pag. 394. fine. saith. quod nos magno beneficio af∣fecit Gregorius, id sem∣per gratissima memoria recolemus: Protestants, conuerted vs En∣glishe men (by the preaching of Austine) from hea∣thenish infidellitie to the faith of Christ.
Concerning the religion professed by Gregory, and wherunto we were as then so by him conuerted, it was so vndoubtedly our now professed Catholicke faith, that the protestant writers (not of vulgar note but those that are for learning reputed most accom∣plished, do for such throughout euery particuler spe∣cially and at largeIn prooffe that our then cōuersion was to euery perticuler pointe of our now professd Catholike faith, Mr. D. Humfrey in Iesuitissimi part. 2. rat. 5. pag. 626. & 627. saith. In eccle∣siam vero quid inuexerunt, Gregorius & Augustinus. onus caeremoniarum: &c. intulerunt pallium archiepiscopale ad sola Missarum solemnia: Purgatorium &c. oblationē salutaris ho¦stiae, & preces pro demortuis &c. reliquias, &c. transubstātiationē, &c. nouas templorū con¦secrationes &c. ex quibus omnibus quid aliud quaesitum est, quam vt indulgentiae, monacha∣tus, Papatus reliquūque Pontificiae superstitionis chaos extruatur? Haec autem Augustinus magnus monachus, a Gregorio monacho edoctus, importauit Anglis: &c. Also Luke Osian∣der in his epitom. historiae ecclesiasticae centuria sexta pag. 289. fine. & 290. initio. descri∣beth it yet more perticulerly, saying. Augustinus romanos ritus, & consuetudines Anglica∣nis ecclesijs obtrusit, nimirum Altaria, Vestes, Imagines, Missas, Calices, Cruces, Candelabra Thuribula, Vexilla, sacra Vasa, Lustrales aquas, Romanarum ceremoniarum codices: &c. And ibid. pag. 288 prope finem. he saith of Gregorie, in pluribus articulis turpiter & pon∣tificié hallucinatus est, nam & libero arbitio & bonis operibus nimium tribuit, de poeniten∣tia non recte docet, caelibatum ministrorum ecclesiae acriter vrsit, inuocationem Sancto∣rum eorumqué cultum, sed & imaginum idolatricam venerationem approbauit, palliauit, & defendit: Also the Centurie writers of Magdeburg in their sixt Centurie ca. 10. col. 748. circa med. make like report of Austines doctrine to vs English men. And collecting (els where in the sam booke) out of Gregories owne writings by them recited certaine his opinions which th hould for erroneous, as being popish they do in their index or Alpha∣beticall table of tha sixt centurie at the word Gregorij specially set downe (with figures of prticuler reference w euery such said opinion is to be found, as followeth.) eiusdem error de bonis operibus, de  sessione, de coniugio, de ecclesia, de Sanctorū inuocatio∣ne, de inferno, de Iustificatione,  rbitri de Paenitentia, de Purgatorio, de Sa∣tisfactione,: Also they charge him ye  itings with Consecration of Aultars, Chalices, and Corporalls: col. 369. fine. with Oblati rifice for the dead col. 473. post med. with Exorcisme col. 376. circa med. with translati ues. col. 381. fine. & 382. with Monachisme. 383. initio. & 384. with Pilgrimage. co  with Conse∣cration of Churches, with Masse, Reliques and sprinckling of holy water.  with Con∣ , of ap¦e, of oia, and Ole: l. 367. prope inum. h Crtin of Masse: . 36. n & 370. i∣o, & 693. post med. &  in : & with Claime & exercise of Iurisdiction & Pmacie ouer all Churches: ol. 425, 426, 427, 428 429, 430. 431. 432. &c. with which last point con¦cerninge Primacie he is in like manner charged and reproued by Mr. D. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory pag. 310. ante med. and by Peter Martir in cap. 8. iudi∣cum. describe it: Mr. Doctor Fulke tearming it therfore in generall our peruersionMr. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory. pag. 333. initio.: Da∣naeus also calling it, inebriatioDanaeus in resp. ad disputat. Bellarm. part. 1. pag. 780. fine. meretricis de qua est a∣poc. 17. vers. 4: and Mr. Harison confessing likewise thatMr. William Harrison in his description of Brittanie set before Hollnshed great Chronicle volum. 1. (after the last edition) pag. 29. b. line 11. And see his other more plaine wordes. ibidem. pag. 27. a. line 27. Austine came and brought in Poperie: with whom agreeth Mr. Bale, affirming that Aust.Mr. Bale in catalog. scriptorum illustrium maioris Britaniae cent. 14. pag. 117. saith of Austine, plebem per interpretes fidem papisticam docuit. by his inter∣preters taught our people the Papisticall faith with the pro¦fession
whereof they doubt not likewise sin plaine tearmes,) perticularly to charge certaine famous and godly learned English men, who liued in the ages nexte after our said conuersion, as namelyMr. Bale in Catallog scriptorum illustrium maioris Britaniae centur. 14. pag. 145. speaking of their martirdome saith: Passi∣sunt pro papismo papistici Martires Anno 693. And see further the Centurie writers cent. 7. cap. 6. col. 154. and Luc. Osiander in epitom. cent. 7. l. 4. c. 20. pag. 331. circa & post med. the two (memorable) brethren named Eualdi whom they there∣fore call Papisticall: and S. Bede whom they likewise expresly charge withLuc. Osiander in epitom. cent. 8. l. 2. c. 3. pag. 58. initio saith of Beda: Omnibus pontificijs erroribus (in articulis in quibus nos hodie a Papa dissentimus) inuolutus est &c. and saieth yet further of him, bonus fuit vir: error in all those popish articles wherin they at this day dissent from the Pope: and yet (that his profession notwithstanding) they do thinke him worthy of the surname ofMr. Foxe in his acts and monuments prin∣ted 1576. pag. 128. b. initio, and M. Couper in his chronicle at the yeare 724. fol. 168. b. and Hollinshead in his great Chronicle of the last edition volum. 1. pag. 130 b. initio. reuerende not doubting to number him amongstMr. D. Humfrey in Iesuitismi. part. 2. rat. 3 pag. 326. ante medium. the godly men raysed vp by the holy Ghost. THAT THE SAME FAITH VVAS VNI∣uersally professed for sundry ages before, and was also agreeable to that first faith, where to the Brittons of Wales were conuerted in the Apostles times. § 2. (most dreed Soueraigne) being our con∣fessed Catholicke religion, whereunto most vn∣oubtedly we were (so many ages since) thus con∣uerted,
and for which we haue of late yeares endu∣red such affliction, was not as then priuate only vn∣to Rome, or vs Englishmen, but (as our aduersaries do complaine) was vniuersaly thēMr. Parkins in his expo¦sition of the Creed pag 307. saith: During the spa of nine hundred yeares the popish heresie hath spread: selfe ouer the wholle earth professed through the Christin worlde, neither first as then became so vniuersall, but (as they yet further complaine and acknowledge) continued such for sondry ages then before.Mr. Iohn Nappeir in his treatise vppon the reuela∣tions dedicated to your Maiestie pag. 68 prope si∣nem saieth. Betweene the yeare of Christ 300 & 316. the Antichristian and pa∣pisticall reigne begunne reig¦ning vniuersally and with∣out any debatable contradi∣ction. 1260 yeares. Regning vniuersally (saith Mr. Napee) and without any debateable contradiction, (euen) twelue hundreth sixtie yeares: nexte ensewing the first 300. yeares after Christ,Mr. Nappeire vbi supra pag. 145. fine faith. Euen 1260 yeares the Pope and his Cleargie hath possssed the outward visible Church of Christians: And with this accompt of Mr. Napeir a∣greeth Mr. Brocad in his treatise vpon the reuelations fol. 110. a. circa med. vvhere he af∣firmeth, that the Church was trodden downe and oppressed by the papacie, euen from Siluesters time, vnto these times: which he there and fol. 123. (b) collecteth to be during the said 1260 yeares the Pope and his Clergie during all that time possssing the outward visible Church of Christi∣ans. In so much that whereas our learned aduersaries do truly affirme (as being vndoubted) that our neigh¦bours the Brittons of Wales,M. Camden in his Britannia &c. pag. 40. circa med. saith: Certum est Britannos in ipsa ecclesiae infancia christianam religionem imbibisse: In proofe, thereof he there alleadgeth sondrie auncient authorities. pag. 40. circa med. And pag. 157. paulo post med. he saith. In hac floruit monasterium Glastenburie quod antiquam repetit originem a Iosepho Ari∣mathensi. &c. hoc enim & antiquissima huius monasterij monumenta testantur &c. Nec est cur de hac re ambigamus. And Mr. Harrison in his description of Brittannie annexed to Hollinshead his great chronicle of the last edition: volum. 1. pag. 23 a. l. 18. saith: that Ioseph preached here in England in the Apostels times, his sepulcher yet in Glastenburie and Epitaph affixed therto is proofe sufficient: Also Mr. HENOCH CLAPHAM in his soueraigne remedie against Schisme pag. 24. speaking of the conuersion of the Brittons in the Apostles times saith therof. Our Schismatickes may as well aske me what assurance I haue there was a King Henry, as demaund what assurance I haue of the other. This point is also yet further affirmed by Mr. D. FVLKE in his booke against Heskins, Sanders &c. pag. 561. sect. 71. and in his confuta∣tion of Purgatorie pag. 332. also by Mr. GODWINE in his catolog. of Bishoppes. &c. pag. 1. initio. receiued theMr. BALE in his pageant of Popes saith: The Brittons being conuerted by Ioseph of Aramathia held that faith at Austines coming: And D. FVLKE against the Rhemish Testament in 2. Cor 12. sect. 5. fol. 316. a circa med. saith The Catholicke Brit∣tons with whome Christian Religion had continued in succession from the Apostles times would not receaue Austine: And in his answere to a counterfait Catholicke pag. 49. fine he saith: The Britons before Austins coming, continued in the faith of Christ euen from the Apostles times And Mr. FOXE in his acts and monuments printed 1576. pag. 463. a circa med. saith:
faith of Christ by the preaching of the Apostles & helde that faith at Austines comming not being (as they yet fur∣ther affirme) in the meane timeIn proofe that the Brit∣tons of wales at and be∣fore Austines coming in∣to England were not al∣tered by th ROMAN Church: Mr. D. HVM∣FREY In Iesuitissimi. part. 2. rat. 3. pag. 304. circa med. saith: Habue∣runt Brittanni templa sibi non Romanis, qui tum Romano iugo non erant subditi, nec Romanā re∣ligionē suscipiebant, nec Augustinum Apostolum suum agnoscebant: Et vide ibidem. pag. 624. fine. Also Mr. Doct. FVLKE in his confutation of Purgatory pag. 372. initio saith. It appeareth that this Land did neuer receaue the doctrine and ceremonies of the lattin Church, before the time of the Saxons. altred or corrup∣ted by the Romane Church:The Brittons after the recea∣uing of the faith, neuer for∣sooke it for any manner of false preaching of other nor for torments. &c. In the speciall proofe whereof (as being most certainly true)Mr. D. BARLOWE in his defence of the articles of the Protestants religion pag. 21. affirmeth the Church of, he Brittons to be as auncient euery day, and as Christian euery way as the Rmane, affirming further, the integritie therof (or not being altered by the Church of Rome) first by their obseruation of Easter different from Austine: Secondly by the opposition which they made against Austine: Mr. D. Barlowe seriously laboureth: it is neuerthelesse eui∣dent by S. Bede who liuedBede did write his historie thereof Anno. 724. as witnesseth Mr. Cowper in his Cronicle fol. 168. b. so nere to those times and write the Historie therof. And is also acknow∣ledged since by Protestant writers, that vpon con∣ference then had at a place thereof called in Bedes timeBed hist. lib. 2. c. 2. initio saith Augustinus adiutorio vsus Edilberthi Regis, conuocauit ad suam colloquium, Epis∣copos siue doctores maximae & proximae Britonum prouinciae, in loco vbi vsque hodie linqua anglorum Augustineizat appellatur: And Holenshead in his greate Coronicle of the last edition. volum. 1. l. 5. c. 21. pag. 102. b. line. 33. 40. &c. maketh like mention hereof. Austineizat betwene Austine and the Brit∣ton Bishops, who at the first frowardly resisted Au∣stine all they could, (for which Mr. Foxe not vniust∣ly reproueth thē)Mr. Fox in his acts and Monuments printed 1576. pag. 120. b. the greatest differences thē stood vpon betwene Austen and them, were expresselie and only mencioned to beBeda hist. l. 2. c. 2. paulo post med. reporteth how Austine said to the Brittons: si in tribus his obtemperare mihi vultis vt Pascha. suo tempore celebretis, vt ministerium Baptizandi quod co renascimur iusta morem romanae & apostolicae ecclesiae compleatis, vt genti Ang∣lorum vna nobiscum praedicetis verbum Domini, cetera quae agitis quamuis moribus nostris contraria, equanimiter cuncta tollerabimu. And the like is testified by Hollens∣head volum. 1. pag. 103. a. line 17. and by Mr. Godwine in his catallog. of the Bishopes. &c. pag. 6. ante med. their dissent from the vse of the Romane Church in their (Ceremonies) or ministring
of Baptisme and keeping of Easter: which let er (as Luc.Luc. Osiander in epitom. cent. 2. l. 3. c. 2. pag. 51. circa med. saith: Ioannes & Philippus apostoli Pascha celebrauerant decima quarta luna post aequi∣noxium vernum, quo tempore Iudaei etiam pascha suum celebrare solebant, idque apo∣stoli haud dubie fecerunt in gratiam corum Iudae o∣rum, qui nuper ad Chri∣stum conuersi fuerunt, & vt plures etiam Iudaeos Christo lucrifacerent: Osiander witnesseth from antiquitie) was tolle∣rated by the Apostles in rearde of the knowne weakenes of some, euen as for like respectact. 16.3. Cir∣cumcision was by them in like sorte tollerated, andact. 15.29. abstinence from blood and that which was straged speci∣ally prescribed: By which their so earnest dissenting about these only maters of smaller importance, is most plainely signifiedFor the Brit∣tons who Contradicted Austine and that so ear∣nestly about these so fewe and smaller points, would neuer haue ben silent, but much the rather haue with-stoode him in the other so many and in comparablie much gre∣ter points of faith, had they in like sorte disagreed from him therein: their full agreement in all other substantiall and head points of faith: Which thing is also as yet more certainely euident, aswell in that the Britton Bishopes as thenBeda hist. l. 2. c. 2. ante med. saith, tum Britones quidem confitentur intellexisse seueram esse viam Iusti∣ciae, quam praedicaret Augustinus: Hereof also see Hollenshead vbi supra pag. 102. b. line 54. Confessed that
it was the right way of iustice & righteousnes which Au∣stine taught: As also for thatMr. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatorie, pag. 335. prope finem. Austine did (as Mr. Fulke affirmeth at the last obtaine the aide of the Brittish Bishopes to the conuersion of the Sxons: So euidently doth that faith which Austine taught vs, and which the Protestants acknowledge for Popish, demonstrate it selfe in generall to be consonant & agreable with that primatiue faith whereunto the Brittons of wales were (as is confessed) cōuerted in the Apostles times: which point is as yet made much more euident by like further obseruation of so many other remote Nations conuerted in the Apostles times as namely of Gracia Armenia. India, &c. which although they be in some things departed from the faith whereto they were first conuerted, yet by their remnante of religion to this day preserued, sufficiently appea∣reth what faith it was whether Catholicke or Pro∣testant, whereto they were at first conuerted, and from which they be so in some pointes at this day departed witnes hereof are the seuerall publickeSee in those Liturgies mention made of Reall Presence, Sacrifice Praier for the dead, Praier to Saints &c. Liturgies of the Cratians, Armeniās &c. further witnes also hereof is their late professed agreement orOsiander in Epitom. histor. eccles. centur 15. pag. 477. post med. saith. Anno 1430. conuocaret (Papa) Eugenius quartus, concilium Florentiae &c. huic conci∣lio etiam Graeci Atmenij Iacoboini consenserunt and, Mr. Marbecke in his common pla∣ces. pag. 258. post med. acknowledgeth that at the Councell of Florence the Christians of Armenia and India consented to the Romane Church, and that the Greekes agreed &c. also Abdisu Primate of the Armenians subscribed to the late Councell of Trent. sb¦mission to our Catholicke Church; and most full and plaine witnes hereof is the aunswerableIt appeareth by the treatise published by the Protestants diuerse of Wittenberg Anno. 1584. entituled acts theologorum witebergensium & Hieremiae Patriarchae Constantinop. &c. that the Greeke Church at this day though deuided from the Lattin, professeth to beleeue Inuocation of Saints, Relickes, worshipping of Images, Transubstantiation, Sacrifice, the signifying Ceremonies of the Masse. Auriculer Confession: Enioyned Satisfaction: Confirmation with Chrisme: Extreme vn∣ction: all the seuen Sacraments: Prayer for the dead: Free will: Monachisme: Vowed Chastitie: the fast of Lent: that Preistes may not marry after orders taken &c. see this alledged in perticuler hereafter Tract. 1. ss. 7. in the margent at Figur. 11. And Chrispinus in his discourse of the estate of the Church pag. 253. initio: affirmeth that Anno 870. the greeke and Lattin Churches became deuided only for the Primacie and diuersitie of Ceremonies: so fully did they at that time consent in all other pointes: And concerning the other orientall Churches further remote, Osiander (in epitom. histor. eccles. centur. 16. pag. 970. post med.) saith, Hoc Anno. 1585. Christiani qui &c. the yeare 1585. the Christians who inhabit neere to Mount Libanus, be∣came at last Conquered, and subiect to the Turkish Empyre, neither is that to be maruailed at, for the Christians in the East haue not sincere religion, but are in most parte of Articles Popishly. Testi∣monie of our learned aduersaries: By which fore∣said examples of so many remote nations, so far di∣stant each from other, as namely Wales Graetia, Ar∣menia India &c. ConuertedAs concerning the conuersion in the Apostles times of Armenia: See Chemnitius examen. part. 2. pag. 7. b. Paulo ante med. when he saith, Armenit Bartholomeus Euangelium prae∣dicauit. of the like con∣uersion of Indiae: See O∣siander centur. 1. pag. 37 circa med. & Paulus ve∣netus l. 3. cap. 27. & 43. and Hayton Armen. l. de tartaris cap. 6. the like conuersion of Graecia ap∣peareth by Paules epistles to sondry of that Nation as to the Corinthians E∣phesians Thesalonians. And see reuelat. 1, 11. & concerning the like con∣fessed conuersiō of Wales See heretofore pag. 4. in the margent there at the letter. . vndoubtedly all of them in the Apostles times, and agreeing so far with vs and against our aduersaries in so many principall points of faith, is not obscurely signified that our now Catholicke Religion is that Primatiue faith, which the Apostles them selues first planted in all nations.
A FARTHER DEMONSTRATION BY Confessed Testimonie from the Fathers that it was taught in the Apostles time. §. 3. VVHICH antiquitie or prescription of our professed Catholicke Doctrine vp to those Apostolicke times is also made as yet much more probable or rather euident, by that which our lear∣ned aduersaries them selues do yet further acknow∣ledge and collect from the writings of the more an∣cient Fathers: To goe through eueryconcerning euery perticuler see more fully hereafter Tract. 2. c. 1. sect. 3. perticuler would be ouer tedious to your MAIESTIE and im∣proper to this place: Vouchsafeth therefore your HIGHNES that we may giue instance in such as be cheefe. 1 First concerning vowes it is acknowledged thatPeter Martir de votis pag. 490. fine. saith: erant ergo Cle∣mentis aetate professiones castitatis & vota fateor. Iam tum inceperant ho∣mines deflectere a verbo dei. &c. the profession and vowes of Chastitie were extant amonge Christians in the time of Clement Bishope of Alexandria thatPeter Mar∣tir ibidem. pag. 524. fine saith Scio epiphaniū cum multis alijs ex patribus in eo errare, quod peccatū esse dicant votum huius∣modi violare cum opus fuerit, & male illum id referre in traditiones A∣postolicas: Epiphanius & many other Fathers erred therin: thatcentur. 3. c. 6. col. 140. line. 27 & centur. 3. c. 7. col. 176. line. 39. Tertulian and Ciprian taught vowes of Chastitie: That the same haue bene vsedCaluin in∣stitut. l. 4. c. 13. sect. 17. ab vltima memoria, and an∣tiquitus receptum: thatPeter Martir de cele∣batu & votis versus fi∣nem. imediately after the Apostles times to much was attributed to vowes: that Ignatius him selfe (though their scholler) signifieth in his epistles: hiscentur. 2. c. 4. col. 64. line. 40. It is said ex epistolis Ignasij apparet homines iam tum paulo impensius caepisse amare & venerari virginitatis studium, nam in epist. ad Antioch. ait: virgines videant, cui se consecrarins. to much liking of that profession: andCentur. 2. c. 10. col. 167. line 24. de virginitate minus comode loquitur. speaketh in∣commodiously of virginitie.Abraham Scultetus in his medulla theologiae Patrum. pag. 450. circa med. alleageth Ignatius saying ad Philadelp. Saluto collegium: virginū wherupon he imediately inferreth: Ergone in illo ecclesiae flor fuerunt, quae castitatem & continentiam perpetuam profiterentur Virgines? fuerunt omninq. &c. saluting (and affirming Colleges of Virgines: and so plainely, that our learned)
aduersaries doe there-vpon affirme, how that euenScultetus vt supra. in that flower of the Church there were Virgins, that pro∣fessed Perpetuall Chastitie that lastly S. Ambros and E∣piphanius deriuePeter Martir de coe∣libatu & votis. pag. 543. paulo post med. & pag. 525. initio. Professed Chastitie from the instituti∣on of S. Paule: 2 Secondly cōcerning the Reall presence of Christs body in the Sacrament, the reseruation thereof, and the mixture of water with wine in the Challice: con∣cerninge the first, it is affirmed that Gregory, the greateHum∣fred. Iesuitissimi part. 2. tat. 5. pag. 626. post med. taught transubstantiation thatThe Centurie wri∣ters. cent. 5. col. 517. l. 23 say: Chrisostomus tran∣substantionem videtur confirmare, nam ita scri∣bit. &c. Chrisostome is thought to confirme transubstantiation: thatCentur. 4. c 10. col. 985. line. 30 Eusebius Emissen did speake vnprofitablely of transubstantiation: thatAothonie de Adamo in his Anotomie of the Masse. fol. 221. a. fine. & see the centurie writers, cent. 4. cap. 4. col. 295. l. 3 And oecolampadius in li¦bro epistolarum oecolā∣padij & Zuinglij. lib. 3. p. 765. the bookes of Sacraments ascribed to Ambros, affirme the opinion of Christs Bodely Presence in the Sacrament: wherin Peter Martir likewise professeth toPeter Martir in defens. obiect. Gardner. part. 4. pag. 724. And see also Peter Martirs further dislike of Cyrils syings in his epistles annexed to his cōmon places in Eng∣lish, his epistle there to Beza pag. 106. b ante medium. where he saith. I will not so easely subscribe to Cyrill, who affirmed such a communion, as therby euen the substance of the flesh and blood of Christ first is ioyned to the blessing. (for so he calleth the holy Bread) &c. And in his epistle to Caluine ibidem pag. 98. a. ante med. he proueth further for this opinion Cyrill and some other Fathers. dislike the Iudgment of Cirill: thatIn the treatise attributed to Vrsinus entitled Commonefactio cuiusdam theologi. de S. caena & eiusdem commonefactionis consideratio pag. 211. & 218. In Ciprian are many sayings which seeme to affirme transubstantiation: in so much as they doThe sermon of Cyprian de caena Domini, which this foresaid testimonie concer∣neth, is dedicated to Cornelius who was Bishoppe of Rome when Cyprian liued, and to whom Cyprian him selfe l. 1. ep. 1. & ep. 3. did write, in so much that Mr. Fulke against the Rhemish testament in 1. cor. cap. 11. fol. 282. a. circa medium alleageth testimonie from thence, affirming that the Author de caena Domini was not in time much inferior to Cypri∣an. vnworthely affirme that Sermon of his in which those sayings are extant to be counterfaite: that lastly IgnatiusMr. Whitgift in his defence against Carthwrightes reply pag. 408. ante med. who was S. Iohns scholler, & liued in Christs time did (as Theoderet 1200 yeares since, & them selues now doTheodoret. dial. 3. and Hamelmanus de traditionibus apostolicis &c. col. 746. line 18. 19. 22, 23 &c. alleageth not only Theodoret but also one Wydefortus alledging Anno 1396. this saying of Ignatius, out of an auncient copie of that time. affirme, and as the Luthe∣ranes
do obiectVide recitationes de concilio scripti libri concordiae &c. (printed Lipsiae 1581.) nona reci∣tat. p. 177. ante medium. in proofe of their Reall presence, say of the heretickes in his time, they do not admitt Eu∣chariste and oblations, because they do not confesse the Euca∣riste to be the flesh of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, which flesh suf∣fered for our sinnes: and one of our aduersaries confes∣seth accordingly, thatAdamus Francisci in Margarita theologica. p. 256. saith. Commen∣tum Papistarum de tran∣substantiatione mature in ecclesiam irrepsit. Transubstantiatiō entred early into the Church: and an other saithAnthonie de Ada∣mo in his Anotomie of the Masse pag. 236. a. an∣te med. I haue not yet he∣therto beene able to knowe, when this opinion of the Reall and bodily being of Christ in the Sacrament did beginne: As concerninge reseruation of the Sacrament: whereas according to our aduersaries Doctrine,Mr. Willet in his synopsis pag. 460. ante med. It is no Sacrament vnlesse it be receaued. The contrary was so plainely taught and practized, euen in the more ancient times of S. Chrysostom,Chri∣sostom. in ep. 1. ad Inno∣centium. CiprianCyp. in serm. de lapsis post med. Ire¦neus,Ireneus apud Euse∣bium hist. l. 5. c. 24. Iustine,Iustine in Apolog. 2. pro∣pe finem. &c. that Mr. Fulke confesseth hereof sayingFulke a∣gainst Heskins Sanders &c. pag. 77. prope finem. That the Sacrament (of some) was re∣serued in the elder dayes of the Church, is not so great a con∣trouersie, as whether it ought to be reserued. and Caluine acknowledgethCaluine. instit. l. 4. cap. 17. sect. 39. the reseruation of the Sacrament (to be) veteris ecclesiae exemplum,See Peter Martir. lib. con∣tra Gardinerū obiect. 88. the example of the auncient Church: & (to omitte others) Chemniti∣us doth likewise acknowledge thatChemnitius examē part. 2. p. 102. a. paulo post meiū. witnesses of this custome of priuate reseruation of the Eucharist, are Tertulian, Ciprian, Ambrose, Hierom, Basile, &c. and thatChemniti∣us ibid. cer∣taine of the aunicent Fathers greately commended the same, as Nazianzen, Ambrose &c. and that it was,Chemni∣tius ibid. anti∣qua consuetudo late patens & diu propagata. In so much as PeterSee this hereafter tract. 1. sect. 8. pag. 57. in the margent at at the letter .k. Martir cannot but acknowledge that (by the testimonie of S. Cirill) the anthropomor∣phites were specially condemned for their impug∣ning of the Sacraments reseruation: As concerning the minglinge of water with wine in the Chalice before consecration of the Sacrament It is so abundantly testified by the FathersIu∣stine apol. 2. fine and Ire∣neus l. 5. c. 1. Cypr. l. 2. ep. 3. Ambros l. 5. de sacramentis cap. 1. & l. 4. c. 5. Hierom. in morc. c. 14. Austine tract. 120 in Ion. & de eccles. dog. cap. 75. & de doctrina Christiana lib. 4. c. 21 Euseb. emissen. ser. 5. de Paschate. concil. 3. Carthag. can. 24. & concil. Auraicen. can. 17. & concil. 3. brach. cn. 1. & concil. tribur. can. 21. & concil Aphrican. can. 4. & ex capitulis graec. synd. c. 55 & concil. 6. constātinop. can. 32 of all
ages and Countries, that Mr. Whitguifte saith.Mr. Whit∣gift in his defence &c. pa. 473. prope initium. Ciprian was greately ouer-seene in making it a matter so necessary, in caelebration of the Lordes Supper, to haue water mingled with wine, which was at that time no doubt, com∣mon to moe then to him: Mr. Carthwright likewise ac∣knowledgeth thatMr. Carthwrite al∣leaged in Mr. Whitgifts foresaide defence. p. 525 fine. in the minglinge of water with wine, a necessitie and greate misterie was placed, as may ap∣peare (saith he) both by Iustine Martir and Ciprian: and Mr. Iewell speaketh of this mixture, confesseth in like manner saying,Mr. Iewell in his reply pag. 34. paulo antemed. in deede S. Cirian and certaine olde Fathers, spake of it, and fr it much, adde but now hereto, that the Armenians being the first wee reade of, that denied the mixture, ffirming (with our ad∣uersaries) tht only wine wa to be vsed, were there∣fore speciall condēned of error, as witnesTheo∣philac. in Ion. cap. 19. nom the water & blood which issued from Christs side: saith. Con∣fundntur Armenij qui non admiscent in miste∣rijs aquā vino, non enim credunt vt videtur, uod aqua ex latere egressa sit. The∣opilact and the Fathers of the sit CouncellCouncil. 6. constan∣tinop. can. 32, saith. No∣uimus quod in Armenia∣norum Regione vinum tā tum in sacra mensa offerunt aquam illi non miscentes, qui sacrificium incruentum peragunt: which their vsage that councell there condemneth, saving there further against it, nam & Iacobus Domini nostri Iesu Christi frater. &c. & Basilius Cesareae Archiepisopus. &c. mistico nobis in scripto tradito sacrificio, ita per agendum in sacro misterio ex aqua & vino sacrum poculum ediderunt. of Constantinople, who (aboue a thousand yeres since) alleaged against themibidem vt supra. S. Iames his Liturgie in proofe of the foresaide mixture: 3 Thirdly as concerning Antichrist, Altars, and sacrifice, Mr. Whitaker confesseth touching Anti∣christ saying,Whitaker. l. de An∣tichristo. pag. 21. the Fathers for the most parte thought that Antichrist should be but one man. But in that as in ma∣ny other thinges they erred: concerning the short time of his persecutiō or raigne gathred from the scriptures. Mr. Fox confesseth thatFoxe in Apoc. c. 12 pag. 345. post medium. almost all the holy and lear∣ned interpreters do by a time, times, and halfe a time vnder∣stand only three yares and a halfe: affirming further to beFoxe in Apoc. ca. 13 pag. 392. fine. the consent and opinion of almost all the auncient Fa∣thers. As concerning Aultars and Sacrifice, (which as D. Rainoldes grauntethD. Rainlodes in his confer∣rence with Mr. Hart pag. 552. fine. are linked by nature in relation & mutuall dependance one of other. And first con∣cerning
Aultars: Peter Martir reproueth the aun∣cient Fathers, saying,Peter Mar¦tir in his common places in english. part. 4. p. 225. b. post med. Petrus Alexandrinus &c. attri∣buteth more to the outward Aultar then to the liuely Temples of Christ. And yet further against Optatus:Peter Martir ibidem. p. 226. a. initio. Optatus l. 6. aginst Parmenianus saith, what is the Aultar? Euen the seate of the Body and Blood of Christ:ibidem. such sayings as thse (saith Peter Martir) edified not the people &c. and in no lesse plaine maner is Optatus foresaid saying mentioned and reproued by the centuriecent. 4. c. 6. col. 409. l. 25. writers:Peter Martir in his common places part. 4 pag. 225. b. ante med. As also Peter Martir, reproueth the Fathers in ge∣nerall, saying the Fathers shoulde not with so much libertie haue seen ed here and there to haue abused the name Al∣tar: Now as concerning sacrifice, it is affirmed, by our learned aduersaries that the more auncient Fa∣thers, namlySee this affirmed by Caluin hereafter pa. 145. in the margent vnder the letter. t. at Anno. 320 Athanasius, Ambrose, Austine, Arnobi∣us, &c. erred herein, and so fully, that their supper (is therefore saide to haue) carried the face of a renewed ob∣lation, imitating ouer nrly the Iewish manner of sacrificing &c. that theyCaluin. in omnes Pauli epist. in haebr. c. 7 vers. 9. pag. 924. b. forged a sacrifice in the Lords supper with out his Commaundement, and so adulterated the supper with adding of sacrifice: that also the writinges of Ireneus and Ignatius, (who are most auncient are herein)Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 63 line 9. & cent. 2. cap. 10 col. 167. line 17. and see hereafter pag. 145 in the margent vnder the letter .t. & at Anno 90. & 170 in∣commodious and dangerous: and thatSebastianus Francus in his epist. de abrogan∣dis in vniuersum omnibus statutis ecclesiasticis. presently after the Apostles times, the Supper of our Lord was turned into a sacrifice. In so much as some of our aduersaries doubt not to charge the auncient Fathers euen with propitiatoryAndreas Christianus lib. de opificio Missae pag. 167. initio reciting the Fathers opi∣nion hereof saith: Dicta autem Patrum non solum impetrationem sed etiam intrinsecant quandam vim placandi Inuunt Origines hom. 13 in Leuiucum at: ista est commemoratio sola quae propitium facit Deum hominibus. Athanasius in sermone de defunctis apud Da∣mascenum ait: incruentae hostiae oblatio propitiatio est. To which end he alleageth like∣wise further the perticuler sayings of Ambrose, Chrisostome, Augustine, Gregorie, Bede, and of the 3. Councell of Brach: and concerning the Fathers further testimonies for Masse see more hereafter Tract 3. Sect 1. in the margent at the letter .t. sacrifice, and sacrifice for the dead: So chargeable were the ancient Fathers no lesse then we now are, in that greate question of sacrifice.
4 Fourthly concerning Praier for the dead it is graunted thatMr. George Gifford in his demonstration that our Brownists be full Do∣natistes pag. 38 and see hereafter pa. 44 post med. & pag. 45. it was generall in the Church longe be∣fore the daies of Augustine, as it appeareth in Ciprian and Tertulian: that alsoMr. Fulk in his confutation of Pur∣gatorie pag. 362 ante med & vide ibid. p. 303 circa med. & 393 post med. Tertulian, Ciprian, Austine, Hie∣rome, and a greate many more, do witnes that sacrifice for the dead i the tradition of the Apostles. That likewise praier for the dead is taught in the writingsMr. D. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatorie pag. 353 & 354 ante med & vide Diois. de eccles. Hierarch. c. 7. part 3. now extant vnder the name of Dionisius Ariopagitta, who is mentioned in the Actes,Act. 17, 34. and those witings as∣wellMr. Fulke against the Rhemish Testment in 2. Thess. 2. sect 19 fol. 361. b. paulo ante med. thinketh that Dionisius liued in the time of Origen. acknowledged by Mr. Fulke to haue bene written aboue 1300. yeares since, (which was long before the obiectedWhere as it is vsually obiected against this booke that if it had bene the writing of Dionisius then Eusebius or Hierome would haue mentioned it, this confessed antiquitie therof before their times, auoideth that obiection, which is also no lesse plainly auoided by Eusebius hist. l. 5. c. 26. and Hierome (in catul. prope initium) who signifie that the bookes of sondry writers were vnknowne to them. times to the contrarie of Eu∣sebius and Hierome) as also alledged specially by Mr. Sutcliffe as beingSutcliffe de Presbiterio c. 13 pag. 91 prope finem saith. Dionisius antiquitatis optimus sane testis, videtur enim esse anti∣quissimus &c. And the Lord Archbishop of Canterburie in his answere to the admonition pag. 105 sect vlt. alledgeth Dionisius saying, Dionisius Ariopagitta in his booke de caelesti hie∣rarchia & seauenth chapter speaketh thus. &c. And see hereafter in this Section numb. 13 in the margent at this marke (¶) most auncient, and the best wit∣nes of antiquitie. In like maner concerning Limbus Patrum where as Bellarmine alledgeth in proofe thereof the plaine testimonies of the Greeke Fathers, as namely ofBellarm. tom. 1. l. 4 de Christi Anima cap. 14 Iustine, Ireneus, Clemens, Origen, Eusebius, Basill, Nazi∣anzen, Nicen, Epiphanius, Chrisostome, &c. and of the Lattine FathersBellarm. ibid. Tertulian, Hipolitus Ciprian, Hilla∣rie, Gaudentius, Prudentius, Ambros, Hierome, Rufinus, Austine, Leo, Fulgentius, &c. our aduesarie Danus an∣swereth to their testimonies saying.Danaeus ad Roberti Bellarmini dput. part. 1 pag. 76. paulo post med. as concerning them, they were not inctructed out of Gods word, neither doe th y confirme theire opinion from it, but only from their owne coniectures &c. In like plaine maner doth my Lord of Winchester make his acknowledgement, saying.
Master Bilson in his booke of the full redemp∣tion of mankind pag. 188 fine. All the Fathers with one consent affirme, that Christ de∣liuered the soules of the Patriarkes and Prophets out of Hell, at his comming thither, and so spoyled Sathan of those that were in his present possession: where-vnto might be ad∣ded the like liberall and plaineMr. Whitta∣ker contra Durum l. 8. p. 567. fine. answereth to Dureus his testimonies from the Fathers concer∣ning Lymbus Patrum say¦ing: quod scripturis euin∣cere minus potuisti, id Pa∣trum Testimonijs procul dubio conficles: de qu∣bus vt tibi quod fentio li∣bere, breuiterque respon∣deam, apud me vna scrip∣turae vocula plus habet ponderis, quam mille Pa∣trum sine scripturis pro∣nunciata, itaque non ex∣pectabis dum singulati hos Patrum errores diluo. And see further Mr. Whi∣taker ibid. pag. 773. initio And D. Barlowe in his defence of the articles of the Protestants religion pag. 173 Post med. sayeth hereof. This passeth most rife among the Fathers, who taking Inferi for Abraham bosome, expound it that Christ went thither, ad liberandum liberandos, to conuey the Fathers decea∣sed before his Resurrection into the place where now they are. confession of Mr. Whitaker and Mr. D. Barlowe. In so mch as Ioan∣nes Lascicius a learned Protestant of Polonia, doubt∣eth not to affirmeIoannes Lascicius in the booke entituled de Russorum, Muscouitorum, & Tartarum Religione. pag. 122 initio & 123 and deriue the Doctrine ther∣of, from manifestSee the testimonie of Ignatius in his epistle ad Trallianos paulo post med. and the like testimonie of Thaddeus apud Euseb. hist. l. 1. cap. vlt. testimonies of Igatius,Mr. Whitguift in his de∣fence &c. pag. 408 ante med. who was scholler to S. Iohn. as also of Thaddaeus who was one ofMat. 10, 3. the twelue. the authoritie and creditte of which last Testimonie FrigenilleusFrigeuilleus Gauuius in his Palma Christiana pag. 74 post med. Gauuius (an other Prote¦stant writer) vndertaketh specially to defend. 5 Fiftly as concerning feewill, it is affirmed that ProtestantsSo sayeth the Puritanes in their breefe discouerie of vntruthes &c. conteined in D. Bancrofts sermon pag. 203 fine. knowe that euer since the Apostles time in a manner it florished euery where, vntill Martin Luther tooke the sword in hand against it. And that accordingly the most auncient Fathers, namelyHereof see Abra∣ham Scultetus in medulla theologiae patrum pag. 369 post med. & 304 post med. & 466. fine & 151 paulo ante med. & 105 circa medium & 98 circa med. & 48 prope initium & fine. & 66 fine & 73 initio & 40 ante med. and see the centurie writers cent. 2 c. 4 col. 58 line 30 & col. 59 line 11. & cent. 3 c. 4. col. 77 & 78 & col. 48 line 15.. Ciprian, The∣ophilus, Tertulian, Origen, Clemens Alexandrinus, Iustine Ireneus, Athenagoras Tatianus: &c. erred therein: 6 Sixtly as concerning freewill & merite of workes Mr. D. Humfrie saith,Humfreid. Iesuitismi pat. 2 pag. 530 ante med And concerning the con¦fessed doctrine of Me ite, of Wrkes in Clemens Alex∣andrinus, Theophilus, Cypr. Iustine, Martir &c. See Abraham Sculttus vbi supra pag. 48. ante med. & 122 post med. & 151 post med. And the centu∣rie writers cent. 2. c. 4 & cent. 3 c. 4. it may not be denyed but that Iereneus, Clmenes, and othr (quos vocant Apostoli∣cos) called Apostolicall (in respect of the time in which they liued, haue in their writing the opinions of freewill
and of meritt of wookes: 7 Seuenthly concerning freewill, meritts of workes, inuocation of Saints, and such other like: The Lord Arch∣bishope of Canturbury discourcing ofMr. Whitguift in his defence &c. against the reply of Carthwrite pag. 472 fine & 473 initio. Doctrine taught in any age ine the Apostles time: affirmeth with∣out any other exception, either of age or Father, that (to vse his owne wordes)Mr. Whitguifte vbi supra pag. 473 paulo post initium and e Mr. Louel in his examination &c. pag. 120. almost all the Bishopes and learned writers of the Greek Church, and Lattin also fr the moste parte were spotted wh Doctrine of freewill, of merite, of inuocation of Saintes, and such lke: 8 Eightly concerning Baptisme, that the most aun∣cient Fathers (who suceeded next to the Apostles schollers) namely Iustine, Clment &c.Centur. 2. c. 4. col. 47. line. 43. and in Cen∣tur. 3. c. 4. col. 82. line. 55. it is saide: Affirmare audet Ciprianus quod per¦sona Baptizans Spiritum sanctum conferat & Bap∣tizatum intus sanctificet. thought rege∣neration (not to be signified but) wrought by Baptisme, and the word; vnto which (two) ioyned t gether they attri∣but efficacie, that is to say remission of sinnes: that alsoCent. 3 cap. 6. col. 125 line 16. Origen, Tertulian, and Cipriane, mencion how that the Bap∣tized persones were accustomed to be signed with the signe of the Crosse. That there were likewise then vsed in Baptisme sundry other Ceremonies ascent. col. 124. line 53 & col. 126 line 20. Abrenunci∣ati:cent. 3. col. 125. line 1 & 124 line 57 Three sould immertio,centur 3. col. 125 line 9. vncton &c. thatSoe saith Carthwrite in Mr. Whit∣guifts defence &c. p. 522 fine And Bullenger in his decades in English decad 5. serm. 8. pag. 1049. a. circa med. Au∣stine was of minde that Children could not be saued without Baptisme: thatMuscu∣lus ho. comun. de Baptis∣mo pag. 308. post med. Austine and many Fathers were of the same opinion. In so much that (as Caluin confesseth) the Fathers hereupon doubted notCaluin. institut. lib. 4 c. 1 sect 20. almost from the very beginning of the Church, to vse the Baptisme of laye per∣sons in daunger of death. 9 Ninthly concering Confesion, Absolution, Penance and satisfaction: that euencent. 3. cap. 6. col. 127. line 28. and see the wordes alled∣ged hereafter tract. 2. sect 7. in the margent at the letter c. neerest the end in (those firster) times of Ciprian and Tertulian was vsed priuate Confession (euen) of thoughtes and lesser sinnes, and that the same wasvide ibidem then commaunded and thought necessarie that also as then Penancecent. 3. col. 127 line 40 or satisfaction was enioyned according to the offence. that the same FathersWhittaker contra Camp. rat. 5 pag. 78 and see him also alledged in Mr. Fulkes defence of the English transltions c. 13 pag. 368 ante medium. though by (such) their externall discipline of life, to paie the paines due for sinnes, and to satisfie Gods Iustice. ThatWhitaker in resp. ad. Camp. rat. 5 pag. 78 paulo ante medium. not Ciprian only; but almost all the most holy Fathers of that time were in that er∣ror
and that the Priest, when Confession was (as be∣fore) made, and Penance enioyned,Cent. 3. col. 129. l. 77. did after∣wardes absolue the Penitent (euen)Vide ibid. And see this ceremonie of impo∣sing the Preists hand in absolution mentioned by Cyprian in serm. de lapsis paulo ante med. & l. 3. ep 17. & 18 Concil. 4. Car∣thag. Can. 76. & 78 & Chrisost in Ioh. 20. hom. 85 fine. with the now like vsed Ceremony of imposing his hand. 10 Tenthly concerning the Primacie of Peter, and the Romane sea, our aduersaries reprehend sundry of the Fathers for their afrming the Church to be buil∣ded vpon Peter: namelycent. 4 col. 1250 line 2. S. Hierome:cent. 4. col. 555 line 30 Hillary:Cent. 4 col. 558 line 54 Nazianzen:Cent. 3 col 84 line 37 TertuliāCent. 4 col. 84 line 59. Ciprian:Cent. 3. col. 85 line 3. Origen: and in generallCaluin. institut. l. 4 c. 6. sect 6 saith. In Petro fundatam esse ecclesiam quia dictum sit, super hanc petram &c. At nonnulli ex Patribus sic exposuerunt, sed reclmat tota scriptura &c. And Daneus in respons. ad Bellarmini disput. part. 1 pag. 277 post med. saith. Patres pessime de Petri persona sunt interpretati &c. many Fathers reprouing also others for their entitling PeterCent. 4 col. 556 line 17. the head of the Apostles: &ibidem col. 1074 l. 16 the Bishope of Bshps in so mch that whereas the Fa∣thers doubted not to celebrate publickly a yearely festiuallConcil. 2 Turonense 2 can. 16 saith: sunt etiam qui in festiuitate Cathedr domini Petri Apostoli &c. And Austine serm. 15 de Sanctis saith. Institutio solemnitatis hodi∣ernae, a Senioribus nostris cathedrae nomen accepit, &c. recte ergo ecclesiae, natalem sed illius colunt, quam Apostolus pro ecclesiarum salut suscepit, dicente Domino, tues Petrus &c. ideo digne fundamentum hoc ecclesia colit: and see farther mention hereof in Beda in martirologio. day, in honour of Peters sea (which re∣spect so had theeto, is more then we finde had to any other sea of any oher Apostle:) Daneus answering hereunto ffirmeth the Fathers assertiō, hereof to beDanaeus in resp. ad Bellarmini disput. part. 1 page 375 fine et 276 initio: the iudgements and testimonies of the Church then cor∣rupt d and betwitchd, or made blinde with this error. As concerning the Primacie of the Romane sea, the Centurists syCent. 5 cap: 10 col: 1262 line 30. Leo very painefully goeth about to proue that singulr prheminence was giuen to Peter aboue the other Apostles, and that thence rose the Primacie of the Romane Church: and Beza further saithConfess. Geneue c: 7 sect 12 and Whitaker de concilijs contra Bellarminum pag. 37 paulo ante medium faith, de Le∣one primo non laboro, magnus ille suit Antichristiani regni architectus, and yet ibidem pag. 34. circa medium he sayeth: of Leo, fuit ille quidem doctus & pius E∣piscopus, sed fuit tamen magis ambitiosus: &c. it is mani∣fest that Leo in his Epistles doth clearely breathe forth the ar∣rogancie of the Anticristian Romane sea and my Lorde
of Canterbury saithMr. Whitguifte in his defence pag. 342 post med. it is certaine that then viz. in the time of the auncient carthage & Aphrican Coun¦cell the Bishope of Rome beganne at least to claime the supe∣rioritie ouer all Churches. In like manner is that aunci∣ent councell of Sardis whereat sundry fathers of the Councell were present, charged for acknowledg∣ingHereof see Osiander cent. 4. p. 294 ante med. and Caluin in∣stit. l. 4 c. 7 sect 9 and see hereafter Tract. 1 sect. 7 in the margent at the let∣ter d of the second alpha¦bet. appells to the Bishope of Rome and Mr Fulke and other Protestants affirme that the auncient Ro∣mane BishopesSee Mr. Fulke alleaged hereafter Tract. 1 sect 7 letter a of the se¦cond alphabet: And see Sparke against Mr. Iohn de Albines in his answere to the preface ante med. and Osiander cent. 5 pag 28 & 218. Anastasius, Innocentius, zozimus, Boniface and Celestinus, (who liued 1200 yeares since) challinged prerogatiue ouer the Bishopes of Aphrica by sor∣ging a false canon of the Nicen Councell which pretence of forgerie is hereafterSee her∣after Tract 1 sect 7 in the margent at the letter c. d. of the second alphbet auoided: Mr. Whitaker saith also of Iulius Bishpe of Rome (who liued in Con∣stantines time) thatSee Whitaker de concilijs &c. quoest 2 pag 42 fine 43 initio & 44 paulo ante med. he challenged to him selfe au∣thoritie that no Councell shoulde be celebrated without the sentence of the Bishpe of Rome: S. Cipriane though a Bishope of Aphrick (who liued Anno. 240.) is charged by the centurie writers for his affirmingCent. 3 c. 4 col. 84 line 44. our chaire sounded by our Lords voice vpon the rocke: and thatibid. l. 49 there ought to be one Bishope in the CATHO∣LICKE Church: & for his challengeibid. l. 56 Peters chaire the principlll Church from whence Priestly vertue ariseth and lastly for his (say they)ibid. line 51. teaching without any foun∣dation of scripture, that the Romane Church ought to be ac∣knowledged of all others, for the Mother and Roote of the Catholi k Church victorMr. Whit∣gifte in his defence &c. pag. 510 prope finem. (as my Lord of Canter∣bury affirmeth) liued Anno 198. and was a Godly Bi∣shope and Martir, and the Church at that time in greate pu∣ritie: (as) not being long after the Apostles time: yet is he charged by Amandus Polanus toAmandus Polanus in silogethesin theologiae. p. 165. haue shewed a Papall minde & ar gancie: and by M. SparkeMr. Spark. against mr. Iohn d' Ab∣bines in his answere to the preface ante med. and see Osiander cent. 2. pag 7 & 96. some∣what Popel k to haue receaued hs bonndes when he took vp∣on him to excommunicate the Bishopes of the East Mr. Whi∣taker also charging him withWhitaker contra Dureum. l. 7. pag. 480. initio exercising iurisdiction vpon former Churches: Lastly S. Ierneus (who liued next after the Apostles schollers and in the same time
victor) is disliked for his affirming, thatThe cen¦turie writers. cent. 2. c 4 col. 64 line 10 all the Churche ought to accord to the Romane Church in regard of a more powerable principallitie: wherein the Centurists charge him withSee the 2. centurie in the Al∣phabeticall table at the word Irenaeus. a corrupt saying concerning the Pri∣macie of the Roman Church: 11 Eleuenthly as concerning the appointed Fast of Lent: St. Ambrose saithAmbrose serm. 25 34. & 36 it is sinne not to faste in Lent: for which M. CarthwrightMr. Cart∣write alleged in master Whitgiftes defence p. 100 initio. reproueth him: & yet no lesse is affirmed byAug de tem∣pore serm. 62 & 77 S. AustineChrisost. ad pop. ho. 6. prope finem. Chri∣sostome and otherconcil. 8. Tol. can. 9 Fathers: in so much as Chem∣nitius confesseth thatChemnitius examē Concil. Trident. part 1 pag. 89. b. ante med. saith Quadragessi nam enim Ambrosius, maximus tau¦rinensis, Theophilus, Hie¦ronimus, & alij affirmant ess traditionem apostolicam. Ambrose, Maximus, Taurinen∣sis, Theophilus, Hierom, and other do affirme the faste of Lent to be an Apostolicall tradition. In more vndouted proofe whereof other Protestante writers do not only af∣firmeSee this in Abraham Scultetus in medul. theologiae Patrum p. 440. initio. The superstition of Lent & fasting, to haue bene al∣lowed and commaunded by IgnatiusMaster Whitgifte in his defence &c. pag. 408 circa medium who was scholer to S. Iohn: but do also defendSee Abraham Scultetus vbi supra. And the same epistle of Ignasius (being ad Philip∣penses) is in like manner cited and acknowledged by Mr. Whitgifte in his deffence p. 102 ante med. And by mr. Carthwrite alleaged ibidem. pag. 99 prope finem. And mr. Hoo∣ker in his ecclesiasticall policie l. 5. sect. 72 pag. 209 circa med. answereth our aduersaries vsuall obiection made against it. and so likewise doth mr. Whitgifte in his defence. &c. that very Epistle of Igna∣tius, in which this Doctrine is extant, to be his true Epistle and not counterfaite: 12 Tweluethly concerning vnwritten Traditions and Ceremonies, and first concerninge vnwritten TRADITIONS it is Confessed as followeth, whereas Sanit. CHRISOSTOME saithChrisost. in 2. Thes¦sal. hom. 4 the A∣postles did not deliuer all thinges by writing, but many things without, and these be as worthie of credit as the other: Mr. Whitaker in answere thereof saithWhit∣taker de sacra scriptura. p. 678 paulo post med. I answere that thi is an inconsiderate speech and vnworthie so greate a father and whereas Epiphanius saithEpiphanius haer. 61 circa med. we must vse Tradition for the scriptue hath not all thinges, and therefore the Apo∣stles deliuered certaine thinges by writinge and certaine by Tradition: with whom agreeth S. Basill sayingBasil. de Spir. Sanct. cap. 27. some
thing we haue from scripture other things from the Apostles Tradition &c. both which hath like force vnto Christian Re∣ligion: Mr. D. Rainoldes answering to these foresaid sayings of Basill and Chrisostome, saithD. Rainoldes in his Conclusions annexed to his conference the 1. con¦clusion. pag. 689. I take not vpon me to controule them, but let the Church Iudge if they considered with aduice enough: &c. Whereunto might be added the like confessedWhere Eusebius l. 1 demonstr. Euang. c. 8 is obiected to say, that the Apostles published their doctrine: Partly by wri∣ting, partly without wri∣ting, as it were by a cer∣taine vnwritten law. Mr. Whittaker de sacra scrip∣tura pag. 668 fine. saith therto. I answere that this testimonie is plaine enough, but in no sorte to be recea∣ued, because it is against the Scriptures. testimonie, from Euse∣bius. And thus much breifly concerning the Fathers of the Greeke Church. Now as concerning the like confessed Doctrine in the Fathers of the LATTIN Church (to avoide tediousnes) S. Austine only (as being mostGo∣marus in speculo verae ecclesiae &c. pag. 96 ante mediu saith: Augustinus Patrum omnium commu¦ni sententia purissimus ha¦betur. approued by our aduersaries) shall serue for all: who labouring to proue that those who are Baptized by heretickes shoulde not be Rebapti∣zed, saithAug. de Bap. contra Don. l. 5. c. 23 the Apostles commaunded nothinge hereof, but that custome which was opposed herein against Ciprian is to be beleeued to proceede from their Tradition, as many things be, which the wholle Church houldeth, and are therefore well be∣leeued to be commaunded of the Apostles, although they bee not written. Wherein andSee the like saying in Austine epist. 118 ad Ianuarium. other his like sayings his meaning is so euident and confessed, that Mr. Carthwright speaking thereof, saythSee Mr. Carthwrite in mr. Whitgifts defence &c. p. 103 ante med. to allowe St. Austines saying is to bring in Poperie againe: and thatSee Mr. Carthwrites wordes alleaged vbi supra. if S. Austines Iudgement be a good Iudgment, then there be some things commaunded of God, which are not in the scrip¦tures, and there-upon no sufficient Doctrine conteined in the scriptures: Add but now hereunto, thatSee Chemnitius ex∣amen part. 1. pag. 87. 89 90. Chemniti∣us, reporteth for their like testimonie of vnwritten Traditions; Clemens Alexandrinus, Origen, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Hierome, Maximus, Theophilus, Basill, Damas∣cene &c. That M. FulkeSee mr. Fulke against Purgatory pa. 362 ante med. & 303 & 397 and against Martiall pag. 170. 178. and against Bristowes motiues p. 35 & 36. also confesseth as much of Chrisostom, Tertulian, Ciprian, Augustine, Hierome, &c. that lastly, Mr. WhitakerSee master Whitaker de sacra scrip∣tura pag. 678. 681. 683. 685. 690. 695. 696. 670 668. acknowledgeth the like of Chrisostome, Epiphanius, Tertulian, Ciprian, Augustine, Innocentius, Leo, Basill, Eusebius, Damascene, &c. Now as concerning Ceremonies Mr. Calfehill
(to omitte others) affirmeth thatHereof see Mr. Fulkes reioinder to Martialls Replie printed 1580. pa. 131 fine & 132 initio. the Fathers decli∣ned all from the simplicitie of the Gospell in ceremonies. 13 Thirtenthly it is confessed yet further in gene∣rall concerning Dionisius Artopagitta and Hermes, who are houlden most auncient & Apostolike,Of Dionisius mention is made act. 17, 34. and of Hermes rom. 16, 14. name∣ly that Dionisius in his fore-saide writinges which were aboue a thousand yeares since (as D. HumfrieHumfreid. in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 5 pag. 513 fine & 514 ini∣tio. saith: Hunc Arcopa∣gitam, Suidas, Michaell Singelus, Gregorius Tu∣ronensis, & alij Pauli au∣ditorem credunt fuisse il∣lum scriptorem caelestis et ecclesiasticae Hierarchiae: And see before Sect 3. n. 4. lit. .o. confesseth) publickely extant and alleadged vn∣der his name, doth (casually and obiter amonge o∣ther thinges) make mention ouer and besides the foresaide Doctrine of praier for the dead,Hamelma∣nus de traditionibus apo∣stolicis col. 707 line 27 & col. 736 line 56 and master Whitaker de sacra scriptura pag. 655 ante med. of Aposto∣licke vnwritten Traditions: ofHamelma∣nus vbi supra col. 707. l. 4 & col. 732 l. 51 ChrismeHa∣melmanus vbi supra col. 707. l. 49 & col. 743 l. 4 Consecration of Moncks. &Humfreid. in Iesuitis∣mi par 2 pag. 519 circa∣med nd Luther tom. 2 Witeberg. Anno 1562 de captiu. Babil. fol. 84. b. ante med. Sixe of our Sacraments that the booke of Hermes entituled Pastor affordeth in like manner testimonie or grounde worke ofAbraham Scultetus in medulla theolog. &c. pag. 467 post med. freewill and mo∣nasticall solitude ofHamelmanus de trad. apost. col. 252 fine & col. 253 initio. & col. 254 line 38 and Abraham Scultetus vbi supra pag. 467 post med. Pugatorie, and praier for the dead: ofHamelmanus vbi supra col. 253 l. 54 & col. 254 l. 49 Merite and Iustification of workes: of Professed Cha∣stitieHamelmanus vbi supra col. 251 line 48 & col. 254 l. 30 in ministers ofHamelmanus vbi supra col. 254 l. 36 Fasting from certaine meates: ofibidem col. 253 line 46 the Innocent parties remainnig vnmaried in case of ad∣ultrie: ofChemnitius examen concil. Trident. part. pag. 127 a prope finem workes of superogation: and ofHamelmanus vbi supra col. 254 l. 53 saith. Furtigitur bonum papismi initium impu∣rus ille liber pastoris, vel Heremitis. Poperie: And though in the primatiue Church some questionVide Eusebium hist. l. 3 . 3 prope finem was made of this booke, as whether it were Ca∣nonicall scripture or not, (many FathersIt was thought to be sacred, and for such alleaged by Origen lib. 10 in epist. ad Rom. Tertulian l. de oratione. Clemens Alex. l. 6 stromat. Athanasius in libro de decretis Nicen Synod. Cassianus collat. 13. c. 12 and by Ireneus l. 4 c. 37. thinking that it was) yet is it confessed to haue ben receaued at the least forHamelmanus vbi supra col. 254 line 24 saith. illum pro ecclesiastico habue∣runt quidem Patrs: and col. 730 line 25 he saith Hermetis libellus qui di∣citur Pastor, est olim ali∣quando in numerum ec∣clesiasticorum librorum re¦latus: In so much as Eu∣sebius hist. l. 3 c. 3. Ruf∣finus in Simbolum & Hie∣rom. in catul. do commēd this booke for profitable, and so Mr. Whitaker de sacra scriptura p. 93 fine confesseth of Hierome. Ecclesiasticall, and the authoritie thereof to haue bene so many ages since specially al∣leadgedHamelmanus vbi su∣pra col. 253 line 10 saith: Liber pastoris videtur re∣ceptus esse ab Ireneo & Clemente. And col. 255 line 42 he saith: Ostendit Eusebius a quibusdam li∣brum pastoris receptum esse, & imprimis ab Ire∣neo sic & Origines l. 1 de Principijs c. 3 citat quae∣dam ex libro pastoris eius∣que libri lectionem com∣mendat: ho: 13 in Ezech: by Origen, Clement, and Ireneus, who liued next to those Apostles times.
14 Fourthtenthly whereas the Lord Archbishope of Canterburie doth against Carthwright learnedly and truly vrge this generall rule or proofe of Apo∣stolicke Doctrine, sayingMr. Whitgiste in his deffence: &c. pag: 351 for so much as the origi∣nall & beginning of these names, Metropolitaine, Archbishop &c. such is their antiquitie, cannot be found so farr as I haue read it is to be supposed they haue their Originall from the Apostls themselues. For as I remember S. Austine hath this rule in his 118 Epistle. In somuch as he yet further saith in proofe of this ruleMr. Whitgifte vbi su∣pra pag: 352 it is of credit with the writers of our time, namely with Mr. Suinglius Mr. Caluine, & Mr. Gualter, and surely I thinke no learned man doth dissent from them: It is now by the premisses made more then euident that the seuerall Doctrines of our faith, are according to this rule, no lesse fre from all noted and knowne beginning since the Apostles times, then are the o∣ther foresaide Doctrines of Metropolitaines and Bi∣shopes: a thing so manifest that Master. Carthwright though our greate aduersarie) doubteth not yet fur∣ther to acknowledge the same, saying therefore of this very rule in plaine wordes,See Mr: Carthwrite his wordes in Mr. Whitgiftes foresaide deffence &c. pag: 352 initio: that thereby a win∣dowe is open to bring in all Popery: AndMaster Carthwright alleaged ibidem pag: 103 paulo ante medium. I appeall (saith he) to the Iudgement of all men, if this be not to bringe in Poperie againe, to allowe of S. Austines saying: &. So eui∣dently do our owne learned aduersaries, confirme and proue our foresaide Catholicke Religion, wher∣to we were so manie ages since conuerted, to be vn∣doubtedly Apostolicke.
ANOTHER LIKE DEMONSTRATION thereof by Testimonie from the Aun∣cient Iewes. §. 4. ADD but now in further demonstration hereof that concerning such Articles of faith now in question as are cōmon to vs with the Fathers of the olde Testament whensoeuer vpon any occasion, di∣rect mencion is made of any of them either by those that were before Christs time, or by the Iewish Ra∣bines since, it is still with vs and against our aduer∣saries. So in the example of praier for the dead, ad∣mitting the booke of Machabees but for a true Hi∣storie, it may not be denied but that long before Christs time, Iudas Machabeus (the vndoubted ser∣uant of god2. Machab. 2, 43 procured sacrifice for the dead: that the Priestes at Hierusalem accordingly offred2 Machab. 2, 45 So he made a reconciliation for the dead that they might be deliuered from sinne. it, and that the Author of the Historie so many yeares after commended2. Machab. 2, 45. It was a holy & good thought, & vide ibidem: verse: 43 the same. Whereunto might be added further like Testimonie thereof, from Io∣sephusIoseph cap: 9 diswa∣deth those distressed soul∣diers that were ready to kill thē selues saying: ig∣noro milites quae sit pro∣pitiatio animae hominis qui seipsum interfecit: quis intercedet pro nobis ad Deum si sic peccauerimus? most plainely therby insinuating that for such as dye in better estate, Praier may be made. Bengorion, also from Rabby SimeonRabby Symeon in libro Zoar. in c. 18 Genesis, saith of such as are temporally punished after this life. After they are purged from the filth of theire sinnes, then doth God cause them to ascend out of that place. (who liued befre Christ) & from sundry other olde IewishMenachim siam in Comment. ad Leuit. c 16 and R. Hismi. Alphesi scholiastes ad caput Roch: Haschana. And R. Isaac. Ababab. in Lucerna lucis conclusione. 1. part. 2. c. 2. & R. Dauid. Kimhi in Psalm: 32. Rabbines. In so much as the Iewish Rab∣bines of latter age do therevpon yet to this day pro∣fessefull to retaine and obserueRabby Moyses in his simbolum fidei Iudeorum printed at Paris Anno 1569. fol. 26. b & 27 a & 22 b exprssth a prescript forme of praier for the dead. like testimonie therof is giuen by Ioannes Isaac in institutionibus linguae haebricae impres∣sis Coloniae. 1553 And by Antonius Margarita: (a late conuerted Iewe) in his booke entituled vni¦uersi Iudaeorum fides: Praier for the dead: a thing not denied but plainelie confessed by Mr.Whitaker contra Du∣reum lib. 1 pag. 85 ante¦med. saith: Scio enim Iu∣dae is esse libros memori∣ales quos in Sinagogis su∣is legunt, eosque nunc pre¦cibus quibusdam pro mor¦tuis vti solere non igno∣ro. Whitaker.
2 Secondlye concerning Limbus Patrum the booke entituled Ecclesiasticus, though we should for the time suppose it not to be Canonicall Scripture, yet was it Collected or penned before Christs time, and by such an Author as then beforeIn the prologue of the booke of ecclesi∣asticus ante med. had giuen him selfe to the reading of the Lawe and the Prophets and other bokes of their Fathers and had gotten therein sufficient knowledge. In this booke is our Sauiours discending in to that place specially foretoulde vs where it is said in his person:Ec∣clesiasticus 24, 37. I will pearce through the lower partes of the earth, I will looke vpon all such as bee a sleepe, and will lighten all them that trust in the Lord: a saying so di∣rectThis pearcing thing the lower partes of the earth to lighten those that were there a sleepe and trsted in the Lord argueth plainely that those faithfull so a sleepe (or dead) were not thē in Heauen: for by the lower partes of the eth cannot be ment heauen. and pertinent that Master VVHITAKER seeketh to euade by these two only waies, as first in answering thatWhitaker contra Du∣reum l. 8 pag. 567 post¦med. these wordes are wanting in the Greeke Coppie: Seondly (this being notoriously falsealse for the English Bible (to omit o∣thers) of Anno 1576 purporting by the title on the first page thereof to bee translated ac∣cording to the Hbrue and Greeke hath these wordes translated accordingly. he finally and only reposeth him selfe in answeringe thatWhitaker contra Dureum l. 8 pag. 567 post med. saith, Nec libri huius authoritatē canonicam ag∣nosco, his fundamentis limbum immixum reuera est necesse. the booke is not Canonicall and so acknowledg∣ing the plaine meaning of the wordes, reiecteth their authoritie: So euidently doth this author make with the Doctine of Limbus Patrum. In like maner Rab∣benu Haccados who liued before Christ, saith in the person of the MessiasRabbenus Haccados li∣bro qui inscribitur: Reuelator Arcanorum. I haue decreed to discend into Hell to redeeme the soules of the iust which my Father did thrust there in the rodd of  s indignation, for Adams sinne: and the same doctrine is more plainly as yet affirmed
by RabbyRabby Symeon filius Iohai apud Rabbe∣num Heccados foretelleth of the Messias saying: Tunc anima eius discendet ad inferos, a∣pud quos triduo morabitur, vt inde omnes animas Patrum iustorumque educat. &c. iuxta illud Hoseae 6. visitabit nos post duos dies, in die tertia suscitabit nos, & viuemus ante fa∣ciem eius. Symeon (who liued before Christs comming) and by otherSee these more at large alleaged by Petrus Galatinus de arcanis Catholicae veritatis l. 6 c. 9 & 10. See them also alleaged by Peter Martir in his common places part. 3. cap. 16 sect 13 pag. 377 a. fine & b. Iewish Rabbines, and it is further more so agreeable with the writings of theIt is said that the law brought nothinge to perfection but was onely an introduction of a better hope: hebr. 7, 19) that therefore the way of holies was not open whiles the sister Tabernacle was standing. hebr. 9, 8 the same way being therefore called the new way which Christ dedicated (hebr. 10, 20.) that the Fathers of the olde testa∣ment are saide to dye ac∣cording to faith not recea∣uing the promise. hebr. 11, 13. God prouiding a better thing for vs, that they with out vs should not be made per¦fect. ibidem verse vlt. that accordingly the soules of sondry persons dead be∣fore our Sauiours Ascen∣tion, as of Lazarus: Ioan. 11, 43, 44. the made Luc 8, 55. and of those many bodies of the Saintes that rose and appeared to many. Mathew 27, 52, 53. did not returne from the eternall and vnchangea∣ble ioies of heauen, but from that other place which is called Abrahams bosome (Luc. 16, 22 the which was not heauen, as is testified by Peter Martir in his cōmon pla∣ces part. 2 pag. 621. a & part. 3. pag. 378. b & 379 a. initio: that (lastly) our Sauiour in regard of his deliuery of the olde Pa∣triarkes & iust men from this place at the time of his ascention, is accordingly said to As∣cend on high leading captiuitie captiue: (Ephes. 4, 8.) new Testament, that the auncientSee heretofore sect 3. subdiuision 4. Fathers and sondry learnedSee hereafter tract. 3. sect. 7 in the margent vnder the letter .m. example 17 pag. 174 fine: and see Peter Martir vbi supra. Protestants do therefore al∣low of it. 3 Thirdly as concerning Freewill it is saide in the foresaide booke of Ecclesiasticus not only of Adam who was then dead, and his sinne past, but by way of admonition to the men of that time, and against their sinnes then to come:Ecclesiasticus 15, 12, 15, 16, 17. say not thou he hath caused me to erre, if thou wilt, thou shalt obserue the Commaunde∣ments, h hath set water and fire before thee, strech out thy hand to which thou wilt. Before man is life and death, good and euill, what liketh him, shall be giuen him, a saying so plaine, that Mr. VVhitaker therefore saith thereof de loco Ecclesiastici Patrum, laboro &c.Whitaker in respons. ad rationes Campiani rat. 1. pag. 15 ante med. I make smalle account of the place of Ecclesiasticus, neither will I be leeue the freedome of mans will although he should affirme a hundreth times, that before man were life and death: and aunient Philo who liued in Christs time, affirmeth in like maner thatPhilo. in libro quod Deus sit immutabilis. man hath freewill &c. to which purpose (saith he) is extant the Oracle in Deutronomie, I haue placed before the lfe and death, good and euill, choose life: whereunto might be added no lesse plaine say∣ings of the other olde IewisheRabby Moyses filius Maimon in epistola aduersus astrolo∣gos, saith: Ac illud quidem intelligere debetis, praecipuum ac principale ex fundamentis legis nostrae omnesque item Philosophos aperte confiteri, quecunque ab ipsis hominibus fiunt, ea in ipsorum manu esse ac potestate &c. Si velit homo seruit Domino &c. sin placet adire concilia impiorum, & illud quoque facit: And see the other no lesse plaine sayings of Rabby Moyses Hadarsan in cap. 4. Gen. and also of Rabby Abba and Rabby Selomo, alleaged by Petrrus Galatinus de arcanis Catholicae veritatis: Printed Francofuf. 1602. l. 6 c. 6. colum. 339. f. & 340. b. c. Rabbines, and the answereableMr. Fulke in his defence of the Eng∣lish translatiōs &c. p. 320 initio, saith: The Iewish Rabbines Patrons of free∣will, do erre &c. And wher¦as Rabby Akiba in capi∣tulis Patrum, saieth: Et potestas data est & in bo∣no mundus iudicatur Pau¦lus Fagius in hunc locum saith: Haebrei hanc sentē∣tiam sic explicant &c. vt cuiuis homini potestas tradita sit vel bene vel ma¦le agendi. And againe. Apotheca aperta est &c. Hoc referunt ad liberum arbitrium videlicet in no∣bis situm, vt vel male vel bene agamus, Deum no∣bis mortem aut vitam pro ponere. confession in that be halfe of Mr.
D. Fulke and Paulus Fagius. 4 Fourthly as concerning Gods induration or hardening of Pharos hart: the Iewishe Rabbines are so plaine in affirming with vs the same to bee by Gods Permission, and not by his working (which expositionCalum insti∣tut. l. 2. c. 4 sect. 3. ino Caluine disliketh in the auncient Fa∣thers) that Peter MartirPeter Martir in epist. ad Rom. c. 9. and MunsterMn∣ster: Annot. in Exod. c. 7 doe ac∣cordingly acknowledge this their aforesaide expo∣sition. 5 Fiftly as concerning Angells and Saintes, the booke of Toby written so many ages before Christ, is soToby. 5, 5.12, 12.13, 15.18. plaine with vs concerning the patronage and intercession of Angells, that Mr. Whitaker doth therefore accordingly confesse and say thereof,Whit∣taker in respons. ad ratio∣nes. Campiani rat. 1. pag. 15. ante medi. illum vero Tobiae Raphaelem &c. Little doe we regard the example of Raphaell the Angell mentioned in Toby. Ne¦ther doe we acknowledge thoseOf the like number of seauen Angels which Mr. Whita∣ker so misliketh: see reue∣lat. 1, 4. & 5, 6. seuen Angl whereof he speaketh, all this is different from the Canonicall Scriptures, and sauoreth I know not of what superstition: In like maner doth the booke of Machabees make mention how that Iudas Machbeus2. Machab. 15, 12, 13, 14. sawe in vision Onias the highe Preiste (who was then before sline)See 2. Machab. 3, 33 & 4, 34 houlding vp his hands towards heauen and praying for the People, after which there appeared to him an other man who was agd &c. And Onias spake and said, this is a louer of the Brethren who Pray∣eth much for the People, and for the whole Cittie, (to witt) Ieremias the Prophet of God: A place so directe for the intercession of Saints, that Mr. Whitaker doth ther∣fore contemne itWhitaker in respons. ad rationes Campiani pag. 16. circa medium, saith: Illud Iudae de Oum somnium quod. 2. Machabe. 15. legimus, vt somnium pretermitto, sed parum re∣fert mortuorum siue intercessionem siue sacrificium intelligas, vtrumque tuum est, vtrum∣que est falsum. And it is to be obserued frther as very probable, that the Iewes present at our Saui∣ours Death, coulde not haue bene so easesly perswa¦ded to thinke & say that our Sauiour sayingMat. 27, 46, 47, 49. & Marc. 15, 34, 35, 36. Eli Eli Lammasabacthani, called He ias: If the inuocation of
Saintes had not bene as then familiar and vsuall to them: which their opinion appeareth yet more eui∣dently, aswell by further testimonie of the auncientSee Flauius Iosephus de Bello Iudaico l. 3. c. 14 where it is said: Purae ani¦mae quae exaudiunt inuo∣cantes, retinent locum in coelo adeptae sanctissi nū: And Iosephus Bengorion in Bello Iudaico. cap. 21 where it is said: Exurge nunc Moises fili Amram & vide populū tuum. ex∣urge nunc Aaron &c. and R. Abr ham in Gen. 22: saith of the Iewes. Isaac interponere solent interse & Deum in suis precibus quasi intercessorem. Iewes, as also of those other Rabbines of latterConcerning the like practise of the latter Iewes, see simbolum fidei Iudaeorum impress. Prari∣sijs 1569. fol. 22. b & 28. b And in their office of the dead, (where it is said) Angeli pacis egredimini in occurum defuncti, por¦tas Paradisi voluptatis re∣serate illi: & in libro pre∣cationum Iudaicarum it is said: Angeli misericor∣des ministri Dei altissimi placate quaeso faciem Dei optima deprecatione &c. times. 6 Sixtly concerning the vnwritten Traditions of the Iewes.Origen hom. 5 in numer. & in ep ad Rom. c. 3. Origen and HillaryHillarie in Psal. 2. saith: Erat iam a Mose antea institutum in omni Synagoga septuaginta esse Doctores: nam idem Moyses quamuis veteris Testamenti verba in literis condidisset, tamen separatum quaedam ex occultis legis secretiora misteria septuaginta senioribus, qui Doctores deinceps manerent, intimauerat. &c. doctrina ergo horum in posterum, quae ab ipso scriptore legis accepta, in hoc seniorum & numero, & officio conseruata est. do affirme that Moyses left many things vnwritten, the knowledge whereof was continued by Tradition, which his vnwritten Traditions: the booke of Esdras doth not obscurely signifie, as where it is said in the person of God, touching Moyses4. Esdras. 14, 4, 6, 26. I brought him to the mount Si∣nay, I did detaine him with me many daies &c. I commaunded him saying th s wordes thou shalt make knowne, & these keepe secret. And Egesippus mencioneth in like maner (as Mr. Hanmer Translateth EusebiusEgesippus apud Eusebium hist. l. 4 c. 21 fine. the vnwritten Traditions of the Iewes. To which their vnwrittē Tradi∣tions that most auncient Author AnatoliusAnatolius apud Eusebium hist. l. 7. c. 26 gi∣ueth also further Testimonie, & the auncient Iewes do affirme of their vnwritten Lawe, thatIn ca∣pitulis Patrum. Moyses receaud it vpn Mount Sinay and deliuered it to Iosua, & Io∣sua to the Elders &c. which saying as Rabby Iudas af∣firmethR. Iudas in hunc locum. concerneth the order of Tradition deliuered by word of mouth: a thinge not denied but confessed byPaulus Fagius in hunc locum saith: Tenet enim Iudeoru opinio, Mosen duplicē legem a Domino in monte Synai accepisse, al teram quam legem inscripto siue scripto traditam vocant, alteram quam legem quae in ore est siue ore traditam nominant at{que} hanc postremam succedanto quodam ordine per Mosen ad posteros derinatam af∣firmant. Paulus Fagius. 7 Seuenthly concerninge the force or meritte of Almes, and other good workes, proceeding from
true faith in the Mesias the Doctrine of the aunci∣ent Iewes is deliuered in the booke of Toby, where it is said:Toby 12, 9 after the translatiō of the English Bible of 1576. & according to the greeke copie published by the di∣uines of Basill 1550: the which I doe more pre∣cisely note, for that Mr. Fulke against the Rhe∣mish Testament fol. 109 a. circa med. denieth the latter parte of this text to be in the greeke. Almes doth deluer from death, & doth purge all sinne: and againeToby. 4, 10. Almes doth deliuer from death. & suffereth not (the soule) to goe into daknes: and in the foresaide booke of EcclesiasticusEc∣clesiasticus. 3, 33. water quencheth burning fire and Almes expiateth (or purgeth) sinne: and this is but agreeable with the other Scriptures ac∣knowledged for Canonicall, as where it is saideDa¦niel 4, 24. Wheras our aduersaries doe here in¦steed of Redeeme translate breake of. Hemnigeus in his exposition of the 84 psal. Englised pag. 527. thin∣keth that the haebru word signifieth to Redeeme: so al¦so most cleerelye in the greke translation doth the greeke word and so likewise doth the vulgar interpreter, & the auncient Fthers read accordinly, in so much as the same reading is obserued likewise by Luther in loc. comun. class. 1. pag. 72. ante medium: and by Peter Martir in his common places in English: part. 3. cap. 4. pag. 114. b. circa med. by Melancthon in loc. conun. edit. 1536. cap. de bonis opribus pag. 157 in fine: by the Apology of the Confession of Augu∣sa fol. 104. a circa med. And by the Tgurine translation of 1544 whereunto might be added the like reading and iudgement of Caluine, Aretius, Bullenger and many other Prote∣stants. redeeme thy sinne with almes, and thy iniquities with mer∣cie to the poore:Prouerb. 16, 6. By mercy and truth sinne shal be forguenProuerb. 15, 27. although this be omitted in the En∣glish Bible of 1576 yet is it so euidently parcell of the text that (to omitt the Fathers) the Diuines of Bsill in their edition hereof in Greeke and Lattin printed. 1550. do reade it accordinglie. By almes and saith sinnes are purged:Luc. 11, 41. Giue almes and behoulde all thige are cleane to you. 8 Eightly concerning Monasticall ife that it was not altogither wanting, but in some sorte professed amonge the auncient Iewes, Iosephus testieth say∣ingIosephus antiquittum: Iudaicarum. l. 18. cap. 2. the righteousnes of the essenes is maruailous: &c. they enioy their riches in Cōmon: &c. And in this course a∣boue. 4. thousand men doe liue, hauing neither wiues nor seruantes: &c. And else where it is affirmed of them thatIosephus de Bello Iudaico l. 2. c. 7. they are Iewes by nation, and doe obs rue continen∣cie, auoide Mariage, are contemners of riches (and) enioy things in common, none being ritcher then other: And that before any be admitted amongst themIbidem. Tri∣all
is had of his Continencie, and his other manners are for two yeares prued, and then he is taken into the Company. And Philo also who liued in the Apostles times, maketh mention of those who thenPhilo de vita contempla∣tiu. forsaking their goodes did dwell without the walles louing solitarine: he also ma∣keth like mention ofPhilo, ibidem. their Monasteries, where being solitarie, they studied the Misteries of holy life, and ofSee Philo his wordes apud Eusebium hist. l. 2. c. 16. post med where it is saide of them, quidam poro &c. vix semel toto triduo cibi recordantur: (& againe) nonnulli illec ebris sapientiae &c. sic oblectantur &c. vt duplo plus temporis in∣edim facile sustineant & vix tantum sex diebus expletis alimentum necessarium degustent: their (wonderfull greate) fasting from meate: Which foresaide professors of monasticall life thus menci∣oned by Philo, are by the CenturieCentur. 1. l. 2. c. 3. col. 18. line 33. writers, and D. RainoldsD. Rainoldes in his Conference pag. 488. prope finē. (for theire lesserTo their les∣ser disaduātage, least other wise being taken for Chri¦stian professors (as they are by Eusebius hist. l. 2. c. 16. and by Hierom de scriptor. Eccle. verbo Phi¦lo) it should argue mo∣nasticall profession to be apostolicke. disaduantage) acknowledged to be Iewishe. 9 Ninthly concerning Vowes: it is saide in the wri∣tings of the olde Testament.Psal. 76, 11. Vowe yee, and render your vowes vnto God:Numeri. 30, 3. whoseuer voweth a vowe vnto the Lord, &c. He shall not breake his promise, but shall do ac∣cording to all which proceedeth from his mouh.Deutro. 23, 21. when thou shalt vowe a vowe vnto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not be slacke to paye it, for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee:Ecclesiastes 5, 3, When thou hast vowed a vowe vnto God deferre not to paie it: &c: It is better that thou shouldest not vowe then that thou shouldest vowe and not paie it: Whereunto might be added sondry otherPsal. 22, 25. & psal. 50, 14. & Esay. 19, 21. like Testimonies from the writings of the olde Testament. We are not igno∣rant how that Peter Martir, Mr. D. Fulke, and o∣thers seeke to euade in answering thereto, thatPeter Martir de cae∣libatu & votis pag. 302. fine & 303. and ibidem pag. 304. post med. He further saith. Votū ego caeremoniale antiquae le∣gis praeceptum fuisse af∣firmo. And Mr. Fulke. answering to psal. 76, 11. saith That text pertaineth to the olde Testament in his re∣tentiue against Bristowes Moiues. &c. pag. 153. fine. And Bullinger in his decades in English, pag. 380. ante med. saith vowes belong to the Iewsh Ceremo∣nies. vwes were Ceremonies of the olde Testament: &c. Abolshed by Christs commig But is not the contrarie manie waies euident? as .1. First in that vowes were made before Moyses time, as is to be seene in the example ofGen. 28, 20 Then Iacob vowed a vowe saying, &c. Iacs vwe. 12. Seondy by the heretoforeSe here∣tofore. tract. 1. sect. 3. initio. confessed Doctrine of the most auncient Fathers, teaching vowes. 3. Thirdly, (to omitte the sundry other proofes that might bee alleadged from the new Testament) by the euident confession of sun∣dry learnedMr. Per∣kens in his reormed Ca∣tholicke, pag. 155. post, med. saith. And now in the new testament we haue war∣rant in like maner to vowe &c. of this kinde are the vowes to keepe set times of fasting &c. And see the the like lawfulnes of Chri∣stian vowes. further affir∣med by Musculus in loc. comun. de votis. p. 524. circa med. And by Mr. Willet in his Sinopsis. pa. 241. post med. And by Amandus Polnus in par∣titionihus theolog. l. 2. pag. 394. and Danaeus in primae partis altera parte contra Bellarminum pag. 987. affirmeth it, fas esse Christianis Hominibus vouere quae cum dei vo∣lūtate consentiunt: Protestants who a knowledg the lawfullnes of Christian vowes: in so much as Mr.
Hooker acknowledgethMr. Hooker in his Eccle∣siasticall policie. l. 2. pag. 103. paulo post med. Ananias his solemne vowe vnto God, which strictly bound him to the giuing of his possessi∣ons to the Churches vs, (though vet Mr. Fulke and Mr. Willet will notMr. Willet in his Sinopsis pag. 245. ante med. saith VVe do not reade that ANANIAS made any Vowe &c. And Mr. Fulke against the Remish Testament: in act. 5. fol. 191. a. propt finem. affir∣meth the like. in any case acknowledge Ana∣nias to haue voed) and Augustine Marloret ac∣knowledgeth in like maner how thatAnd so doth Peter Martir de caelibatu & votis pag. 323. initio. Marloret in. 1. Tim. cap. 5. vers. 11. pag. 375. a fine: the wid∣dowes) menioned by S. Paule,) did giue their faith to Christ the spouse, and to the Church, willingl barring them slues from Mariag: with whome herein do agree, sundry otherThe Protestant author of the booke entituled Antichristus siue Prognostica finis mundi. pa. 148. fine. & 149. saith quod Lutherus hanc primam fidem de fide iustificante intelligit & non de fide pudicitiae, id plane coactum est &c. loquitur apostolus de fide seu voto officij &c. quia autem Paulus vitio vertit quod nubere postea voluerint, clarissi num est hanc conditionem in voto intercessisse &c. And Mr. R. Alison in his confutation of Brownisme. pag. 71. affirmeth likewise of these widdowes, that before God and his Church they had vowed not to marrie: And thus (saith he) is this place expounded, by Bullenger, Claudius, Guiniam and others. Protestant writers affirming the vowed Chastitie of the saide widdowes. 10 Tenthly as concerning our conession of sinnes PetrusGalatinus de arcanis Catholicae veritatis l. 10. cap. 3. Galatinus giueth examples of seuerall testi∣moniesIn li∣bro Sanhedrin Hierosolomitano in capite quod nigmar haddin id est definitum est iudi∣cium it is said. Omnis cōfitens habet partem in seculo futuro sic enim in Achan reperimus quod dixit ei Iehouas, filmda obsecro honorem Domino Deo Israel, & da confessio∣nem, & indica mihi quaeso quid feceris nec celes a me &c. And in libro Ioma id est dierum in capite tom appurim id est dies propitiationum. It is said, dixit R. Hurma omnis qui trans∣gressione transgressus est, necesse est vt singulatim exprimat peccatum. &c. in the auncient Iewes, and like further testimonie or prefiguration thereof is not wanting in Leuiticus for whereas seuerall sacrifices are there apointed for seuerall sinnes, as forLeuit. 4, 2, 3. &c. sinne through ignorance, and otherLeuit. 5, 1, 4, 17. & 6, 1, 5. & numeri 5, 7. perticular offences, for whichLeuit. 4, 3. the Priest was appointed to offer and makeLeuit. 4, 20. & 5, 6, 13. & 6, 7. aone∣ment, how coulde the Priest heere offer those sun∣dry sacrifices appointed seuerally according to the diuersitie of SINNES, vnlesse the partie so offen∣ding confessed the same sinnes to him; which to haue bene so, is yet furthermore probable, in that it
was there also appointed and saideLeuit. 5, 6. and numer 5, 7. when hee hath sinned in any of ths thinges, then he shal confesse that he hath sinned therein &: And the Preist shall make attone∣ment for him cncerning his sinne. 11 Eleuenthly as concerning Melchisadechs offe∣ring of Bead and Wine in sacrifice (which our ad∣uersariesMaster Fulke against the Remish Testament in haebr. 7. sect. 8. fol. 406. a. initio saith Melchisadechs Bread and VVine pertended not to his Priestly office neither did he offer it to God. And Mr. Willet in his Sinopsis. pa. 478. ante med. & versus finem affirmeth the like; And Mr. Whitakes in his answere to Mr. Rainolds &c. pa. 67. saith, Melchi∣sadehe did not by any thing wherein he so sacrificed, pr¦figure the sacrifice & Priest∣hood of Christ: deny) and the prefiguration thereby, of our nowe sacrifice of the new Testament. Rabby Samuell saithRab∣by Samuell in Bereschit Rabba ad cap. 14. Genes. Melchisadech set forth the acts of Preist∣hood, for he sacrificed Bread and Wine, to the holy and Bles∣sed God. Rabby Phinces saith,Rabby Phinces ibi∣dem in cap. 28. numer. In the time of the Mes∣sias all srifices shall ceasse, but the sarifice of Bread and Wine shall not ceasse &c. as it is saide Psal. 110. thou art a Preist forer accoding to the order of Mlchisdech. Rab∣by Moyses Hadarsan saith of Melchisadech,Rabby Moyses Ha∣darsan in Bereschit Rab∣ba ad cap. 14. Genes. bringing forth bread & wine, sheweth that he taught the acte of Priesthood, which was to sacrifice Bread and Wine, and this is that which is read in the Psalmes &c. thou art a Priest for euer according to the order of Melchisadich: This point is so euident in the olde Iewish Rabbines: that The∣odorusThedorus Bibli∣ander de SS. Trinitate l. 2. pag. 89. saith, erat a∣pud veteres haebraeos dog¦ma receptissimum in ad∣uentu Messiae Benedicti, cessatura esse omnia lega∣lia sacrificia, tantumque celebrandum sacrificium thoda gratiarum actionis &c. & illud peragendum pane et vino sicut Mel∣chisadech Rex Salem & sacerdos &c. panem et vi∣num protulit Bibliander (a Protestant writer) doubteth not accordingly to confesse the same. 12 Tweluethly as concerning their further opini∣on of the Churches sacrifice vpon the comming of the Messias: our now sacrifice is therein so plainely signified and affirmed by the auncient Iewes who liued before Christs time, that (as Galatinus saith of one of them)Gala∣tinus de Arcanus Catho∣licae veritatis l. 1. cap. 3. circa med. they may be thought not so much to haue foretoulde things to come, as to haue reported Euangelist-like thinges alreadie done: To this end saith Rabby CahanaRabby Cahana ad c. 49. genes. vers. 11. the sacrifice which shalbe offered of Wine, shall not only be chaunged into the substance of the Blood of the Messias, but also into the substance of his Body: the sacrifice which shalbe of Bread notwithstanding that it be whit as milke, it shall be conuerted into the substance of the Body of the Mssias. In like maner Rabby Iudaes saithR. Iudas in 25. exod. the bread shall be changed when it shall be sacrificed from the substance of bread into the
substance of the Body of the Messias, which shall discend from Heauen, and he him selfe shall be the sacrifice &c. Rbby Symeon saithR. Symeon filius Iohn libro qui in∣scribitur reulatio secre∣torum. The sacrifice which after the Messias his comming Priests shall make &c: they shall make it of Bread and Wine &c. and that sacrifice which shall b s celebrated vpon euery Aultar, shall be turned into the Body of the M s∣sias: Rabby Barachias teacheth that at the comming of theR. Barachias in ecclesiasten. Mssias, foode shall come from Heauen like a little Cak. Thus did these religious and auncient Iewes who liued before CHRISTS comming, foretell and write (by speciall inst nct) concerning our Churhes Blessed Sacrifice: whereto might be added sundry of their other no lesse plaine testimoniesRab∣by Ionathas in libro col∣lectionum in psal. 72. saith ille est Mssis de quo lo∣quitur totus psalmus, cum ergo ait, et erit placenta frumenti in terra in capite montiū, vult dicere quod placenta panis fiet sacri∣ficium in capitibus sacer∣dotū qui sunt in ecclesia. And Rabby Moyses Ha∣darsan in psal. 136. saith, Gustate & videte quomā bonus est deus, quia pa∣nis quem dat omnibus, ipse est caro eius, et dum gustatur panis, conuerti∣tur in carnem &c. he whih togither with these are collected specially by PetrusSee these foresaide testi∣monies and sondry other like alleadged from the Rabbines by Petrus Ga∣latinus de Arcanis Catho∣licae veritatis. l. 10. ca. 5. 6. & 7. Galatinus, and by Mr. WhitakerFor whereas Duraeus vrgeth this col∣lection made by Galati∣nus of the Hebrues fore∣saide so plaine sayings cō∣cerning Reall Presence & Sacrifice. Mr. Whitaker answering thereunto (l. 9. cotra Duraeum pag. 818 circa med.) Neither con∣fesseth nor yet denieth but shufleth them of, saying only thereto. Tuum in hac causa petrū Galatinū minime profecto desideramus, nec Hbraeorū Testimonijs illis indigamus. And is this a direct & sufficiēt answere, to so many pline sayings of the olde Hebrues that liued before Christ, so euidētly foreshewing & affirming the Reall Presence & sacrifice of Christs Blessed Body in the holy Sacrament? rather shf∣fled of then answered,) wherein they do no lesse plainely fore shewe the truth of Christs Body Re∣ally present and offered in the Blessed Sacrament, then d d the Heathen Sibills in like maner foretell the truth of his incarnation. And for so much asEsaye 41, 23. God only knoweth thinges to come. The Diuell not being able to foretell things smplie future, but only such other future effects as depend vpon their seconday causes then already past or present, in which causes, he (of his greate skill and experience) foreseeth the comming of the said effects, to which kinde, the foresaide Doctrines of Re ll Presence and Sacrifice, cannot in any sote be reduced, by reason they can∣not be saide to hue bene then depending vpon any naturall or other cause, then past or in being, saue only the imediate & sacred will of God. This there∣fore so pline foresaide pediction mde by the aun∣cient Rabbines before Christs tme, in behalfe of
Reall Presence and Sacrifice, demonstrating it selfe so euidently to haue proceeded not from any secon∣darie cause but only from a diuine instinct, yeeldeth thereby a most strong argument in behalfe of the saide Doctrines. 13 Thirtenthly and lastly (to omitte other pointes) as concerning the finall ending of controuersies, not only scripture, but a certaine visible and liuely Iudge vpon earth was appointed and acknowledged. To omitt all other proofe thereof, the Lawe of Deutro∣nomie was that when there didDeutron. 17, 8, 9, 11. arise any matter to hard for the (people) in Iudgment: they were appoin∣ted to goe vp to the place which God had chsen, and to come to the leuiticall Prist, and to the Iudge in those daies: and to aske of them the sentence of Iugement, and to do according to he Iudgment which they did tell, not declining neithr to the rgt hand nor to the lefte, it being yet further saide of him that didDeu∣tron. 17, 12. presumptiously refuse to obay the com∣maundement of the Priest, tha by the decree of he Iudge that man should di: Now that the sentence grounded vpon this Lawe, was not subict to new question vnder colour of appeal ng to the scriptures but was defini∣tiue and finall, and concerned aswell Ecclesiasticall as Ciuill Causes is in it sefe plaine, and for suchDoct. Rainolds in his conferēce pa. 251. circa med. saith, The lawe of Deutronomie was made to establish a high¦est Court of Iudgement, in which all harder causes Ec∣clesiasticall & Ciuill should be determined without ap∣peall further: and Mr. Whi¦taker de sacra scriptura p. 466. prope finem. saith: Respondeo verba ista in∣telligenda esse &c. de au∣thoritate tantum defini∣endi difficiles lites ac cō∣trouersias, siue ecclesiasti∣cas, illas quidem per mi∣nistrum, siue politicas et foreses per magistratum, vt esset semper in vtrisque aliquis, a quo prouocare non liceat alioqum enim nullus esset litigandi finis: & vide ibidem pag. 470. paulo post med. And Mr. Bilon in his perpetuall go∣uerment of Christes Church. pag. 20. post med. saith, hereof that the same did conscerne such matters as were of greatest momēt both Ciuill and sacred, and their sentence by Gods law no man might refuse without punish¦ment of death: And see the like assertion in Mr. Hoo∣ker in his preface before his bookes of eclesisti∣call policie pa. 26. fine. & 27. & 28. fine. confessed by Mr. D. Rainolds, Mr. D. Whitaker, Mr. D. Bilson, and Mr. Hooker Where-vpon it is euident that not only scripture (which they of the olde Testament had as well as we now haue) but be∣sides that a certaine visible Iudge, was then appoin∣ted to determin cōtrouersies. And for so much as the occasion to haue controuersies ended, is as greate now as during the olde Testament, the doubts of re∣ligion being as now many moe and the daunger of error no lesse greuous: whether therefre may it be thought that ourHaeor. 8, 6. Testament which is established in bet∣ter promisses is wantng of this priuiledge? and so ther∣by the Ecclesiasticall policie of Moyses time, to be
preferred herein before that other which succeeded by Christ? With which only laste reason the Puri∣tanes doubt not toPenrie in his suppli∣cation to the high Courte of Parliament. p. 21. fine. saith That forme of gouer∣ment which maketh our Sa∣uiour Christ Inferior vnto Moyses is an impious, vngodly & vnlawfull gouerment con∣trarie to the word &c. See him further p. 22. & 23. & peruse the occasion and circumstance of this his reason, and it will appeare to houlde much more stronge in this point then in that other for which he vrgeth it. presse their other Protestant Brethren in matters of much smaller importance. By which so many foresaide examples of our Ca∣thoicke Faith, thus affirmed by the auncient Iewes that liued before Christs comming, it is made further probable that our religion is not new or lately deui∣sed, but most auncient and vndoubtedly apostolicke: which point is made as yet much more cleare by that which is hereafterSee here∣after tract. . sect. 7. & 8. alleadged concerning the Ro∣mane Church being conuerted in the Apostles time and her not being sithence changed in religion. THAT TREW MIRACLES MAKE a strong argument: And that the aforesaide faith whereto the Englishe were conuerted, was confirmed with such Miracles. § 5. AND like as in those firster times of the Chur∣ches infancie, our Sauiour did make manifest the truth of his Apostles Doctrine with vndoubted Mi∣racles, to serue as. cor 12, 12. signes of theire Apostleshipe, to that end.Marc. 16, 20. Confirming the word wih sgnes followinge: So likewise this vertue or power of Miracles not ceasing, but (as our aduersaries confesse)Whereas our Sauiour, Ihon. 14, 12. saith. Hee that beleeueth in mee the workes that I do he shall do and greater: In the Marginall Notes of the Englishe Bibles (Printed 1576.) it is there-upon saide, this is referred to the wholle Body of the Church, in whome this vertue doth shine for euer. shininge in the Church for euer, the necessitie thereof being one and the same in all succeeding ages to the conuersion of the heathen, who contemning the scriptures, are nothing moued with the Miracles thereof mencio∣ned, our Sauiour did in like maner confirme our now faith so then taught by Austne, with like manifesta∣tion of Miracles, not such only as Antichrist or the Diuell can by the power of nature or secondarie
causes bring to passe, which may beThes. 2, 9. lying signes, against which wee are forewarned, but with Mira∣cles exceeding the power of nature, and done ime∣diately by God: which by the Doctrine of learned ProtestantsVrsinus in Cōmen∣tar. catech. pag. 21. fine saith: Etsi Ethnicorum nonnulla miracula com∣memorantur, ac de Anti∣christo, & pseudoprophe∣tis dictum est edituros esse signa &c. tamen caneque numero ne{que} magnitudi∣ne paria sunt miraculis Ec¦clesiae &c. primum enim ea miracula quae iactantur ab hostibus ecclesiae, sunt eiusmodi, quae (ordine naturae non mutato) ho∣minum vel diabolorū frau¦dibus possunt effici &c. miracula vero quibus De∣us ecclesiā ornauit, opera sunt preter aut contra na∣turae & causarum secunda¦rum ordinem, ac proinde non nisi diuina potentia facta. And the like is affirmed by Zanchius in D. Pauli epistolas ad Philipenses, Colloss. & Thessai. pag. 241. & 242. By Danaeus in Isagoges Christianae. part. 4. pag. 43. initio 46. fine & 47 initio By Piscator in Annal. epistolarum Pauli pag. 470 paulo ante med. and by many others. are euermore true and infallible, of which kinde though some be somtimes done (as the scriptures forewarneMat. 17, 22. & DaneusDanaeus in Isagoges Christianae part. 4. pag. 48. initio saith: Ad eos qui donum duntaxit miraculorum adeo acceperunt absque dono regenerationis, pertinet, quod ait Christus, multi dicent mihi in die illo; Domine nonne per nomen tuum prophetauinius, & daemonia eiecimus &c. And see the same further affir∣med by Sigroartus in 23. disputat. theolog. & p. 164 sect. 12 &c. 13. confesseth) by professors of wicked life (accordingly as our Sa∣uiour in like manerMat. 10, 1. gaue power ouer vncleane spirites, and to cure all maner of diseases to his Twelue Disciples: Whereof euen the wicked IudasMat. 10, 4. was then one) yet are the Miracles so wrought though by such ne∣uerthelesse certaine and vndoubted testimonies of Gods truth, and for such in general are MIRACLES throughout the wholle course of scriptures most ful∣ly both acknowledgedExod. 8, 19. & 3. Reg. 17, 24 & 3. Reg. 18, 39. & 4. Reg. 5, 15. & Mat 27, 54. & Mat. 14, 25, 33. & Ioan. 2, 23 & 3, 2. & 4, 53. & 9, 30 & 11, 45. & act. 4, 14 16. & 9, 35. and vrged,Exodus 7, 17. & 16, 12. & numer. 16, 12 28. & Iosue 3, 10, 16. & 3. Reg. 13, 3, 5. & 18, 24, 38. & 20, 23, 28. & 4. Reg. 20, 8, 9, 10. & Mat. 9, 6. & Marc. 2, 10 & Ioan. 14, 11. & 15, 24. & 20, 30, 31. as being e∣uen to our Sauiour him selfeIoan. 5, 36. a greater Testimonie then Iohn. And hence it is that the credible histories as well of all former times, as also of thisIn the booke entituled a report of the kingdome of Congo a region of Aphricke printed 1597 published by Mr. Abra∣ham Hartwell seruant to the Lord Archbishop of Canterburie, and by him dedicated to his Lo. mention is made l. 1. c. 1. initio. Of the discouerie of that Kingdome Anno 1587 by Odoardo Lopes: and of the Conuersion therof to the Christian faith l. 2 c. 2. and of the greate and vndoubted miracles shewed by God in the presence of a wholle armie l. 2. c. 3. in so much that Mr. Abraham Hartwell in his epistle there to the Reader post medium, confesseth that this Conuersion of Congo was accomplished (by Massing Priestes) and after the Romish maner. And this action (sath he) which tendth to the glory of God shall it be concealed and not committed to memorie, be∣cause it was performed by po¦pishe Priestes, and popishe meanes? God forbid. In like manner Mr. Iohn Porie lately of Goneuill & Cai∣us College in Camebrige in the Geographicall history of Aphrica by him publi∣shed Anno 160 pag. 410 versus finem, acknowledgeth and mencioneth the said Miracles and page 413 initio he commendeth Mr. Hartwell for Publishing his foreside treatise. Also wheras it appeareth in the booke entituled: Rerum in oriente gestarum Commenta∣rius. fol. 2 that Francis Xauerus set forwarde in his iorney from Lisbone to the East India Anno 1541 to the Conuersion of those Nations, and page 36. That the King of Portugall hearing of the great Miracles as then there wrought, sent forth his Commission to his Vice-Roy there dated in Aprill 1556 to take examination therof vpon oath, vpon execution wherof and certificate therupon being accordingly made, it did appeare (fol. 8. b.) that Xauerus in testimonie and proofe of the Christian faith by him then preached and taught, Cured miraculously the Dumbe, the Lame, the Deafe, and with his Worde healed the Sicke. (and fol. 9. a.) raised sondry dead persons to life, and after his death which happened (fol. 14. a) Anno 1552 the graue being opened, wherein his dead body for a time had bene burid, to the end his naked bones might be carried from thence to Goa (fol. 14. b.) they found his body not onely vnconsu∣med, but aso yeelding forth fragrant smells from whence they carried it to Goa, and placed it there in the Church of S. Paull, where yet to this day (saith the Commentarie) it remaineth free from corruption: Witnes wherof saith that treatise are all the inhabitants of that Citie, and trauellers that repaire thither, and the truth hereof for matter of facte is so probable, that Mr. Whitker lib. de ecclesia contra Bellarminum page 353. dare not in his answere ther∣to altoither rest in deniall of the matter of facte, but saith: ne putet (Bellarminus) me om∣nino haec mirula contemnere: respondeo fieri posse vt in regno pontificio fuerint huius∣modi miracula & nunc sint. and page 354. post medium (he saieth:) Potuit Diabolus Xa∣uerij corpus ad tempus seruare incorruptum & suauiter olens: and so he not so much deni∣eth those miracles as ouer bouldly referreth thē to the Diuels worke: wheras yet to the con∣trarie Mr. Richard Hackluit preacher in his booke of principall nauigations &c. printed 1599 in the 2. parte of the 2. volume page 88. initio. doubteth not to afford cōmendable men∣tion of that holy man (Xauerus) his perticuler vertues and wonderfull workes in that Region present age, are
plentifull in like examples of true and vndoubted Miracles shewed by God, at the Conuersion of hea∣then Nations. Amonge which our Countries fore∣said conuersion by Austine houldeth not the least place, as being in like maner greately then confir∣med with vndoubted Miracles, not lately fained, but so credibly testified by the faithfull writers of those times, that now sithence they are acknow∣ledged for certaine and true by learned Protestantes themselues. To this end doth S. Bede and our owne Chronicles witnes, how that AustineBeda hist. l. 2. c. 2. ante medium saith. Allatus est quidam de genere Anglorum, ocu∣lorum luce priutus &c. tandem Augustinus iusta necessitate compulius, flectit genua sua &c. deprecans vt visum caeco quem amiserat restitueret, & per illuminationem vnius homi∣nis corporalem, in plurimorum cordibus fidelium spiritalis gratiae lucem accenderet, nec mora illuminatur caecus, ac verus summae lucis praeco ab omnibus predicatur Augustinus, tum Britonis confitentur intellexisse se veram esse viam iusticiae quam predi∣tet Augustinus. And see Hollinsheads Cronicle af¦ter the last edition volum. 1. l. 5. c. 21. page 102 b lin. 51. to proue his
opinion good, wrought a Miracle in restoring sight to one that was blinde. Which kinde of Miracle, as HemnigiusHemnigius in his exposition of the 84. Psal. englished part. 1. c. 6. acknowledgeth for a true Miracle, so likewise the Christian Brittons present thereat, were speciallyBeda vbi supra and Hollinshead vbi supra moued there-with. In like maner it is testified by S. Bede and Protestant writers, that Austine per∣swaded the King to his religionBeda hist. l. 1. c. 26 circa medium saith of the King, Miraculorum mul∣torum ostensione credens Baptizatus est, and Hol∣linshed vbi supra pag. 100 b, line 60. and Mr. Foxe in his actes & monuments printed 1576. page 117 a prope finem. by diuerse MI∣RACLES shewed. Which were at those times so cer∣tainely knowne, that (as S. Bede reporteth) it wasBeda hist. l. 2. c. 3 fine. written in the Epitaphe vpon his tombe: that he was: Suffultus a Deo Miraculorum operatione.Be∣da hist. l. 2. c. 1 versus fi∣nem saith. Quibus verbis beatus Gregorius declarat quod Sanctus Augustinus & socij eius coelestium ostensione signorum gentem Anglorum ad cognitionem veritatis perducebant. and S. Gregory him∣selfe l. 7. epist. 30 indict. 1 reporteth hereof to Eulogius Archbishope of Alexandria say∣ing. Knowe then that wheras the English nation &c. remained hitherto in infidelitie, I did by the helpe. of your praiers &c. send vnto that nation (Austine) a Moncke of my monasterie to preach to them &c. & now letters are come to vs, both of his health & of his worke that he hath in hand: And surely either he or they which were sent ouer with him, worke so many Miracles in that Nation as they may seeme therein to imitate the power and miracles of the Apostles them selues. And Gregorie him selfe, not only affirmeth those Mira∣cles, but also by hisHollinshead vbi supra page 192 a line 25. Letters dated Anno. 602. did spe∣ciallyThis letter of Gregorie is extant in Bede hist. lib. 1. c. 31 and mencioned by Hollinshead vbi supra page 102 a. l. 10, 11. &c. write to Austine touching the Miracles shewed by him, aduising him not to glorie therein, but rather to consi∣der that God gaue him the gifte for the weale of those to whome he was sent &c. In so much that Mr. Foxe and Mr. Godwine (both of them learned Protestantes) do ac∣cordingly mention and acknowledgeMr. Foxe in his actes and monumentes printed 1576. page 117. a. prope finem and Mr. Godwine in his Catalogue of the Bishops of England page 4 fine. the Miracles (then) wrought by Austine through Gods hand. As also S. Bede, Mr. Foxe, and Hollenshead do in like maner speacially mencionBeda hist. lib. 2. c. 12. post medium and Mr. Foxe his actes and monumentes printed 1576 page 121 b. post medium 122 a. and Hollinshead in his greate Chronicle the last edition volume 1. page 108 b initio & 109 a line 29. 30 &c. the Miraculous conuersion
of Edwine King of Northumbers, which hapned some 26. yeares after Augustines foresaide comming into England, Mr. Foxe not doubting to place the same in his Catallogue ofMr. Foxe in the Alphabeticall table of his actes and monuments printed 1576 at the word Miracle. true Miracles. Here-vnto we coulde likewise add, the vndoubted many and greate MiraclesAs concerning the miracles of Malachias: To omitt perticuler men∣tion of them, no meaner a witnes then S. Bernard, who liued in the same time with him, and was to him so famili∣arlye knowne, saieth of them in generall (in vita Malachiae: In what kinde of olde miracles did not Ma∣lachias excell? Hee wanted not prophsie, nor reuelation, not the gifte of healing, and to conclude not raising of the dead. And no lesse vndoubted mira∣cles are written of S. Bernrd by his owne scholler Godfridus, & others of that time, who write his life: Godfridus (de vita Sancti Bernardi lib. 3. c. 5.) mencioning an vndoubted knowen miracle wrought by him in Tholouse in confirming of his doctrine against the He∣retickes called Apostolic: who (as appeareth heareafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3 in the margent vnder the letter n. denied the Reall Presence, Masse, Purgatory &c. of which said miracle S. Bernard him selfe in his 241 epistle (which was written to the same persons) giueth a modest signification in like wordes, as doth S. Paull 1. Thessal. 1, 5. the many miracles of S. Bernard are so credibly and certainely reported, that Osiander in Centur. 12. page 310. post med. dare not rest in deniall of them, but saith of them, Partim permissione Dei, praestigijs Satanicis effecta existimo, non quod S. Bernardum magum suisse putem, sed quod verisimile sit Satanam talia miracula effecisse &c. ad confirmationem idolatriae & falsorum cultuum: so good a Protestant he maketh S. Bernard. wrought of later times, (to omitte son∣dry
others) by holy Malachias, and S. Bernard, both of them confessed, and knowneAs concerning Malachias his Religion: Osiander Centur. 12. page 315. post med. saieth: Malachias Archiepiscopus in Hibernia abineunte aetate literis & religioni addictus tandem inuitus & diu admodum coactus Archiepiscopatum Hiberniae assumpsit S. Bernardo admodum familiaris fuit, eius monachatum admiratus & imitatus est, superstitiones Pon∣tificias amplexus, Romanum Pontificem pro Deo coluit, tribuuntur illi admodum pluri∣ma miracula &c. (& vide ibidem page 256. post medium.) and S. Bernard in vita Mala∣chiae affirmeth that Malachias was Legate to the Pope. As concerning S. Bernardes religion of whom Mr. Whitaker (in prelect. de ecclesia contra Bellarminum page 369 paulo post medium) saith: Bernardum vere sanctum fuisse existimo: He was Abbot of Claireuaux (as testifieth Symon de Voyon vpon the Catallog. &c. page 126.) and he acknowleged so plainely the Popes primacie. (wherof see S. Bernard l. 2. de consider. ad Eugenium & l. 3. c 8 and epist. 125. & 131. & 190 ad Innocentium.) That he is therfore reproued by D. Fulke (against the Rhemish Testament in Luc. 22. sect. 11. fol. 133 b. post initium) and by Mr. Whitaker. lib. 2. contra Duraeum page 154 ante medium. and was so euident∣ly a professed Catholicke, that Gomarus in speculo Ecclesiae page. 23. versus finem alleageth him to vs saying. Bernardus sanctus vester: and mr. Whitaker in respons. ad ratio. Camp. rat. 7. P. 105 ante med.) saith, Bernardus quem ecclesia vestra multis annis vnum tulit Pium Virū: &c. Lastly this point is yet made further euident in Malachias, and Bernard: in that it is manifest that they both liued Anno. Domini. 1140. When the profession of our now Ca∣tholicke faith was most florishing; which thing Mr. Iewell In his defence of the Apology prin∣ted 1571. pag. 557. Paulo ante med. confesseth saying, S. Bernard liued in the midest of the Popes rout and tirany: Whereupon it followeth that for so much as neither of them is found to haue bene troubled for any one point of Doctrine disagreeing from those times, but were to the contrary both of thē in high fauour as then with the Romane Sea, th'one of thē being the Popes Legate the other an Abbot, that ther∣fore they were agreeable in religion to the profes∣sed Doctrine of those times: So improbably do our aduersaries pretend S. Bernard to haue bene a member of their Church, for his only then zealouse reprouing the corruption of life and manners in the Clergie of that age. members of our now professed Catholicke faith. THAT HIS MAIESTIES AVN∣cestours liued and died in that faith: and that it is acknowledged by Protestants for sufficient to Saluation. § 6. IN this faith thus dedicated and continued, haue your MAIESTIES most Noble Auncestours (KINGES and QVEENS of this Realme) for so many ages togither liued and died, with peace to∣wardes God, and honour to the worlde. In this faith died your HIGHNES dearest MOTHER (of Bles∣sed Memory (admired at her death for her moste Christian resolution, the which (at the time of her Funerall) was accordingly and for such Celebrated, euen by the then Preacher Protestant whom the Puritanes publickely, and reprochfully traduced, for that (to vse their owne wordes therefor had of him)Martin Marprelate in his Epistle Printed ouer Sea &c. pag. 50. Preaching at Peterburrow Agust. 2. Anno. 1587. at the funerall of one who died a professed Papist (viz. the Scottish Queene) he praied that his soule and the soules of all there present might be with the soule of the dead Papist. For this faith thus taught vs, haue our learned aduersa∣ries honoured.Mr. Cowper late Bishope of Lincolne in his foresaid Chronicle fol. 156. a. Mr. Bilson now Bishope of winchester in his true dife∣ference betweene Cristiane subiection & vnchristian re∣bellion, Part 1. pag. 57. & Mr. Foxe in his Acts and Monuments Printed 1576. pag. 117. a. Mr. D. Fulke in his booke against Hes∣kins Sanders, &c. p. 561. fine & 562. initio. Gregorie and Austine with due and answerable commendation, calling therefore th'one of themMr. Godwine in his Ca∣tallog. of Bishopes pag. 7. ante med. S. AustineMr. Godwine vbi supra pag. 7. initio. our Apostle and th'otherMr. Godwine vbi su∣pra pa. 3 ante med. that Blessed and holy Father S. Gregorie &c. To this faith like-wise haue all the learned Protestants of sober
Iudgement afforded the promisses of hopefull sal∣uatiō, as appeareth most plainely. 1. By their owne most euident testimonies. 2. By their like confessed examples thereof giuen. 3. And by their vndoub∣ted answerable practize. To giue proofe of euery of these partes. And 1. First concerning theire testimonies in this kinde: Mr. D. Baro saith,Mr. D. Baro in his foure sermons and two questi∣ons disputed ad clerū &c. serm. 3. pag. 448. fine. I dare not deny the name of Christians to the Romanistes sithe the learneder writers do acknowledge the Church of Rome to be the Church of God And Mr. Hooker also saith.Mr. Hooker in his third booke of Ecclesi∣asticall Policie pag. 188. initio. And Iohannes Re∣gius in his liber. Apologe¦ticus &c. p. 95. fine. saith In Papatu autem cum fu∣erit ecclesia vera. &c. The Church of Rome is to be reputed a part of the House of God, a limme of the vi∣sible Church of Christ: andMr. Hooker vbi su∣pra pag. 130 ante med. we gladly acknowledge them to be of the familie of Iesus Christ: Mr. Bunnie likewise saith of Catholickes and protestants:Mr. Bunnie in his tre∣tise tending to Pacificatiō sect. 18. p. 109 circa med. Neither of vs may iustly accompt the other to be none of the Church of God,Mr. Bunny vbi supra pag. 113. post med. we are no seuerall Church from them, nor they from vs: In like sorte doth Mr. D. Some in defence thereof (against Penrie the puritane) say:Mr. D. Some in his defence against Mr. Pen∣rie & refutation of many absurdities &c. in Mr. Penries treatise pag. 164. ante med. that the Papistes are not altogither aliens from Gods couenant, I haue shewed before: forMr. Doct. Some vbi supra pag. 182. initio. in the Iudgement of all learned men and all re∣formed Churches, there is in Poperie a Church, a Ministerie, a true Christ &c.Mr. D. Some vbi supra pag. 176. pro∣pe finem. If you thinke that all the Popishe sorte which died in the Popish Church are damned you thinke ab∣surdly, and dissent from the Iudgment of the learned Prote∣stants. Lastly to omitte many othersPeter mar∣tir (as appeareth by his Epistles annexed to his common places in Eng∣lish pag. 153. a. fine. De∣sired at the conference had at Poysie betweene the Catho∣lickes and Protestants, that they should not for diuersitie of opinion breake brotherlie Charitie, nor call one an∣other Heritickes: and see the same opinion yet further affirmed by the Protestāt writter against Nicholas Machiuell. printed at London 1062. page 80 post medium & 83 paulo post medium & 85. prope finē. (for we are vn¦willing to become tediouse to your MAIESTIE) Mr. D. Couell in his late treatise Published by Autho∣ritie and didecated to the Lord Archbishop of Can∣terbury, defendeth this opinion at large, and con∣cludethMr. D. Couel in his defence of mr. Hookers fiue bookes of Ecclesiasticall pollicie. Pblished by authoritie. page 77. ante med. saying wee affirme them) of the Church of Rome (to be partes of the Church, of Christ, and that those that liue and die in that Church may notwith-standing be saued: In so much as he doubteth not to charge the Puri∣tanes
withmr. D. Couel. vbi supra page 68. paulo post med. Ignrance for their contrary opinion. 4 Hitheto concerning their Testimonies before vndertaken. 2 Secondly, As concerning now their like confes∣sed examples we will out of very many alleadge on∣ly some fewe: It will not (we thinke) be denied but that our late SOVERAIGNE KING Henry the Eight, did after his breach with Rome, beleeue and maintaine the wholl frame and substance of our now professed Catholicke faith, the Article of the Popes Premacie only excepted. To which end their owne author Sleidane saith of himSleydan in English .l. 13. fol. 174. a. initio: He exiled the name of the Bishope of Rome, but kept still his Doctrine: and Mr. Foxe saith acordingly:Foxe act. monu. pag 1472. b. sine He set forth and by full con∣sent of Parliament established the booke of sixe Articles con∣teining the summe of Popish Religion. And it is euident that he himselfe in person, not only as then dispu∣ted,Act. monu. pag. 530 a. & b. initio. but also commaundedact. monu. page 533. a circa med. sentence to be pro∣nounced against Lamberte: as also the L. Cromwell redde andact. monu. page 533. a. pronounced that sentence, and at his owne death protested him selfeAct. mon. page 598 b circa med. & see Hollinsheads Chronicle page 591. to die in the Catho∣licke faith, not doubting in any Article of faith or Sacrament of the Church, though (saith he) many haue slaundred me to the contrarie. And yet is he commended by Mr. Foxe to dye asAct. mon. page 598 b. post med. a valiant Souldier and Captaine of Christ: as also the Church vnder the raigne of King Henry the .8. is by Mr. Fulke affirmed to be a trueMr. Fulke against Heskines, Sanders &c. pag. 564. sect 80. & 82. Churh: and the King him selfe acknowleged in like manner forFulke vbi supra sect. 82 and see D. Humfrey in Iesuitismi. part. 2. rat. 3 page 304 circa med. a member of the Catholike Church of Christ. In like sorteOsi∣ander cent. 12. pag. 309 post med. S. Bernard liued (some 400 yeares since, as Mr. Iewell confesseth) euenIewell in his defence of the Apo¦logie printed 1571. page 557. paulo ante med. and see Whitaker contra Du∣raeum l. 2 page 154 ante med. in the middest of the Pope roue and tyrany: And as we do not finde that he was then troublede or gainesaid so much as in an one article diffe ēt f om the doctrine of the Romane Church of that tim, so we find con∣fessed to the contrarie, that he acknowleged euenBernard l. 2 de considerat. ad Eugeniū & vide epist. 125. & 131 & ep. 190 ad Innocentiū and see this confessed by mr. Fulke against the Rhe¦mishe Testament in Luc. 22. sect. 11. fol. 133. b. post initium. and by Mr. Whitaker l. 2. contra Du∣raeum, pag. 154. ante med the Popes Supremacie, & was so conformable
to the doctrine of the Romane Church, that he was madeOsiander in epitō. &c. cent. 12. page 309. and Symon de voyon. in his catalog. &c. pag. 926 Abbot of Claireuaux, being alsoOsiander vbi supra page 309. fine saith: Cen¦tum & quadraginta Mo∣nasteriorum author fuisse creditur: and Danaeus in primae partis altera parte contra Bellarminum page 940. saith. Hieronimus & Bernardus fuerunt mona∣chi & istius erroris autho∣tes & fautores. author of many monasteries: In so much as our aduersaries al∣ledging him to vs do call him, Sanctus vesterGomarus in speculo eccle¦siae pag. 23. fine. our S. andWhitaker in respons. ad rat. Campiani. rat. 7. pa. 105. ante med. saith: Ber∣nardus ecclesia vestra, mul¦tis annis vnum tulit pium virum. a man brought forth by our Church: who in re∣gard of Christian communion was deerelyOsiander Centuria. 12. page 305 post med. fami∣liar to Malachias whom our aduersaries reiecte for a confessedOsian∣der ibid. See his wordes heretofore sect. 5. in the margent at the figure. 3. initio. Catholicke, or papist. And yet this his knowne religion notwithstanding our aduersa∣ries do acknowledge him forWhitaker de ecclesia page 369 paulo post med. saith. Ego quidem Ber∣nardum vere fuisse Sanctum existimo. And see thee like in Whitaker against mr. William Rainoldes page 125 & 126 a true SainteOsiander Cent. 12. page 309 post med. a very good man,See this in Pasquils returne into England. page 8. & 13. a good Father, & one of the lampes of the Church of God. In like maner S. Bede (who liued about 900 yeeres since) was so euidently of our religion, that our aduersary Osiander therfore saith of him:Osiander in epitom. &c. cent. 8. l. 2. c. 3. pag. 58. initio. Beda was wrapped in all the popish errors, wherin we at this day dissent from the Pope, for he admired and imbraced the worshippe of Images, the popish Masse, inuocation of Saintes. &c. which thing appeareth also yet more vndoub∣tedly: (to omitt his euident writinges) by hisSee mr. Foxe act. monu. printed. 1576. p. 128. & 129 confessed credite and estimation had with the Popes of that age, and yet is he (all this notwithstanding) acknowleged by our aduersaries to haue beneOsiander cent. 8. p. 58. ante med. a good manmr. Couper in his Chronicle at the yere of our Lord 734. fol. 171 b. renowned in all the world, for his learning & godly life: for which he was also priuileged with the surname ofOf this title see Hollensheds Chronicle at the yeere 735. and mr. Couper in his Chronicle at the yeere 724. fol. 168. b. and mr. Foxe act. mon. printed 1576. pag. 128. b. & vide 129. a. & Oecolampadius in libro epistolarum Zuinglij & Oecolampadij p. 654 post med. Reuerend, and by D. Humfrey spe∣cially registred, amongHumfredus in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. p. 326. initio. the godly men raised vp by the holy Ghost. Hitherto also appertaineth the like ex∣amples of Gregory and Austine both of them here∣tofore acknowleged forhereof see heretofore tract. 1. sect. 1 d. 2. 3. e confessed popish Ca∣tholickes,
and yet th'one of them called by our aduersa∣ries,hereof see before in this section at d. That Blessed and holy Father S. Grego. & the o∣therbefore in this section at b.c. S. Austine our Apostle: where-vnto (to omitte others) might be added the foremencioned example of your HIGHNES Dearest Mother, whose vn∣doubted Saluation (her knowne religion notwith∣standing) was (euen in that oposition of time) by the learned aduesarie as beforebefore in this section at z. publickly acknow∣ledged. What now can our aduersaries answere vnto these confessed examples? Is thereIames. 1, 17. with God vari∣ablenes? orEphes. 6, 9. & deu¦tro. 10, 17. & Rom. 2, 11 & 1. Peter. 1.17. any acception of persons? or is heNumer. 23, 19. as the sonne of man that he should change so as one and the same religion, which was before in them holy, should now be in vs damnable? And thus much breifly concer∣ning certaine vndoubted examples of this kinde. 3 Thirdly to make this point, more euident as yet by the like answerable practise of almost all Prote∣stant reformed Churches. Whereas they hould thatIn the propositions and principles disputed in the vniuersitie of Geneua page 166. sect. 25. the Sacraments are only to be administred, to those that are taken for knowne members of the Church: Which no man can be with-out faith, because thatHebr. 11, 6. without faith it is impossible to please God. For which cause they teach concerning Infants, who in their opinion haue notThat children haue not faith is affirmed by master Carth write in mr. Whitgifts de¦fence pa. 611. And in the propositiōs & principls dis¦puted in the vniuersitie of Geneua. p. 178. sect 4. & by Iacob. Kimedoncius in his redemption of man∣kind l. 2. c 15. page 164 fi∣ne. and by mr. Whitaker contra Dureum lib. 8 pag. 682. faith, (which as the scriptures witnesRom. 10, 17. commeth by hearing which Infants cannot accomplish) thatSo saye the Deuines of Geneua in the foresaid propositions and princi∣ples disputed page 178. sect. 4. also Oecolampa∣dius in libro epistolarum Oecolampadij & Suinglij l. 2. page 301. circa med. saith hereof. Parentum & compatrum fides pueros sanctificat. And Praetorius l. de Sacramentis page 108. saith: Re∣spectu fidelium parentum, infantes fideles habentur. &c. Credunt igitur infantes, sed in parentibus they are comprehended within the couenant of eternall life, by meanes of the faith of theire Parents, &In the propositions & page 178 are for that cause to be Baptixed, and that there-fore the Children of Iewes, Turkes and such like professed Infidels, areIn the propositions & princi∣ples &c. vbi supra. sect 8. page 179. and mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 8. page 679. fine saith. Infidelium liberos (vt Turcarum, Iudeorum, Ethnicorum Caluinus meritò & veré negat esse baptizandos and the like is taught by Kimnedoncius in his redemption of man∣kind: l. 2. c. 15 page 167 fine: and see mr. D. Some in his defence against Pen¦rye, and refutation &c. page 150. not to be Baptized, as not being comprehen∣ded within the couenant, by reason that their Pa∣rents do not beleeue. All this yet notwith-standing
they professeTaught by mr. Whit gifte in his defence. &c. page 623 ante med. By mr. Hooker in his eccle∣siasticall policie l. 3. sect. 1. page 131 by D. Some vbi supra page 149 & 150 and in the foresaide pro∣positions and principles: &c. page 179. sect 9. It is saide by the Diuines of Geneua: We are of minde that the children of Papists may be receaued vnto Bap∣tisme: to teach and practise their Bapti∣zing of Infants Borne of Catholicke (or as they terme) Popishe Parents: Not (saith Mr. Hooker) in regard ofmr. Hooker vbi supra: Gods promise which reacheth vnto a thousand generations: for by this reason the Children of Turkes and (as Mr. Hooker saith)Master Hooker ibidem: all the worlde may bee Baptized, in so much as no man is a thousand discents remo∣ued from Adam. But their saide Baptising of them is (according to the other premises of their Doctrine) by them selues practised and holden good, though (as Mr. D. Some affirmethmr. Some in his foresaide de∣fence &c. cap. 22. page 165 & 167 to Penry) they were the Children of Popishe west-Indians whose other former auncestors neuer knew the Christian faith, and though (saith hee) those West-indiansMaster Some ibidem: page 167. were Baptized by Popish Shauelings, yet they receaued true Bap∣tisme and were ingraffed into Christ, and for this reason, because there is a Church in Popery, for (saith he)mr. Some ibidem p. 149 post med. saith: And Amandus Polanus in par∣tic. theologic. page 305: post med. saith. Hodier∣na Ecclesia Romana est ad¦huc Ecclesia Christi, sed omnium impurissima &c. alioquin ij qui in papatu¦sunt baptizati, extra eccle¦siam Christi. ac proinde nec baptismo Christi fu∣issent baptisati. &c. If there were no Church at all in Popery, (then) the In∣fants of Papistes were not to be Baptized in any reformed Church: By which premisses of their confessed pra∣ctise it appeareth 1 that the Children of Catholicke (or Popish) Parents are to be Baptized 2 as being comprehended within the couenant of eternall life: 3 and that by reason of their parents Faith: So eui∣dently in their Doctrine and practise, is the faith of the Catholicke (or Popish) Parents, houlden for a∣uaileable to his Childe. And shall it then be thought damnable to him selfe? or houlden worthy to be yet further persecuted by our so implacable and vnrelen∣ting aduersaries?
THAT PROTESTANTS CANNOT proue, that the Romane Church did change her Religion, since the first Conuersion thereto in the Apostles time. § 7. AND for so much as it is your HIGHNESIn the summe of the Conference before the Kings Maiestie pag. 75. circa med. Constant and resolute opinion, that no Church ought further to seperate it selfe from the Church of Rome, then shee hath departed from her selfe, whē shee was in her florishing & best estate. In further probabilitie therfore of the Pre∣misses we do presume hereby most humbly to sub∣mitte to your MAIESTIES most learned Iudgment this briefe discourse had thereof in the two sections next ensuing: it is generally confessed that the Ro∣mane Church was once the true Church and pro∣fessed the right faith, whereto theI thanke my God for you &c. because your faith is renowned thro∣ughout the wholle worlde. Rom. 1, 8. To all that be at Rome, the beloued of God called to be Saintes, grace to you. Rom. 1, 7. That which is common to vs both, your faith and mine. Rom. 1, 12. Your obedience is pub¦lished in euery place. Rom. 16, 19. Apostle him selfe giueth full and assured testimonie: where-vpon it euidently followeth that if the Romane Church haue not sithence changed her religion, then she still retaineth and persisteth in the right faith. Now as touching her supposed change. we will breifely examine what our learned aduersaries (who haue purposely and seriously laboured in discouery or proofe of this pretended change) do most mate∣rially obiect in that behalfe 1 First thenMr. Whi∣taker contra Duraeum. l. 7 page 480 initio: and mr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfeite Catholike p. 36. post med. the first (saith Mr. Whitaker and Mr. Fulke) That exercised Iu∣risdiction vpon forraine Churches was Victor: whereto we answere (as doth the Lord Archbishope of Canter∣burie concerning womans Baptisme) saying to Mr. Carthwrightmr. Whitgifte in his defence page 510 prope finem. you say in the margent that Victor Anno. 198. did first appointe that women might Baptize, by this you do add more credit to the cause then you are aware of, for Vi∣ctor was a Godly Bishope and Martir and the Church at that
time was in greate Purity as not being longe after the Apostles whereto we further add, that whereas Victor in the example now vrged, did vpon occasionThe occasion hereof was that the Churches of Asia minor had receaued of S. Iohn the Euangelist to obserue our Lordes Pasch or Easter day not alwaies vppon Sonday but with the Iewes (in re∣garde of theire knowne weakenes) vpon the 14. of the moone, as in like sorte vpon the same groūd was for the time tollerated, Circumcision: Act. 16, 3. and abstinence from bloode and that which is strangled. Act. 15, 20. The Bishops of Rome who had recea∣ued of S. Peter and Paule the other manner did ac∣cordinglye tollerate the Churches of Asia, til such time as that certaine of them in Asia made this their obseruation necessarie, in so much that the other manner was condemned by the Iudaizing hereticke Basius. Tertulian de praescript. circa finem: and centur. 2. c. 5 col. 107. l. 12. hereupon Victor thought good to tollerate them no longer, and therfore prescribed the Bishops of Asia to be excomunicated, vnlesse they con¦formed them selues to the latine Church in the obseruation of Easter day. then see∣ming very slenderThe Chur∣ches of Asia not denying the feast of Easter, but differing onely from the Romane Church in the day on which it should be kept, wherin also they had (as they presumed) the fore mentioned example and tradition of S. Iohn for their warrant, thought this no iust cause of excomunication. excomunicate the Bishopes of Asia: wherein (saith Mr. Fulke)mr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfaite Catholicke page 36 post med. (he passed the boundes of his Authoritie, howso-euer the Bishopes of Asia (in re∣spect of the saide occasion seeming to them so slen∣der) censured Victor as ouer seuere,Euseb. hist. l. 5 c. 23 & 24 yet (which is most to be obserued) no one of them (though thus in their owne opinion prouoked,) chargeth him (as in all reason if they might they would) with any vn∣due claime or exercise of vsurped authoritie:Euseb. hist. l. 5 c. 24. initio. reporteth how Ireneus who thought Victor ouer sharpe herein, admonisheth Victor by letters that he would not for the obseruation of a Tradition so long vsed, quite cut of so many Churches from the bo∣dye of the vniuersall Church: in which wordes he doth not so much impugne as plainely ac∣knowledge his authoritie. for how could Victor so cut them of vnles he had authoritie ther∣in. euen Ireneus him selfe (who stood most herein) acknow∣ledgeth so plainely els where, the Primacie of the Romane see, that he is therefore specially repre∣hendedCent. 2. c. 4 col. 64 l. 10. It is said: Nouitatē deinde quandā & illud recipere quibusdam videri posset, quod in exemplaribus Irenei, qualia nunc hbemus, extat libro tertio cap. tertio. Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter potentiorem principalitatem necesse st omnem con∣uenire Ecclesiam &c. And in the Alphabeticall table of that centurie at the word Ireneus spe∣ciall reference being there made to this saying of Ireneus, it is withall saide therof: Irene corrupta senentia de r mau Ecclesiae Romanae: 64, 12. by the Centurie writers of Magdeburge: 2 Secondly Mr. WhitakerWhitaker contra Duraeum. l. 7. p. 480 giueth example In Zozi∣mus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus. Bishopes of Rome,mr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfaite Catholicke pa. 37 circa medium. Challenging (saith Mr. Fulke) Prerogatiue ouer the Bishops
in Aphrica by forging a false Canon of the Nicen Councell: Whereto we answere: that the former example of Victor who liued about some 200. yeares before these, fully auoideth this obiection: for if Victor so long before them challenged primacie, then did they but continue it, and not first bring it in; As for the suspitionThe suspition which Protestantes enforce was this: Zozimus Boniface and Celestinus to prooue vnto the Bishoppes of Aphrica appeales vnto Rome allea¦ged in behalfe therof the Nicene Councell: wher∣vpon (saith mr. Iewell in the 4. article of his replye The said Aphricane Bishopes wrote to the Bishoppes of the East to see their copies of the Nicene Councell: vpon returne of which Copies from Cirrill Bishope of Alexandria and Atticus of Constantinople, there appea∣red therein no such Canon: As also (say they) neither in the 22 Canons set downe by Rufinus (hist. l. 10 c. 6) doth any such Canon appeare, whereupon Protestants vrge this to haue bene a forgery and innouation in Zozimus Boniface and Celestinus. of pretended forgery of the Canons of the Nicen Councell by Zozimus, Boniface, and Celesti∣nus it is both vntrueVntrue for betweene the time of the Nicene Councell and of the foresaid Bishopes Cirrill of Alex andrra and Atticus of Constantinople; The Arrianes had occupied those sees, whereof see Socrates l. 2. Zozom. l. 4. Theodoret. l. 2. and Niceph. l. 9 & 10) and corrupted the true originals of the Nicene Councell, so as the Canons which Rufinus setteth downe and which Cirrill and Atticus sent (howsoeuer those Fathers thought of them) were false and corrupted, which to be true, appeareth many waies. 1 First in that sondry auncient Fathers haue alleaged sondry Canons of the Nicene Councell which are not to be found in these: As for example Ambrose ep. 82 saith: It was decreed in the Nicene Councell, Ne biga∣mus in clerum asciscatur: S. Austine ep. 110 saith, It was there decreed (Ne Episcopus sibi successorem sufficiat: Hierom. in praefat. Iudith saith, concerning the booke of Iudith: Hunc librum Synodus Nicena in numero Sanctarum scripturarum legitur computasle: And the Fathers of the second generall Councell of Constantinople (which was 30 yeeres be∣fore Zozimus) in their Sinodicall letters written to the Bishopes of Italye Damasus and others, extant in Theodoret hist. l. 5 c. 9. post medium, affirme that there was sanctorum Patrum in Concilio Niceno decisio: vt videlicet singularum Prouinciarum antistites vná cum finitimis (modo ipsis ita visum fuerit Episcopis) ministros ad ecclesiarum commodum in suis ipsorum prouincijs ordinent. Iulius who was Bishope of Rome presently after the Nicene Councell (in rescript. contra orientales pro Athanasio &c. which is in Isidors collection, and a great parte thereof specially recited and alleaged verbatim by Zozomin hist. l. 3. c. 7. & whereof see Socrates hist. l. 2 c. 11) saith, Canonibus in Nicena sinodo Iu∣bentibus non debere preter sententiam Romani Pontificijs concilia caelebrari. And Socra∣tes affirmeth accordingly that such a Canon was hist. l. 2 c. 5 & that it was alleaged by Iu∣lius hist. l. 2 c. 13 and so likewise doth Zozomine hist. l. 3. c 9. also it is notoriouse and most certaine (as appeareth by Athanasius in epistola de sinodis Armini & Selenci, & by Eusebius de vita Constantini l. 3. c. 5. 17 & 18 and by Epiphan. haer. 69. that one prin∣cipall occasion of the Nicen Councell was to determine the controuersie about the obser∣uation of Easter day, and that accordingly those Fathers made a Canon therof. To omitt sondry other like examples in that kind: (wherof read Concil. Aphricanum Can. 14. and Leo ep. 25. ad Theodosium Augustum. And the Lord Archbishope of Canterburie in his defence &c. page 334. post medium. And to omitt likewise that the Canons alleaged by Rufinus do vary from the Canons sent by Cirrillus both in number, order, and matter, diuers learned Protestants, as Oecolampadius, in libro epistolarum Occolampadij & Suin glij page 664. & 667. Caluin lib. 4. institut. c. 17. sect. 36. mr. Iewell in his Apologie of the Church of England. and mr. Bilson now Bishoppe of Winchester in his true diffe∣rence betweene &c. part. 4. page 555 ante med. do acknowledge and mencion a Canon of the Nicene Councell concerning the Sacrament. All which said Canons are wanting aswel in the 22. Canons set downe by Ruffinus as also in the 20 Canons sent by Cirrill, in so much as Occolampadius vbi supra p. 664 ante med. expresly chargeth our latine copies as defectiue in this behalfe. 2. Secondly in that the Arrians had burned the originals of the Nicene Councell, which to be true appeareth by Athanasius in epist. ad omnes orthodox∣os. And Iulius in rescript. ad Orientales alleageth in perticuler very many of the other Canons of the Nicene Councell, which Protestants now reiecte for forged, and among them one Canon concerning appeales to Rome. 3 Lastly the Aphricans (whom this mat∣ter most concerned) were so far from charging the said Popes with Innouation or forgerie that S. Austine one of them calleth Zozimus the most blessed Pope Zozimus: Aug. de gra. Christi l. 2 c. 2 & 6. 7. & 8. & 17 & epist. 157 & Concil. Aphric. in epist. ad Bonifacium. And like titles of reuerence and honour are giuen by the Aphricane Bishopes to Boniface, and Celestinus. Vide epistolam Aphricani concilij ad Bonifacium. & vide epist. Aphric. concil. ad Celestinum. andImpertinent because that the Councell of Sardica (not that hereticall conuenticle against Athanasius mentioned by Zozomen hist. l. 3. c. 10. And which mr. Whitaker mistaketh contra Dureū l. 7 p. 499) but that other Catholike coun¦cell mentioned by Dresserus in millenar. 5. page 104 & 246. and by Carion in chronic. p. 283 initio. and by Zozomen l. 3 c. 11. (wherat as witnesseth Theodoret hist. l. 2. c. 7 and Carion in chronic. page 282 post med.) Athanasius and many other of the Fathers of the Nicene Councell were present) affirmeth can. 7. before the times of Zozimus, Boni∣face, and Celestinus, this very matter of appealing to Rome, in so much as Caluine l. 4 in∣stitut. c 7 sect 9. mencioneth this decree, and thought that the Pope did not forge, but by mistaking alleage this decree of Sardica as the decree of the Councell of Nice, so cleare hereby it is that Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestinus were no Innouators. impertinent.
3 Thirdly Mr. Whitaker giueth example in Pope Siritius saying,Whitaker cont. Du∣raeum l. 7. page 480 ante medium. Siritius was the first that annexed per∣petuall Chastitie to the Ministers of the word. Whereto we answere First that Mr. Whitaker alleageth no proofe that Siritius was the first, neither doth he or can he name any Catholicke writer of that time so repor∣ting: Secondly we alleadge most plainely to the con∣trarie how that S. Hierome who liued in the time of Damasus predecessor to Siritius saith thereof.Hierom. in Apolog. ad Pamach. c. 3 and the same doctrine doth he af∣firme in c. 1 ad Titum: If Married men like not this, let them not be angry with me but with the holy scriptures, with all Bishopes Priests and Dea∣cons, who know they cannot offer sacrifice, if they vse the act
of Marriage: And this opinion was then not first be∣gune, but (to the contrarie) so vniuersall, that Saint Hierome affirmeth it to be the generall Doctrine and practise ofHierom: contra Vi∣gillant. c. 1 saith. Quid faciunt Orientis Ecclesiae quid Egipti & sedis Apo∣stolicae? quae aut Virgines clericos accipiunt aut con¦tinentes, aut si vxores ha∣buerint mariti esse desi∣nunt. the Church of the East, of Egipte and the Sea Apostolicke. And in like manner was the Mar∣riage of Priests long before these times so plainely impugned euen in the Greeke Church byEpiphanius haer. 59. after other plaine wordes had herof saith: At dices mihi in quibusdā locis adhuc liberos gigne∣re, Presbiteros, Diaconos & Hipodiaconos: at hoc non est iuxta Canonē &c. So plainelye doth he ac∣knowledge hereby a for∣mer Canon. Epi∣phanius,Ori∣gen in numer. hom. 23 saith: Certum est quia im∣peditur sacrificium inde∣sinens ijs qui coniugalibus necessitatibus seruiunt, vn de videtur mihi quod illi∣us est solius offerre sacrifi∣cium indesinens, qui in∣desinenti & perpetuae se deuouerit castitati. & vi de Origen in Leuit. hom: 4. & l. 8. contra Celsum. Origen, and also euen by that misapliedMisaplied for that many learned Protestants do vrge it in profe of Priestes marriage: wheras it prooueth the contrarie. example of Paphnutius,It doth appeare by Socra∣tes hist. l. 1. c. 8. ante med. and Zozomen hist. l. 1. c. 22 and by the Centurie writers Cent. 4. c. 9 col. 656. line 44. and by mr. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament in Mat. 8 sect. 3. fol. 14 a. post med. that Paphnutius, though he thought that Priesthood did not dissolue marriage contracted before orders giuen, yet he affirmed to the Nicene Councell that those who were made Priestes before they were married, should not afterwards marry: alleag∣ing for this (veterem Ecclesiae traditionem,) the auncient Tradition of the Church: so plainely doth Paphnutius hereby acknowledge that this doctrine was then holden for the Churches auncient Doctrine. that our learned ad∣uersaries doubt not therefore toSo Chmnitius in his examen concil. Trident. part. 3. repre∣hendeth Hierom, Ambrose, and Origen page 50. a. ante med. and Epiphanius p. 62. a. in∣itio. And Frigeuilleus Gauuius in his palma Christiana page 103 reprehendeth Socrates and Zozomen for their reporte of Paphnutius. reprehend the saide Fathers, and as Epiphanius and Paphnutius in their cited testimonies hereof, do in plaine tearmes rest vpon the Churches Doctrine before their times: so likewise the Fathers of theConcil. 2. Carth. can. 2. saith: Om∣nibus placet vt Episcopi, Presbiteri, & Diaconi &c. ab vxoribus se abstineant (and for this reason there sett downe) vt quod Apostoli docue∣runt & ipsa seruauit anti∣quitas, nos custodiamus. Carthage Councell doubt not in like manner to ground this point vpon Antiquitie and the Apostles Doctrine. So euident hereby it is, that Siritius in his foresaide Doctrine hereof brought in no Innouation or change: 4 Fourthly Mr. Whitaker giueth example in Inno∣cent the third sayingWhitaker l. 7 contr. Duraeum page 480. circa med. He that first inuented Transub∣stantiation was Innocent the third in the Laterane Councell: Whereto we answere First that Mr. Whitaker barely affirmeth but proueth not this his assertion, neither doth he alledge so much as any one author of those times, charging this Pope Innocent or that Councel
with any Innouation or change of Doctrine in this matter. And we further say that Mr. Whitaker vr∣geth this example how soeuer against his knowledg and learning, yet most clearely against all euidence of truth: for this Councell of Laterane was houlden Anno. 1215.Whitaker l. 7 contr. Duraeum page 480. circa med. And as appeareth by the said Councell and further testimonie ofCrispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church page 345. fine Protestants. there were present thereat the Patriarches of Hierusalem, and Con∣stantinople; 70. Metropolitaines; 400. Bishopes: and 800. Conuentuall Priors. Now that so many learned men of so many seuerall remote Nations of the CHRISTAN worlde, as were here assembled, should all of them agree to decree Transubstantiation, & yet the same to be an Innouation (as Mr. Whitaker saith, then First inuented, is more thē improbable: The truth here of therefore was most plainely to the contrarie, that in the age before that Councell, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was publicke and generall: on∣ly Berengarius as then impugned the same, and was therein publickly contradicted and specially written against by diuers FathersThere did in that age write purposelye in proofe of the Reall pre∣sence Anselmus Lanfran∣cus, Guitmundus Adel∣manus, Algerus, Hugo Lingonensis, and others: in so much that Papir. Maslon. Annal. francorū l. 3. in Henrico Rege, te∣stifieth saying. Berenga∣rio, omnes illius temporis Theologi Bellum indixe∣re: And Oecolampadius in libro epist. Oecolam∣padij & Suinglij l. 3. pag. 712. fine saith, Viuo Be∣rengario, multi contra ip∣sum scripserunt. of seuerall Nations in that age: In so much as the fore-saide Councell of Laterane was at length then afterwardes assembled against that his then new seeming opinion. A thing so euident that Mr. Foxe confesseth and saith therof,Foxe act. monumē printed 1576. pag. 1121 b. circa medium. about the yeare of our Lord 1060. the denying of Tran∣substantiation, beganne to be accoumpted Heresie, and in that numer was first one Berengarius who liued about Anno. 1060. So farr was Transubstantiation from being (as Mr. Whitaker pretendeth) first affirmed or in∣vented after-wardes in the Councell of Laterane Anno. 1215. Secondly we say that also the many say∣ings (ouer tediouse here to recite) of the other much more auncient Fathers who liued long before the Laterane Councell, are so plaine and pregnant for Transubstantiaton, that the learned Protestants thē elues do in plaine tearmes accordingly acknow∣ledge
the same, and therefore reprehend the saide Fathers: To omitte the plaine testimonieOsiander in epitom. hist. eccles. Cent. 9. 10. 11. & page 95. fine: saith Anno. 950. exorta est in Clero Cantuariensi acris contentio de Pane Eucha∣ristico, alij enim asseuera∣bant priorem panis sub∣stantiam remanere & ni∣hillominus simul ibi verū Christi Corpus porrigi alij verò pugnabant reci∣tatis verbis Domini prio∣rem substantiam elemen∣torum prorsus euanescere at{que} transire in corpus Do¦mini. &c. And Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church page 286. circa med. & pag 289 in∣itio. & 323. post medium. confesseth that Paschasius (who liued Anno Domi∣ni 880.) taught Transub∣stantiation. herein of Osiander and some others: in this sort it is confes∣sed and affirmed thatAffirmed by mr. Carelile in his booke that Christ descended not into Hell: fol. 58. and by Oecolampadius in libro epistolarum Oecolampadij & Suinglij. l. 3. page 661. and see Mr. Fulke against Heskens page 217 post med. & 204. ante med. & 296 fine. And by Ca∣rion in chronic. page 451. initio. Damascene taught Transub∣stantiation that bothSee the treatise entitled Commonefact. cuiusdam theologi de sacra Domini Caena. & eiusdem Commonefact. consideratio page 211. post med. where it is said, Theophilactus & Damascenus plané inclinant ad Transubstantiati∣oné; & vide Chemnitiū examen. part. 2. p. 83. a. paulo post med. & pa. 90. b. circa medium. Damasene and Theophilacte do euidently encline to Transubstantiation: thatHumfredus in Iesuitismi part. 2 rat. 5. page 626 saith: In Ecclesiam verò quid inuex∣erunt Gregorius & Augustinus, intulerunt &c. Transubstantiationē &c. Gregorie the greate and Austine brought into England Transubstan∣tiation: thatThe Cen∣turie writers cent. 4. c. 10. col. 985. line 30. say of Eusebius Emissenus that, parum com∣mode de Transubstantiatione dixit. &c. Eusebius, Emissenus did speake vnprofita∣bly of Transubstantiation thatThe Centurie writers vndertaking in their fifth centurie. c. 4. col. 496. line 4. to set downe, errores Doctorum huius seculi do therein col. 517. line 23. say: Chrisostomus Transubstantiationem videtur confirmare nam ita scribit in sermone de Eucharistiae, num vides Panem? num Vinum? num sicut reliqui cibi in secessum va∣dunt? absit ne sic cogites, quemadmodum enim si cera igni adhibita illi assimilatur, nihil substantiae remanet, nihil superfluit, sic & hic puta misteria consumi corporis substantia. Chrisostome doth seeme to confirme Transubstantiation: whereto sondry other like examples might be added: A thinge so euident that Adamus Francisci (a learned Protestant writer) doth therefore acknowledge, how thatAdamus Francisci in Margarita theologica page 256. post med. saith: Commentum Papistarum de Transubstantiatione maturé in ecclesiam irrepsit. Transubstantia∣tion entred early into the Church: so improperly (if not wilfully vntruly) is the foresaide example of the La∣terane Councell, and Innocent the third vrged by Mr. Whitaker, and so many other of his brethren. 5 Fiftely Mr. Whitaker giueth example in Boni∣face the third, sayingWkitaker contra Duraeum. lib. 7. page 480. post medium. he that first intitled the Romane Church to be Caput omnium ecclesiarum, the head of all Churches was Boniface the third: Whereto we answere
that although this point be for the matter thereof, alreadie answered by that which hath bene hereto∣fore saide to the former examples of Victor, Zozimus Boniface, (the first) and Celestinus: yet to refell Mr. Whitaker euen in Terminis: whereas Boniface the third was Pope Anno. 607. that verie title of being Head is acknowledged, and giuen to the Romane Church by many FathersTheodore (though a∣gretian) in epist. ad Re∣natum presbiterum saith of the Romane Church, tenet enim Sancta ista se∣des gubernacula regenda rum cuncti orbis ecclesia∣rum. And in the Counsell of Calcedon act. 1. it is saide, and not contradicted, Pa∣pae vrbis Romae, quae est caput omnium Ecclesiarū, praecepta habemus. Greeke andProsper de in gratis c. 2. saith, sedes Roma petri quae Pastoralis honoris facta caput mundo &c. And Victor Vticensis de persecusione vandalica, l. 2. saith, praecipue eccle∣sia romana quae caput est omnium ecclesiarū: And Ennodius diaconus in libro de sinodis sub spiniacho habitis saith, sanctorum voce patet pontificū, dig∣nitatem sedis apostolicae factam toto orbe venera∣bilem, dum illi quicquid fidelium est submittitur, dum totius corporis caput esse designatur: Vigilius Bishope of Rome in epist ad Euterum. c. 7. saith, Sancta Romana Ecclesia &c. Primatum tenet omnium Ecclesiarum, ad quam tam summa episcoporum negotia, & iudicia, atque quaerelae, quam & maiores Ecclesiarum quaestiones, quasi ad caput semper re∣ferenda sunt. Latin, who liued before those times: And Gregorie the greate predecessor to this Boniface, affirmeth in sun∣dry places, thatGreg. l. 11. ep. 54. & in quartū Psalmum Paenitentialem. Romana Ecclesia est omnium Ecclesia∣rum caput: For and with which very title, theCentur. 6. c. 7. col. 425. line 38. & l. 41. & centur. 5. c. 7. col 774. line 53. Cen∣turists do reprehend and expresly charge both him and sondry others that liued before Bonifacius tertius. 6 Sixtly Mr. Whitaker giueth example in Gregory the greate saying:Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 7. p 480. He that first deliuered Purgatorie for a certaine Doctrine was Gregorie the greate: whereto in Gregories full discharge from all Innouation in this pointe we answere, that S. Austine longe be∣fore Gregorie deliuereth the Doctrine thereof for most certaine saying:Aug. de verbis apost. serm. 34. saith, Orationibus vero sanctae Ecclesiae & sacrificio salutari & elemosinis quae pro eorum spiritibus erogantur, non est du∣bitandum mortuos adiuuari, vt cum eis miserecordius agatur a domino, quam eorum pec∣cata meruerunt, hoc enim a patribus traditum vniuersa obseruat ecclesia. And in his booke de cura pro mortuis c. 1. he saith of praier for the dead, non parua est vniuersae ecclesiae quae in hac consuetudine claret authoritas. It is not to be doubted but that the dead are holpen by the Praiers of the holy Church, and the healthfull sacrifice, and almes which are imployed for their soules, that God will deale with them more mercifully then their sinnes deserued, for this doth the vniuersall Church ob∣serue as deliuered from our forefathers: and els where he saith no lesse certainelyAug. in enchirid. c. 110. saith, neque negandū est defunctorū animas pietate suorū viuentiū releuari, cumpro illis sacrificiū mediatoris offertur it may not be denyed but that the soules of the deceassed are reliued by the pietie of their li∣uing
frendes, when for them is offered the sacrifice of the me∣diator &c. In so much as he for the Latine Church doubted not toAug. haer. 35. saith, of Aërius, fertur quoque propria dogmata addidisse nonnulla, dicens orare vel offerre pro mortius ob¦lationem, non oportere. censure Aërius for an hereticke, for his deniall of this Doctrine: as also Epiphanius for the Greeke Church, condemneth Aërius in like sort, saying against him in defence of praier & oblatiō for the dead,Epiphan. haer. 75. and ibidem versus finem. He further saith, Ecclesia ne∣cessario hoc perficit tra∣ditione a patribus accepta. The Church hath receaued (this) through the wide world, it was agreed vpon before Aërius was: Hence it is that Mr. Fulke confesseth and saithMr. Fulke in his aun∣swere to a Counterfeite Catholicke pa. 44. finem. Aërius taught that Praier for the dead was vnprofitable, as witnes both Epiphanius and Austine, which they coumpt for an error: Also he acknowledgeth thatMr. Fulke in his con∣futation of Purgatorie pa. 320. ante med. & p. 194. ante med. & pag. 326. initio. & 349. circa & post med. Ambrose, Chri∣sostome, and Austine allowed Praier for the dead, thatMr. Fulke vbi supra pa. 320. ante med. & pa. 326. initio. & 349. post med. & pa. 78. fine. it was the common error of their times: thatMr. Fulke vbi supra pa. 161. ante med. the error) of Purgatorie was some what rifely budded in Austines time, thatMr. Fulke vbi supra page 392. ante med. & vide ibi∣dem p. 303. circa med. & 393. post med. Tertulian, Austine, Ciprian, Hierome, and a great, many more do witnes that sacrifice for the dead is the tradi∣tion of the Apostles. In like manner Mr. Gifford affir∣meth, that euenMr. George Gifford in his Plaine demonstration that our Brownistes be full dona∣tists &c. pag. 38. initio in the (Churches) publicke worshipe to praie for the soules of the dead, and to offer Oblation for the dead was generall in the Church long before the daies of Au∣stine, as appeareth in Ciprian and Tertulian, which was be∣fore him and nearer to the time of the Apostles. Where-vn∣to might be added like testimonie from CaluineCaluin institut l. 3. c. 5. sect. 10 acknowledg¦eth that, ante mille & tre cent. Annos vsu receptum fuit vt precationes fierent pro defunctis (and a little after) sed fateor in errorē abrepti fuerunt &c. So cleare is Gregorie (who liued so many ages after these Fathers) discharged from all innouation in this point: 7 Seauenthly Mr. Whitaker giueth example in Inno∣centius the third, affirming thatMr. Whitaker contra Du∣raeum l. 7. pag. 480. post med. He was the first that instituted auriculer Confession for necessarie: whereto we answere that an Innouation so strange and compul∣sorie as for men (against all naturall shamefastnes) to be constrained to confesse their secret sinnes, could neuer haue bene brought in by mans only autho∣rity, without some open and greate contradiction: If therefore Innocentius first brought in this vsage before that time strange and vntaught, what Father
or other writer of that age then resisted it? or who is witnes to this change? Herein Mr. Whitaker is silent. But to cleare Innocentius who was Pope a∣bout Anno. 1200. It is euident that the Iacobites were condemned Anno. 600. For affirming thatWitnes hereof Guido de Iacobit c. 2. and Mi∣chaell Buchingerus in ec∣clesiastica, historia: And Matheus Parisius in Hen∣rico tertio; and Iacobus Vitriacus historiae orien∣talis. c. 76. and Nicepho∣rus l. 18. c. 45. we are to confesse our sinnes to God only and that Confession of sinnes to a Priest is not needfull. And HaymoHai∣mo in psal. 31. saith licet deus dimittat peccata &c. tamen confitendū est Mi∣nistris ecclesiae quia nisi confiterentur, ex sua ino∣bediētia damnarentur; & no lesse plaine is hee (ad Euangeliū dominicae. 15. post pentecosten ite osten dite vos sacerdotibus. who liued about Anno. 790. expresseth the like agreeable Doctrine of the Church in his time: as also S. BernardBernard. in meditationi∣bus c. 9. saith sed dicis suf¦ficit mihi soli deo cōfiteri quia Sacerdos sine eo a peccatis me absoluere non potest; ad quod non ego sed beatus Iacobus respon¦det dicens, cōfitemini alte rutrū peccata vestra &c. And vide eum de interiori domo c. 37. Pe∣trus Damianus and othersConcil. 2. Cabilonense (which was Anno. 813) can 32. saith, Sed & hoc emendatione egere perspexi∣mus, quod quidam dum confitentur peccata sua Sacerdotibus non plenè id faciunt &c. And Alcuinus who liued Anno. 730. l. de diuinis officijs c. 13. in c. Ieiunij, saith. confiteatur om¦nia peccata sua quae recordare potest &c. quo facto fixis genibus in terram & super ipsa in∣nixus stans suppliciter tensis manibus blando ac flexibili vultu respiciens sacerdotem, dicat &c. And see Aug. de visitatione infirmorum l. 2. c. 4. and l. 50. homiliarum hom. 49. c. 3. and Hospinianus in historia sacramentaria l. 4. pa. 366. circa med. reproueth the same Doctrine of Auriculer Confession, in Peter Lombard who (saith he) liued Anno. 1150. & also in Hugo de S. Victore who liued (saith he) about the yeare 1130. both of them before Innocēt the third. who all liued before In∣nocent the third, do the like for their times. To omitte that S. Basill affirmeth plainely that Confession isSee Basills words. hereafter tract 3. sect. 1 in the margent vnder the letter a. Necessarie: and that S. Leo affirmeth it to be ChristsSee the wordes of Leo hereafter tract 3. sect. 1. in the margent vnder the letter .a institution, teaching with all euenVide ibidem. secret Con∣fession: Our aduersaries the centurie writersThe centurie writers cent. 3. c. 6. col. 127. l. 28. say, absolutionē deinde a peccatis ita conferebant, si qui paeenetentiam agebant, peccatum prius confessi essent: sic enim confessionē magnopere Tertulianus vrgent in libro de paenitentia; & vsita∣tam fuisse priuatam confessionem qua delicta & cogitata quoque praua confessi sunt, ex aliquot Cpriani locis apparit, vt ex sermone quinto de lapsis, & l. 3 epistolarū, epistola 14. & 16. vbi diserte ait in minoribu etiam pecca tis quae quidē non in deum committuntur, necesse est ad exomologesm venire, idque frequenter fierr in∣bet l. 1. epist. 3. &c. spea∣king of the auncient Churches vsage euen in those former times of Ciprian and Tertulian, do out of their writings most plainely collecte and set downe priuate Confession euen of thoughts and lesser sinnes: and that it was as then commaunded and thought necessarie. So greately is Mr. Whitaker mistaken in this example.Petrus Damianus: epist. 1. alleadgeth a notable example in proofe hereof: (& vide eum in serm. 2: de S. An∣drea Apostolo) and concludeth aduising men not to deferre their confession.
8 Eightly Mr. Whitaker giueth example in Pope Ni∣cholas the second, saying of himWhitaker contra Dureum l. 7. pa. 480. Qui primus docuit cor∣pus Christi sensualer tractari. fragi & dentibus atteri is Nicholaus secundus suit: Whereto we aunswere 1. First that the matter hereof is already sufficiently answe∣red by that which hath bene heretofore saide con∣cerning The fourth former example of Transubstantia∣tion, and the confessed antiquitie thereof in many Fathers who liued long before this Pope Nicholas the second: 2. Secondly cōcerning the phrase (which is but a verball obiection) S. Chrisostome (many ages before Pope Nicholas) saide in like manner,Chri∣sostom in Math. hom. 83. post med. Ipsum vides, Ipsum tangis, Ipsum comedis: And else whereChrisostō in Iohn hom. 4 5. post med. Non se tantum videri permittet desiderantibus, sed & tangi & manducari & dentes carni sua infigi: And in what true and sober sence, these words may (in regardAs S. Paule in like regard saith, This is my Body which is broken for you 1. cor 11, 24. and Caluin de caena dom. inter opus∣cula saith in like manner, Iohn Baptist saith, he sawe the holy Ghost descending, of we looke narrowly, we shall finde he sawe nothing but a Doue &c. Yet because hee knewe that vision to be &c. a most certaine signe of the presence of the Holy Ghost, he bouldely affirmeth that he sawe him &c. As the holy Ghost is in regard of this foresaid presence saide to be seene and to descend: so may Christs Body in re∣gard of it like presence in the Sacrament be likewise saide to be handled, broken, &c. of Christs Body Really present in the Sacrament) be vsed, is at large affirmed by our aduersaries the Lu∣theranes, who doubt not specially toIacobus Andraeas in confut. disput. Iohan. Iacobi Grinaei pa. 214. ante med. saith, quomodo autem corpus Christi in hoc sacramento dentibus teri, videri, tangi, dicatur, quae non á Luthero recens inuentae & in ecclesiam introductae, sed eruditae, piae, & ortho∣doxae vetustatis phrazes sunt, &c. Luculenter explicatum est. And page 215. post medium. Hee saith: Haec Berengario á Papa Nicholao & sinodo praescripta pallinodia nihil continet, quod inscriptis orthodoxorū Patrum, Chrisostomi in primis non continetur: & vide page 306. And of Luthers like allowance and defence of Pope Nicholas herein, vide ibidem page 307. initio. & fine. And so the booke entituled apologia modesta ad acta conuentus quindecem theol. torgae nuper habit page 36. post medium. defend a∣gainst their other brethren our aduersaries, this very obiection concerning Pope Nicholas. 9 Ninthly and lastly (for we will not in this our dis∣course which toucheth only Rome, be tediouse in rehearsing Mr. Whitakers other vntrue and imper∣tinent examples concerning other Churches or Bi∣shopes,) Mr. Whitaker (for wante of greater matter) chargeth Pope Calixtus thatWhitaker contra Duraeum l. 7. pag. 480. he was the first that or∣deined
Ieiunium quatuor temporum where-vnto for so much as this auncient Pope was the imediate succes∣sor (next but one) to Victor, we answere as hereto∣fore did the Lord Archbishope of Canterbury con∣cerning Victor saying:Se hertofore tract 1. sect 7 letter r. By this you add more credit to the cause then you are aware of: &c. And seeming that Mr. Whitaker can alleadge no auncient writer char∣ging Calixtus with Innouation herein, the example therfore and authoritie of so auncient a Father, doth not so much impugne as giue credit to this appoin∣ted fast, so as further answere herevnto is needlesse. Mr. Whitaker hauing thus failed in euery one of those examples whereof he made boulde to giue in∣stance, and the Romane Church being found there∣in free from all supposed change or Innouatiō: how much the rather now are we to esteeme it no lesse cleared from change in those other so many & greate Doctrines, whereof he is not able to aforde so much as colour of instance to the contrarie? his apparent want in that behalfe being such as enforced him for shew of varietie, to giue (as before) seuerall exam∣ples concerning one & the same question, as name∣ly concerning the Blessed Sacrament, and the Popes foresaide Primacie. In all which neuerthelesse he had so little trust and did so well fore knowe the discoue∣rable weakenes thereof, that he else where prote∣steth plainely that he and his breethrenMr. Whitaker l. 3. contra Duraeum pag. 277. ante med. And Bucanus in loc. comun. pag. 466. saith: non est nostrum designare quo temporis momento experit ecclesia deficere &c. are not bound to answere in what age Superstition crepte into the Church, and thatMr. Whitaker l. 7. contra Duraeum pag. 477. post med. it is not needfull for them to search out in histories the beginning of this change: And for that in deed he right well knewe that he could not shew the same, therefore quite against his owne former examples, and in proofe that it cannot be shewed, he alleageth similitudes ofWhitaker contra Camp. at. 7. pag. 101. & 102. the haires of a mans head which waxe not whit sodainly, but by degree not to bee discerned: and ofWhitaker contra Camp. ibidem. slifters entring into a building, at first not to be perceaued. &c. and so with deceiptfull
andDeceiptfull and misaplied in many respects: As 1 In that the haires, nor so∣much as any one haire of a mans head are instantly at the first become white at changed. Neither doth euery first beginning of decay in buildings at the first become an outward & markeable ruine, wher¦as in Doctrine euery opi∣nion is at the first either true or false: 2 Secondly the first whitnes of some few haires, and the first decay in buildinges can∣not be at the first discer∣ned, though they were precisely regarded, which is otherwise in change of Doctrine: 3 Thirdly none is specially charged so pre¦ciselie to marke these, whereas on the contrary, it is the special charge not of a fewe, but of all the Churches Pastors not on∣ly to marke but also pub∣lickly to withstand the o∣ther. misaplied resemblances, laboureth to per∣plex and sophisticate his readers Iudgement, wher∣in to beare with his bouldenes, and to admitte (for the time) his saide similituds for pertinēt, yet is al this vnable to relieue our aduersaries: for though we should be sparing herevpon to charge thē with shew¦ing the first begīning of so great a chang as is by thē imagined (which is all that by these foresaide-misa∣plied resemblances, our aduersaries do wrongefully vrge) neuerthelesse at the least yet, we are in all rea∣son to expect, that (according to the nature of these their owne examples)For though the first whit haire or slifter be not discerned, yet the further degrees & increase thereof are markeable & discerned. they should discouer and describe to vs some proceedings and increase of this supposed chaunge: If therefore they say that this change was not made all at once, but by little and little, some times in one pointe of faith, some times in an other, then are they accordingly to shew forth those seuerall little changes or some degrees of the increase and proceedinges therof. As what be those seuerall points of faith so by degrees at seuerall times changed, which bee the Popes that were agentes therin, & who be the fathers that impugned the same &c. In this sort (to omitte the like inSarauia in defensione tractationis de diuersis ministrorum gradibus. cap. 23. p. 362. initio. saith vpon like occasion, respondeo id dici non fat esse, sed ex historijs demonstrā∣dum esse quae illa fuerint schismata, & vbi & quando nata, & quomodo inde tam vniuersa∣lis consuetudo fuerit profecta: And see him further, ibidem pag. 429. initio. D. Sarauia) doth the L. Archbishope of Canterburie defendingMr. VVhitgifte in his defence &c. pag. 747. initio. Cathedrall Churches against Mr. Carthwright,Mr. VVhitgifte ibi∣dem. demaunde accordingly of him: from what Pope they came or in what time they were first inuented: Affirming withall (else where) against the Puritanes thatSee heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. l. m. num. 13. for so much as the originall and beginning of these names Metropolitaines Archbishope &c. cannot be founde, it is (therefore) to bee supposed, that they had their originall from the Apostles, for (saith he) S. Austine hath this rule &c. In defence wher∣of
he further alleagethSee heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. l. n. num. 14. sondry Protestant writers: And hence like-wise it is, that S. Hierome doubteth not to teach, thatHierom ad clitesi phontem. to reduce an heresie to it beginning is a confuting thereof, the truth of which his assertion Mr. WhitakerVVhi∣taker contra duraeum l. 7. pag. 479. paulo post med. saith, multum autem ad haereses refutandas con∣ferre, earum originē nosse nemo negat. acknowledgeth. This point therefore is not our only assertion or vrging, but is also yet further grounded vpon the confessed sence of scriptures, which teach thatSee hereafter Tract. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 1. z. a. b. d. Pastors and Doctors must be alwaies in the Church: and thatHereafter Tract. 2. ca. 2. sect. 1. l. 1. & ibidē l. p. q. r. they shall not be silent: but shallSee hereafter tract. 2. ca. 2. Sect. 1. l. p. alwaies resist all false opinions with open reprehension: The office also and nature of the Church argueth no lesse, for how can she be the true Church, and yet suffer so many and important errors as are pretended to invade her chil¦dren without resistance vpon her part? the experi∣ence likewise of all former times is answerable here∣vnto, for in this sort haue the olde Heresies of the Graetians and Lattines bene discouered, andSee this at large in the seueral treatises of Ire∣neus, Epiphanius, Theodoret Augustine, Damascene, &c. written purposely by thē against haeresies: con∣tradicted: In this sorte were of later times, Berenga∣rius, Waldo, Wicliffe, Luther, &c. Euer at their first ari∣sing contradicted and charged with Innouation. In this sorte lastly is the defectiō or change in Doctrine heretofore made by the1 First, concerning the defection of the Greeke Church, the more aunci∣ent examples thereof in Paulus samosetanus, ma∣cedonius, Nestorius &c. are so memorable as fur∣ther testimonie thereof needeth not. 2 Secondly as concerning the seue∣rall defections for later times of the Greeke Church from the Romane, they are testified by Nicephorus, Zonoras, Clycas, Hunbertus against Nicetas, and others. And in part by some Protestants, as namely by Crispinus in his discourse of the estate of the Church pag. 364. fine. & 253. initio. And by Osiander in his Epitom. Centur 9. 10. 11 &c. p. 144. circa med. & 156. post med. & 261. fine. & 262. fine. & by Mr. Sparke against M. Iohn de Albines p. 158 And by Keckermanus in Sistem theolog. l. 1. pag. 68. & 69. Twelue times or there aboutes hath the Greeke Church reconciled it selfe to Rome, and afterwardes fallen from thence being thereupon now at last wholly opressed with barbarouse turcisme. 3 Thirdly as con∣cerning the seuerall errors (fewe in comparison) wherein the Greeke Church at this day dissenteth from the Romane: theire beginning and contradiction is notoriouse: As for ex∣ample their deniall of subiection to the Romane sea was begune by Iohn of Constantinople and he therevpon specially contradicted by Gregorie the Greate l. 4. ep. 34. & 36. & l. 7. ep. 36. & 64. and by Pellagius in his epistle, vniuersis Episcopis qui illicita vocatione Ioan∣nis Constantinop. ad sinodum conuenerunt. Also their deniall of praier for the dead. was begunne by Aerius and contradicted in him by Austine haer. 53. and by Epiphanius haer 75. And yet afterwards in both these doctrines they conformed them selues to Rome, as is reported by Mr. Sparke vbi supra. and by Osiander cent. 15. page 477. and by Crispi∣nus vbi supra pag. 451. In like manner theire defence of mariage of Priestes was contra∣dicted against Theodorus by Chrisostom. in epist. 6. ad Theodorum Monachum: and against certaine other by Epiphanius haer. 59. ante med. Also their deniall of the holy ghost pro∣ceeding from the Father and the Sonne was begunne and gaine saide about Anno 764 as wit∣nesseth our aduersarie Keckermanus in sistem. theolog. pag. 68. the deniall of vnleauened bread in celebration of the Sacrament was begunne about Anno Domni 1053 as appeareth by Leo the .9. in epst. ad Michaelem Episcopum Constantinop. c. 5. and by Osiander cent. 11. page 156. post med. And by the centurie writers cent. 11. c. 8. Like example might be giuen of their other, but few and lesser errors. the which Anno Domini 870. consist (as appeareth by testimonie of Chrispinus in his discourse of the e∣state of the Church page 253. initio) but only in the Primacie and the diuersitie of Ceremonies All which notwithstanding they do vehemently professe to detest the Protestants religion, as appeareth by the two seuerall treatises translated lately into lattine, the one made by Hieremias Patriarch of Constantinople, the other entituled responsio Ioans Basilij magni ducis Muscouiae &c. Anno 1570. And published and replied vnto by Ioannes Lasicius a Prote∣stant writer of Poland, and extant in the booke intituled de Russorum Muscouitarum & Tarta∣rorum religione &c. printed 1582. And it appeareth in the treatise set forth euen by the Pro∣testant diuines of witteberg, entitled acta theologorum witebergensium & Hieremia Patri∣archae constantinop. de Augustana confessione &c. Printed witeberga Anno 1584 that the Greeke Church yet to this day professeth and teacheth Inuocation of Saintes and Angells (pag. 55. fine. 102. ante med. & 128. initio) Reliques (pag. 243. fine. & 368. post med.) worshipping of Images, (pag. 243. initio 244. circa & post med. 247. ante med. & 251. fine) Transubstantia∣tion (pag. 86. initio 96. initio. 100. circa med. 240. post med. & 318.) Sacrifice (pag. 102. & 104. post med.) The signifying Caeremonies of the Masse: pag. 97. Circa med. And see the mar∣ginall note thereupon. And pag. 99. & 100. Auricular Confession in prefat. ante med & in li∣bro pag. 87. initio. & 130. post med. Enioyned satisfaction: pag. 79. & 89. post med. Confirma∣tion with Chrisme: (pag. 78. initio. & 238. fine.) Extreame vnction: (pag. 242. initio & 326. ante med.) And all the seauen Sacraments (pag. 77. Circa med. & 242. Also Praier for the dead page 93. post med. 102. ante med. & 109. post med. Sacrifice for the dead: page 95. circa med. & 104. post med. Almes for the dead. page 93. post med. & 109. circa med. Freewill page 224. circa med. 296. ante med. & 367 circa med. Monachisme: page 132 ante med. & 257. ante med. Vowes of chastitie: page 111. circa med. & 129. post med. & 135 post med. The fast of Lent and other sett fasting daies page 126 fine. That Priestes may not Marry after orders taken: page 129. circa med. and lastly (to omitt many other) that the tradition and doctrine of the Fathers is to be kept page 131 fine 138. initio & 142. so plainely in all these chiefe points doth the greeke Church yet to this day remaine vnchanged. GREEKE CHVRCH to vs (though in comparison strangers thereto) at this day yet discouerable. And coulde then our home neighbour Rome, only Rome, caste of her primatiue faith, and in liew thereof set abroach pretended er∣rors,
not few but many, not small but of importance not of beleefe only but also of practize (as praier for the dead: Praier to Saintes: Pilgrimage. Vowed Chastitie: Monachisme: Offering of externall sacrifice to God. and a∣boue
all (to omitte many other) the externall adoring (as protestants thinke of Bread and Wine for God,) neither keepe these priuate to her selfe, but there∣withal infect so many Christian NationsNappeire vpon the reue∣lations. page 68. Reigne∣ning vniuersally: and all this as Mr. Napeire confes∣fethNappeire ibidem. without anie debateable contradictionIbidem page 239. ante med. neuer suffering for the space of a 1000. yeares after Siluester the first, (nor before for any thing that is alleadged, so much as) any to be seene vouchable or visible of the true Church to match or encounter her: (whereas yet our ad∣uersaries them selues, do acknowledge and reporteRepor∣ted at large by the centu∣rie writers in the fifthe Chapter of their seuerall Centuries of euerie age. the confessed and knowne heretickes who in euery of the foresaid ages, haue in other points open¦ly and bouldely contradictedThis is testified by the centurie writers vbi supra and by the other ecclesi∣asticall writers of euery age: and see hereafter tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 9. l. 2. the ROMANE Church) And though we shoulde suppose all this so strangely to haue hapned, coulde yet so great and strange a wonder but so much as in that one fore∣saide example ofWheras our aduersaries pretend that Honorius the third who was Pope Anno. 1220. did first bring in the adoration of the Sacrament: it is a meere fiction, for no writer of that age did gainesay or so much as charge him with Innouation therein, onely he did ordaine that Priestes should admonish the people against theire neligence in that behalfe. Before this Honorius Odo Parisiensis, who liued. 1175. (in synodicis constitutionibus cap. 5. de sacram. Altaris) saith in like maner: Fre∣quenter moneantur Laici, vs vbicunque viderint deferri Corpus Domini, statim genua ectant tanquam Domino & creatori suo, & iunctis manibus quoadusque transierint orent: also Algerus Anno Domini. 1060. l. de sacram. Eucharist l. 2. c. 3. fine. saith, Hac fide ipsū sacramentum quasi diuinum quiddam & rationabile alloquimur, & rogamus: Agnus dei qui tollis peccata mundi miserere nobis, quia non quod videtur, sed quod verè est, Christum ibi esse credimus. Also Antonius Praetorius a learned Caluinist in libro de sacramentis pa. 288. prope initium: Telling how Damascene taught Transubstantiation, with all further saith Anno. 735. Subse est Panis adoratio, ac si ipse Christus esset. And so accordingly Ca∣rion in his Chronic. (pag. 451. prope initium, doth not only charge Damascene most ex∣presly with transubstantiation, but doth also (ibidem pag. 476. circa med. & 477. paulo ante med.) place Artolatria. That is to say (saith he) the odoration of the reserued and eluated Bread (sequentibus Annis quingentis &c.) within the second fiue hundreth yeares after Christ. By which only premisses as it is cleare and confessed that adoration of the sacrament was vsed long before the time of Honorius the third. So also it is as euident and confessed by Protestantes, and namely by Mr. Foxe (act mon. pag. 896. b. fine. and after the aedition of Anno 1596. pag. 1276. a. line 14.) that if this Honorius did not beginne the same, the first beginning thereof, is then so sarr from being found, that we cannot (saith Mr. Foxe) finde it to come in by any other: Add but now here-vnto the aunswerable testimonies of Au∣stine in Psalm. 98. of Ambrose de spiritu Sancto l. 3. c. 12. of Theodoret dial. 2. of Chri∣sostome in 1. cor. hom. 24. of Basill de spiritu Sancto cap. 27. of Nazianzen, in Epitaph Gorgoniae, and of Dionisius Areopagita, de Eccles. Hierach. c. 3. which are so plaine and agreeable with our externall adoration of Christ in the Sacrament, that our aduersari Chemnitius doth for such alleadge sondry of them against our aduersaries the sacramentaries (in his examen Concil. Trident part. 2. p. 92.) adoring the sacrament for God, (much more in so many other pointes of faith) haue bene so brought and devulged into so many Chri∣stian Nations nere and remote, and not once testi∣fied or remembred, so much as by any one of the Churches enimies neither hereticall nor prophane: were the Churches owne pastors, her home enimies and strangers to her Religion all of them silent herein,
THAT CATHOLICKES ARE ABLE TO proue the contrary euen by Testimonie of the learned Protestants. § 8 AND although the proofe of the ROMANE Churches supposed change of her religion ly∣ing on our aduersaries part, and hitherto wanting, might be matter in this behalfe sufficient to offer vn∣to your HIGHNES learned Iudgment; yet will we our selues in surplusage exhibit futher demonstratiō of her not change in any needefull article of faith, by manifest testimonie from our learned aduersaries: First then it is heretofore fully proued by euident confession of the learned Protestants (aswell in ge∣nerall,This is fullie confessed heretofore Tract 1. Sect 1 paulo post initium, and Mr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfaite Catho∣licke pag. 36. initio. af∣firmeth also that, the reli∣gion of the Papists, came in and preuailed in the yeare of our Lord 607. as also concerning euery point of faith in perticuler)This is hertofore proued Tract. 1. Sect. 1. in the margent at the letter d. that in the time of Gregorie the great Bishope of Rome, the Romane Church professed our now Catholicke, or (as they terme it) Popishe faith; and that shee hath perseuered in profession thereof euer since that time, is confessed likewise by our aduersaries, and made so euident by all histories as that to vndertake further proofe thereof were
tedi∣ousnes bothConfessed hertofore tract 1. sect. 2. in the margent at the letter l. and also at this marke *. And Mr. Fulke in his aunswere to a counterfaite Catholicke pag. 27. circa med. spea∣king of Boniface the third who was Bishope of Rome the 2 yeare after the death of Gregorie the greate (teste Anastasio l. de vi∣tio Pontificum) saith the Popes from Boniface the 3. were all blasphemous haere∣tickes & Antichristes: And he affirmeth the same in his confutation of Purga∣torie pag. 344. post med. And he likewise affirmeth Boniface the third to be Antichrist, and that vnder him The Papistes religion preuailed (in his foresaid aunswere to a Counter∣faite Catholicke pag. 36. and in his confutation of Purgatorie pa. 194. pau∣lo post med. & vide Whi∣takerum l. de Ecclesia pa. 260. fine. & 261. improper and needelesse. ThisThis is manifestly affir∣med and collected from the Ecclesiasticall writers of euery age, and by our aduersaries the Centurie writers, in euery of their seuerall Centuries. Gregorie liued somwhat within the first 600. yeares after Christ, so that hauing now hereby already pro∣ued the continued profession of the Romane Church in our now taught Catholicke faith for all these last thousand yeares: The only difficultie and doubt least to be examined, is whether that shee did make change of her faith, during these other foresaid first 600 yeares next after Christ. This being the maine pointe or issue of this pre∣sent controuersie, we will now first examine for how many hundreth yeares next after Christ, the Church of Rome is confessed to haue perseuered with-out reuolt or chang in the faith first to her deliuered: In discouery whereof, whereas our writers do obiect, how that Tertullian prouoked the heretickes of his time with the succession of the Romane Bishopes, Mr. D. Fulke aunswering thereto affirmeth the rea∣son thereof to be, for that (saith he)Mr. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory p. 374. post med. The Church of Rome reteined by succession vntill Tertullians dayes that faith which it did first receaue of the Apostles: With whome a∣greeth herein Mr. D. WhitakerWhitaker de Ecclesia pa. 278. post med. speaking of certaine Apostolicke Churches, & emongst them of Rome by name: saith, vnde intelligimus cur ad illas Ecclesias prouocaret Tertullianus, nimirum quia tum Doctrinā Apostolicam perpetua successione tenebant. and HieromeZanchius de vera relig. p. 148. circa med. Zanchius and where one of our writers vrgethIn Mr. Fulkes confutation of purga. p. 372. ante med. the succession of the Romane Bishopes by exam∣ple of Ireneus, Ciprian, Tertullian, Optatus, Hierome, Au∣stine, and Vincentius Lirinensis, Mr. Fulke aunswereth thereto saying,Ibidem p. 373. paulo ante med. that these men specially named the Church of Rome. It was because the Church of Rome at that time, as it was founded by the Apostles, so it continued in the Doctrine of the Apostles. And Mr. D. Rainoldes be∣ing prouoked in the same kinde acknowledgeth in
like manner thatMr. D. Rainoldes in his conferēce with M. Harte pa. 442. post med. the succesion of the Romane Bishopes was a proofe of the true faith in the time of Austine, Epipha∣nius, Optatus, Tertullian, and Ireneus &c. And the like acknowledgment or aunswere thereto, is made by many otherRidley in Mr. Foxe actes and Monuments p. 1359. b. circa med. saith, The Patriarche of Rome in the Apostles time, & longe after was a greate maintainer & setter forth of Christs glory in the which aboue all other Countries and Regions was Preached the true ghospell, the sacraments were most du∣ly administred &c. After the Emperors became Chri∣stians the ghospell there flo∣rished most: And Mr. Iuell in his reply to M. Har∣ding pa. 246. ante med. saith, Aswell S. Austine as also other godly fathers right lie yeelded reuerence to the sea of Rome &c. For the pu∣ritie of religion which was there preserued a longe time without spo. And pag. 628. paulo post med. he further saith, the godly Fathers (of those fore saide times) sought to the Church of Rome, which then for puritie in religion, and constancie in the same was most famouse aboue all others. learned Protestants: only we will conclude with Caluin, who setteth downe our fore∣saide allegation saying of vsCaluin institut l. 4. c. 2. sect. 2. saith Magnifice illi quidem suam nobis Ecclesiam comendant: allegant enim am apud se initio sana Doctrina & sanguine Martirum bene fundatam, perpetua Episcoporum successione conseruatam fuisse ne intercideret; commemorant quanti hanc successionem fecerunt, Ire∣neus, Tertullianus, Origenes, Augustinus, & alij. They in deede sett forth their Church to vs very gloriously &c. They reporte out of Ire∣neus, Tertullian, Origen, Augustine and others, how highly they esteemed this succession: Whereto he then aunswe∣reth and giueth his like reason thereof, saying,Cum extra controuersiam esset nihil a principio vsque ad illam aetatem mutatum fuisse in Doctrina, sumebant quod omnibus nouis erroribus conficiendis sufficeret, illos opugnare Doctrinam ab ipsis vsque Apostolis constanter & vnanimi assensu retentam. (Caluin vbi supra l. 4 cap. 2. sect. 3.) Considering it was a matter out of all doubt that from the be∣ginning euen vntill that time, nothing was changed in Do∣ctrine, the (fore-saide) holy Doctors tooke in argument that which was sufficient for the ouerthrowing of all new errors, (to witte) that they (viz. the heretickes) oppugned the Doctrine which euen from the very Apostles them selues had bene inuiolablie and with one consent reteined: And in his booke of Institutions set forth in French he saith ex∣presly thatCaluin in his institutions in French Printed at Gaeneua by Corradus Badius, Anno. 1562. saith, C'estoyt vne chose notoire & sans doubte, que depuis L'ange des Apostres, iusques a lour temps, il ne S'estoit fait nul. Changement de Doctrine, ny a Rome y aux autres villes. It was a thing notoriouse & without doubt, that after the Apostles age vntill those (fore-said) times, no change was made in Doctrine neither at Rome nor at other Citties: So plainely do our learned aduersaries ac∣knowledge that no change of faith was made by
the Romane Church from the Apostles age vntill the times of Saint Austine, Epiphanius, Optatus &c. Which was for foure hundreth and fortie yeares after Christ. The Church of Rome being then thus cleared from all change of Doctrine (at the least concerning any needfull article of faith which is the only point now pertinent and questionable) during aswell the first 440. yeares after Christ, as also the other thou∣sand yeares now last past. There remaineth only to be examined, the interim of those 160. yeares which passed betweene the saide first 440. and the saide other last 1000. yeares; in which meane time, if no such supposed change was, then doth it hereof vn∣auoidably follow that as the Church of Rome at first receaued and professed the right faith, so like∣wise she doth yet still to this day continew and pre∣serue the same. The matter being as then (euen from the testimo∣nies of our learned aduersaries) made thus issuable, and plainely deduced to this certainety or narrow compasse of time: we haue here often prouoked thē to giue example or instance of this their supposed change in the Romane Church during the saide meane time of 160. yeares. In full discouery of which point, we will breifly vrge three speciall reasons next ensuing: As First seeing the scriptures do wit∣nes to vs aswel that Christ hath placed in his ChurchEphes. 4, 11, 12, 13. Pastors and Doctors, (to continew) to the consumma∣tion of Saints, vntill we all meete in the vnitie of faith, euen as our aduersaries do here-vpon expounde)Mr. Fulke against the Re∣mish testament in Ephes 4. fol. 335. a. initio. And Caluin institut. (Printed Geneuae 1550.) c. 8. de fide. sect. 37, 38. p. 233. 234. & melancthon in loc. Comun. (Printed 1561.) c. de Ecclesia. for euer: as also that theseEsay. 62, 6. watchmen orSee the margi. notes of the English Bible of Anno 1576. in Esay 62, 6. PastorsEsay 62, 6. shall not be silent, but shall (as Mr. Fulke confesseth)Mr. Fulk in his aunswere to a counterfaite Catho∣licke pa. 11. initio. alwaies resist all false opinion (euen)Mr. Fulke ibidem pa. 92. ante medium. with open repre∣hension which thing is also other-wise most euident, in that by the Iudgment of all menSee this confessed here∣after tract 2. c. 1. sect. 6. in the margent at the let∣ter m. & tract 1. c. 2. sect 13. in the margent at the letter r. Christes true
Church must euer continew, but the true Church she nei∣ther is nor can be, if she faile so much in dutie, as to suffer so many supposed errors to assaulte & inuade her Children, without some open defence and re∣sistance to the contrarie: Therefore so many and so important Doctrines, as Merit of workes, Praier for the dead, Praier to Saints, Free-will, Reall presence, Ado∣ration of Christ in the sacrament, Sacrifice of the Masse, The vnmaried life of Priestes, and so many other moe such like, could neuer (supposing they were errors) haue in so small a compasse as of those saide 160. yeares, bene brought to haue bene as then begunne and publickly professed by the Romane Church, with∣out greate difficultie of resistance and open repre∣hension of some one or other Godly man in some parte of the true Church. The examplesThese examples are yet extant, and to be found in Ireneus in libro aduer∣sus haereses. And in Epi∣phanius and Augustine in their seuerall bookes a∣gainst haeresies. aswell of the times then precedent wherein were so con∣tradicted but for some one or other seuerall opini∣on. The Valētinians, Tatianists, Manichees, Arianes, &c. As also of the ages then subsequent, in which were in like sorte contradicted the seuerallThese examples are col∣lected out of the Fathers of euery of those ages by the Protestant writers, as namely by the Centurie writers in their fifte Chap¦ter of euery seuerall Cen∣turie: See also Pantaleon in his Chronologie, and Osiander in his seueral cen¦turies. other he∣resies of euery age, and all yet to this day manifould∣ly recorded, giue plentifull demonstration herein. The like examples also of the very foresaide 160. yeares now in question afforde no lesse euidence hereof, for euen as then were contradicted for their seuerall opinions to vs, yet at this day discerned and knowne not only theAug. l. de haeresibus ad quod uultdeum haer. 88. Pelagianes,Aug. ibidem haer. 91. Nestorians,Aug. ibidem haer. 69. DonatistsSexta sinod. Constanti∣nop. and see Centur. 6. col. 311. line 37. Monothelites &c. But also (which ar∣gueth this matter most inuinciblie and clearely for vs and against our aduersaries) sondry heretickes for theire then priuate and singular denying (as pro¦testants now do) sondry points of our now pro∣fessed Catholicke faith. The vndoubted examples whereof, are many and by our very aduersaries ac∣knowledged: So euen in or (which is more stronge) nexte before the beginning of the saide 160. yeares
was (as is confessed) the deniall of praier and of∣fering sacrifice for the dead & of our appointed fasts condemned as singuler inHereof see Aug. haer. 53. and Epiphanius haer. 75. ante med. And Mr. Fulke in his aunswere to a Counterfaite Catho∣licke pag. 44. fine. & 45. initio. Confesseth this saying, I will not dissemble that which you thinke the greatest matter, Aerius taught that Praier for the dead was vnprofitable as witnes both Epiphanius and Austine, which they coumpt for an error: Also he taught that fasting daies are not to be obserued: And see this confessed in like manner by Pantaleon in Chronographia pag. 28. initio. Aërius. So also was the deniall of praier to Saints and worshipping of Saints Relickes condemned likewise as then inHierom contra Vigilantium c. 2. &. 3. And Mr. Fulke confesseth this likewise, vbi supra pag. 46. paulo ante med. saying, Last of all Vigilantius shall be brought in who wrote against Inuocation of Saints, superstition of Relickes, and other Caeremonies, him Hierome reproueth. & vide centur. 4. col. 1250. line 45. And Osiander in epitom. cent. 4. l. 4. pag. 506. ante med. And see this further confessed by Crispinus in his discourse of the estate of the Church pag. 131. post med. Vigilantius: In the same times were condēned in like manner the deniall of Images inFunctius (a Protestant writer) in libro 7. Comentari∣orum in precedent. Chronologiam. At Anno. Christi 494. confesseth saying, Porro is xenayas primus in Ecclesia bellum contra imagines excitauit: And Nicephorus in hist. Eccles. l. 16. c. 27. saith, Xenayas iste primus (o audacem animam & os impudens) vocem illani euomuit, Christi & corum qui illi placuere imagines venerandas non esse. And see also hereof Cedrenus in compendio histor. Xenayas and the deniall of voluntarie pouertie and monasticall pro∣fession inHierome contra Vigilantium prope finem saith, quod autem asseris cos melius facere qui vtuntur rebus suis & paulatim fructus possessionum suarum pauperibus diuidunt, quám illos qui possessionibus venundatis semel omnia largiuntur; non a me cis sed a Domino respondebitur si vis esse perfectus, vade & vende omnia quae habes & da Pauperibus & veni, sequere me. Ad eum loquitur qui vult esse perfectus &c. iste quem tu laudas, secundus & tertius gradus est, quem & nos recipimus dummodo seramus prima secundit & tertijs preferenda; nec á suo studuo monachi deter∣rendi sunt á te lingua perea & morsu saeuissimo, de quibus argumentaris & dicis, si omnes se clauserint & fuerint in solitudine, quis caelebrabit Ecclesias, &c. And see this plainely confessed by Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church pag. 131. and 132. Vigilantius & others.In like manner is Ianuarius for this like Doctrine reproued by S. Austine serm. 49. ex diuersis cap. 1. and Instus is for the same reproued by Gregorie l. 4. dial. c. 55. And see further hereof Leo ep. 92. ad rusticum. And concil. Chalcedon cap. 7. and Austine ep. 89. ad Hillarium and Chrisostom l. aduersus vitperatores vitae monasticae. The deniall of the power of Priestes to remitt sinnes in theSee this hereafter Tract. 3. Sect. 1. in the margent at the letter x. Nouatians: The deniall of freewill & of remission of sinnes and grace conferred in Baptisme in theHierom in proaem. librorum aduersus Pelagianos fine. saith, Manichaeorum est hominum damnare naturam, & liberum auferre arbitrium. & dei adiutorium: And see Hierom in explan. symb. ad damasum. And S. Austine de fide contra manich. c. 9. saith, Aduersus haec solita caecitate manichaei latrnt, & cum conuincuntur naturam non esse ma∣lum, sed in potestate esse hominis facere bené aut male, dicunt non esse animae liberam vo∣luntatem, & non vident caetatem suam &c. & vide ibidem cap. 10. & in actis cum faelice manichaeo l. 2. cap. 4. And Chrisostom in Iohn hom. 45. prope initium saith, Christ saide to them, no man can come to me, except the Father who sent me drawe him: Here at the Manichees do rise vp contending by testimony of this scripture that we can do nothing of our selues &c. But this ta∣keth not awaie our freewill, but sheweth that we neede Gods helpe. And concerning the other point touching Baptisme, Mr. Whitaker l. 10. contra Duraeum pa. 883. confesseth the same saying: Nos in Baptismo peccata remitti & gratiam conferri credimus ac docemus, quod negare soliti sunt Manichaei, ergo nos á Manichaeis alienisumus, & vide sarcerium loc. co∣mun. tom. 1. de Baptismo fol. 232. b. post medium.
Manichees The deniall of the necessitie of Childrens Baptisme in theInnocentius in rescripto ad mileuitanum conciliū post med. saith of the Pe∣lagians, illud vero quod vestra fraternitas cos as∣serit predicare, paruulos aeternae vitae praemijs abs∣que Baptismatis gratia posse donari, perfatuum est: In like plaine manner is this poine condemned in the Pelagians by S. Austine haer. 88. & contra Iul. Pelag. l. 6. c. 7. & de pecc. mer. & rem. l. 2. c. 9. & 27. and by S. Leo. ep. 86. ad Episcopum Aquili∣ensem. Pelagianes The deniall of the Bles¦sed Sacramēts reseruation in theCirrill ad Calosyrium sayth. I heare they say that the misticall blessing, If any remnants therof do remaine till the nexte day following is vnprofitable to sanctification, but they are mad in so saying, for Christ is not made an other, neither shall his body be changed but the vertue of blessing and liuely grace doe alwaies remaine in it. This pointe is so plaine and con∣fessed that Peter Martir) aduersus Stephans Gardeneri librum de Eucharistia printed Basilea Anno 1581 obiect. 213. col. 838. post med. saith of this saying of Cirrill: Quod autem subijcitur Eu∣charistia reliquias asseruatas in chrastinum diem a sanctificatione non cessare, spectat opinor ad re∣ceptam quanaam consuetudinem. (&c.) ea consuetudo etsi saperet nonnihil superstitionis, tamen illi Cirrillus ali{que} subscribebant: statim enim a temporibus Apostolorum paulatim caeptum est degenerar ab illa veteri simplicitate diuini cultus. Anthropomorphites The deniall of the single & vnmaried life of Priests inHierom contra Vigilantium c. 1. condemneth this doctrine in Vigilantius saying hereof against him. Quid faciunt Orientis Ecclesiae, quid aegipti & sedis Apostolica, quae aut virgines clericos accipiunt, aut continentes, aut si vxores habue∣rint mariti esse desinunt. Vigilantius,See Hierom. l. 1. contra Iouin. c. 19. & 14. & ad Pama∣hium apol. c. 8. Iouinian andEpiphanius haer. 59 ante med. saith. At dices mihi omnino in quibusdam locis, adhuc liberos gignere & Presbiteros & Diaconos & Hypodiaconos wher¦to he aunswereth) at hoc non est iuxta Canonem, sed iuxta hominum mentem &c. And see Siritius in epist. ad Himerium Tarraconensim. c. 6. & 7. others. The deniall of enioyned times of penance in the here∣tickes calledTheodoret l. 4. haer. & fab. de Audianis. reproueth them saying deinde confes∣sis &c. They giue remission to such as are Confessed without prescribing time for Penance as the lawes of the Church Commaunde. Audiani: The deniall of the diuer∣sitie
of Merittes inAug. de tempore serm. 191. saith, Iouiniani damnamus errorem, qui dicit nullam in futuromeritorum distantiā And Hierom l. 1. aduersus Iouin. c. 2. reproueth Io∣uinian for that he taught that Mariage and Virginity were (Eiusdem Meriti) of aequall meritt, confessed by Pantaleon in Chrono∣graphia pag. 32. And S. Ambrose and others say against Iouinian: Agrestis vlulatus est &c. Promiscue velle omnia confundere &c. diuersorumque gradus abro∣gare meritorum. hereof see further Concil. Tolense. & rescriptum Ambrosij ibidem & aliorum ad Siritium prope initium. Iuinian: The deniall of the Commaundements being possible in certaine otherHierom in explanat. symb. ad Damasum saith, Execra∣mur Blasphemiam eorum qui dicunt impossibile aliquid hominia Deo praeceptum esse &c. And the same words hath Austine, de tempore serm. 191. & vide Hieronimum ad Cleantium and Concil. 2. Arausican Can. 25. heretickes of those times. The deniall of Exor∣cisme and Exufflation vsed in Baptisme was condem∣ned like-wise inAug. de nuptijs & concupiscentia l. 2. c. 29. saith, Iulianus Antiquissimam Ecclesiae traditionem nsario crimine aspergit, qua Exorcizantur, & vt dixi exufflantur Paruuli: & vide Aug. ibidem l. 2. c. 17. & contra Iulian. Pelag. l. 6. c. 2. Iulianus the pelagiane: And lastly (to omitt sondry other) The denial of the Churches continuing visible, was condemned in theAug. epist. 170. ad Seuerinum saith, facile tibi est attendere & videre ciuitatem supra montem constitutā de qua Dominus ait in Euangelio, quod abscondi non possit ipsa est enim Ecclesia Catholica, vnde Catholice Graece appellatur quod per totum orbem terrarum diffun∣ditur, hanc ignorare nulli licet, ideo secundum verbum Domini absondi non potest: & vide Aug. de vnit. Eccles. c. 12. & 13. & ep. 48. ad Vincentium Rogatianum. Dona∣tists, andHieromini dal. au. Luciserianos paulo post medium & cap. 6. Prosecuteth this point at large: saying, (amonge much other matter) vbi sunt isti nimium prophani qui pluris sina∣gogas asserunt quam Ecclesias &c. si Ecclesiam non habet Christus, aut si in sardinia tantum habet nimium pauper factas est &c. (And then he aunswereth their obiection saying) Quod si de illa quae in Euangelio scripta est sententia sibi blandiuntur, Putas ne cum venerit filius hominis inueniet fidem super terram, sciant ilm fidem nominari. de qua Dominus alebat fides tua te saluum fecit. Luciferins and all this done by the son∣dry writers that liued in or next before the foresaide 160. yeares now in question. And which is most, not so much as any one Catholicke Father of the saide times being knowne, to haue but defended or excused any one of the saide persons so condemned in their deniall of any one of our foresaide recited seuerall Doctrines. Secondly we do here-vnto add in further demon∣stration that whereas on the one parte our learned aduersaries are not able to shew, that any of the Ca∣tholicke writers of those foresaide 160. yeares did note or charge the then Bishopes of Rome with In∣nouation or change of faith, so againe we on the contrarie are able to giue perticuler proofe, how
that the Catholicke Fathers of those same times,In those times was Leo the first Bishope of Rome beginning Anno. 440. & continuing POPE 21. yeares. (Teste Anastasio. de vitis Rom. pontific.) of the Communion which other Bishopes of that age professed to haue with him: Read Leo Epist. 39. & 41. c. 1. And the Epistle of Theodoret (a Graecian) to Leo and see the Centurie writers Centur. 5. c. 7. Col. 774. circa & posi med. & col. 775. initio & vide concil. Chalced. act 1. 2. & 3. Hillarius was Bishope of Rome Anno 461. of the like Communion of faith had with him: Vide Epistolas Tarraconensium Episcoporū ad Hillarium in 1. tom. concil. Felix the third was Bishope of Rome Anno 483. of the like Communion professed towards him: Vide Epistolam Anastasij Patriarchae Hierosol. ad faelicem Papam: Hormsda was Pope Anno 514. and continued so about 9. yeares: Of the like Communion had with him: Vide Iohannem Patriacham Constantinop. in Epist. ad Hormisdam, in 1. tom. concill. inter Epistolas Hormisdae. & vide ibidem rescriptum Hormisdae ad Episcopos Betica prouinciae: & Epistolam Iustini Imperatoris ad Hormisdam. & Epistolam possessoris episcopi ad Hor∣m sdam. & vide conclium habit: in epiro ad Hormisdam. extat apud Baromium Boniface the second was Pope Anno 530. of the like Communion had with him: Vide Epistolam Eulalij Carthaginensis ad Bonifacium secundum: & vide Centur. 6. c. 10. col. 670. Siluërius was Pope Anno 535. of like Communion had with him: Vide Epistolam Amatoris episcopi ad Siluerium: And see Liberatus in breuiario cap. 22. Vigilius was Pope Anno 537. of like Communion had with him: Vide Epistolam Eutychij Patriachae Constantinop. ad Vigilium, & Epistolam synod. mopsuestan. ad Vigilium: Also the 2. Councell called Turonense Anno. 570 can. 21. and the 1. Councell of Brach c. 22. & 23. Anno 572. professed like Communion with the Romane sea. Gregorius primus was Pope Anno 590. of like Communion had with him: Vide Epistolam Iohannis Episcopi rauennatensis ad Gregorium inter Epistolas Gregorij l. 2. indict. 11. ep. 55. & Isidorum in Praefact. in Opus conciliorum & vide Centur. 6. col. 677. 678. 679. & 687. line 4. 5. 6. &c. This Gregorie was Pope within two yeares or lesse of the last yeare now in question: and of the times nextThe Bishopes of Rome in the times next praecedent were, Inno∣centius Zozimus, Bniface, and Celesinus, of the Communion had with Innocentius Vide Epistolam Chrisostomi ad Innocentium, & Paladium in vita Chrisostomi, & vide Epistolam Concilij miluitant ad Innocentium, & Epistolam Concilij Carthag. ad Innocentium: And concerning the other three Bishopes of Rome, see heretofore page 40. in the margent at the letter c. fine. & vide Epistolam Civilli Alexandrini ad Caelestinum. A little before them was Pope Damasus of the Communion had with him read Hierom. Epist. 57. ad Damasum: And see the further Communion had betweene Damasus and the Greeke and Lattin Fathers specially repor∣ted and confessed by Crispinus in his booke of the state of the Church page 137. before, and afterConcerning the reuerend aestimation had of the Romane sea in the times next after the foresaide 160. yeares, it is generally confessed: yet for more certainetie reade the Centurie writers Cent. 7. c. 10. and how reuerently this our Nation of England thought as then thereof: Vide Bedam in hist. l. 2. c. 8. &c. 10. &c. 17. & 18. & 19. the same, professed to reuerence and Ioyne in Commu∣nion of faith with the then Romane Bishopes: wher∣by also it is (in our opinion) most euidently yet fur∣ther proued, that during all that meane time of the foresaide 160. yeares, the Bishopes of the Romane
Church did not come to the profession of our now religion, by meanes of any their then deuised Inno∣uation or change in faith. Thirdly this point is as yet made furthermore de∣monstratiue in that it is euident and by our learned aduersaries confessed, that sondry euen of the chie∣fest Articles of our faith, as namelySee heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 2. Reall presence:See heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 2. subdiuision 3. and hereafter in the margent at the letter 1. Tract. 3. Sect. 1. Sacrifice:See heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdeuision 5. Free-will:Ibidem Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 6. & 7. Merit of workes:Confessed by Mr. Bilson in his dooke of the full re∣demption of man-kinde pa. 188. fine. By Danaeus contra Bellarmine pag. 176. Paulo post medium. By Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 9. pag. 773. initio. And by Iohannes Lascitius in the booke entituled, de Russorum, Mascouitarum, & Tartarorum religione page 122. initio. And see heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 4. Limbus Patrum:Heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision. 4. And see also heretofore Tract. 2. Sect. 7. subdiuision. 6. Praier for the dead:Heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 7. And see the Centuie writers Centur. 3. col. 84. line 23. & Centur. 3. col. 83. line 47 & Centur. 4. col 1183. & Centur. 5. col. 1009. initio. And Mr. Fulke against the Remishe testament fol. 443. a. paulo ante med. And against Purgatory pag. 310. ante med. Praier to Saints:Hereafter Tract. 2. c. 1. Sect. 3. l. q. r. s. Monachisme:Heretofore Tract. 2. Sect. 3. initio. And hereafter Tract. 2. c. 1. Sect. 3. l. p. Vowed Chastitie:Heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 7. example 1. & 2. & 5. And heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 10. Popishe Primacie:See heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 8. The grace and necessitie of Baptisme:Vide ibidem. The Ceremonies of Baptisme:Vide ibidem subdiuision 9. And see also heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 7. in the margent at the letter c. Confsion of sinnes and absolution:Heretofore Sect. 7. example 3. The vnmarried life of Priests:Confessed by Ibbertus de Principijs Christian. dogm. l. 2. c. 10 p. 675. ante med. & 678. fine. & 674. prope finem. And by Mr. Whitaker de sacra scriptura pag. 678. paulo posi med. & 668. fine. & 690. post med. & 670. post med. And by Carthwright in Mr. Whitgittes defence &c. pag. 103. ante med. & hertofore tract. 1. sect. 3. subdiuision 11. & 12. Vnwritten Traditions, And (to omitt many other)Hereafter tract. 2. c. 1. Sect. 3. most of ourSee heretofore tract. 1. sect. 3. l. y. Dionysius mencioning sixe of our Sa∣craments. Sacraments are plainely found to haue bene professed and pub∣lickely taught in the writings yet extant of sondrySee hereafter Tract. 2. c. 1. Sect. 3. of the confessed Doctrines be∣leeued and taught in the fourth hundreth yeares after Christ. aunc ent Fathers who liued before the foresaide 160 yeares now in question; In so much that Mr. Iohn Napeire (though our greate aduersarie) affirmeth and confesseth the like aunswerable continuance of
our religion before that foresaide meane time of 160. yeares: Affirming to that end most plainely, that fromMr. Nappier vpon the re∣uelations proposition 37. pag. 68. post. med. the yeare of Christ 319. (which was before the saide time now in question) the Antichristiane and Pa∣pisticall Regne hath begunne reining vniuersally, and with∣out any debatable Contradiction 1260 yeares last past: And that fromMr. Nappeir ibidem in c. 12. pag. 161. col. 3. circa medium. the yeare of Christ 316. God hath with-drawne his visible Church from open assemblies to the hartes of perti∣culer godly men &c. During the space of 1260. yeares:Mr. Nappeir ibidem in c. 11. pag. 145. col. 3. fin. The Pope and his Clergy hauing pssessed the outward visible Church of Christians euen 1260. yeares:Vide ibidem p. 191. initio. The true Church abiding (so longe) LatenteVide ibidem p. 161. col. 3. circa medium & pag. 156. ante med. & 237. paulo post med. & 23. fine. and inuisible with (which his opinion or computationMr. Brocard vpon the re∣uelations fol. 110. a. & 123. b. Mr. Brocard also professeth to agree, whereby it is more then euident that our religion being thus publickly professed in the Romane Church both before and eer since the foresaide 160. yeares, coulde not therefore be any matter of Innouation of change, newly brought in or diuised by the Romane Church either then or af∣terwards: Which point is also made as yet otherwise more manifest, by that which hath bene heretofore confessed by our aduersaries, concerning the con∣uersionSee heretofore Tract. 2. Sect. 1 in the marg. at the letter d. and in the texte at the letter c. and ibidem l. f. g. of vs Englishmen vnto our now professed Catholicke faith by S. Austine then sent from Gre∣gorie Bishope of Rome. Concerning also the vn∣doubted conuersion of theSee heretofore Tract. 2. Sect. 2. l. m. and in the marg. there at the letter m. Brittons of Wales in the Apostles times, and their perseuerāceSee here∣tofore Tract 1. Sect 2. in the margent there at this marke ¶. in that faith till Austins commng. And the foresaide eui∣denthereof see hertofore Tract 1. Sect. 2. l. 1. y. z. agreement of Austine and of the Brittones of Wales in all substantiall points of faith: So plaine∣ly is that faith which the Romane Church now pro∣fesseth, the very same, whereto the Romanes were conuerted in the Apostles times. A thing so euident∣lie true, that our aduersarie M. Bunny (though vsing all warines to acknowledge or vtter more then of necessitie he must) confesseth yet (as enforced) and saith of the whole time since the Apostles to this pre∣sent,
thatSee Mr. Bunny in his trea¦tise tending to pacificatiō Sect 14. circa med. pa. 89. the Church of Rome hath euer continued after a sorte in the profession of the faith, since the time that by the Apostles it was deliuered to them &c. and hath also in some manner preserued and hitherto maintained both the word and the sacraments that Christ himselfe did leaue vnto vs, which surely (saith he) is a very speciall blessing of God, an euident worke of the holy Ghost. &c. And thus much briefly whether that the Romane Church professing the right faith in the Apostles times, hath at any time since euer altred or changed the same, against our foresaid discourse wherof groun¦ded vpon seuerall truthes confessed euen by our ad∣uersaries if any boulder forehead shal wilfully oppose it selfe & shall without other answere or respecte had to that which his learned brethren haue heretofore cōfessed, and we otherwise proued, leape ouer al the foresaide proofes and ages iumping per saltum vp to the Apostles, & then tell vs,So Mr. Whitaker. l 7: Con¦tra Duraeum pa. 478: ante medium saith, Nobis suffi∣cit ex Pontificiorū dogmatū & scripturarum collatione discrimen & dissimilitàdinē gnoscere: historicis liberum relinquimus scribere quid v lint: that howsoeuer we proue from histories & Fathers or other testimonie of their owne writers, concerning euery of the ages since the Apostles times, yet the scriptures thēselues are (in hisHereof see hereafter Tract 2. c. 1. Sect. 1. initio in the margent at the letter p. and  q. opinion) contrary in many points to that faith which the Romane Church now pro∣fesseth and that therein therefore she hath changed the faith which was first to her deliuered: Besides, that this is a most needie and miserable begging of the thing in question, against which we doe vehe∣mently contest, (as being more then perswaded that our aduersaries cannot truely alleage from the first of Genesis to the last of the Reuelations, so much as any one texte of scripture, which maketh with them and against vs.) Let that man & all other of his minde yet also further consider, that for so much as the sacred SCRIPTVRES them selues, do as (beforeSee heretofore Tract: 1. Sect. 8. l. n. o. and here∣after Tract. 2. c. 2. Sect 1. prope initium. affirme that the Churches true Pastours must euermore conti∣new and withstand all innouation of false doctrine e∣uen with open reprehension. The answerable perfor∣mance
wherof in perticuler being matter of fact, can be to vs at this day, no otherwise made knowen, then vpon the onely credite of humane testimonie com∣mended to vs by historie,Mr. Whitaker Contra Du∣raeum l. 7. page 472. saith, Quicquid de Ecclesiae Propa∣gatione, Amplitudine, glo∣ria veteres Prophetae pre∣dixerunt id perfectum esse historia Luculentissime testa∣tur, ita vatic inijs Propheta∣rum, Ecclesiasticam historiā suffragari nulla controuer∣sia est: the force of which testi∣monie our very aduersaries acknowledgeMr. Hooker in his Ecclesi∣astical Policie l. 2. p. 115. initio saith, The strength of mans authoritie is affirma∣tiuely such, that the weightest affaires in the world depend there-vpon: And ibidem pag. 116. an∣te medium: VVhatso-euer we beleeue concerning saluation by Christ, although the scripture be therin, the grounde of our beleefe, yet is mans authoritie the keye that openeth the dore &c. The scrip∣ture coulde not teach vs these thinges, vnlesse wee beleeued men: &c: And ibidem l. 1. page 86. ante medium: Of thinges necessarie the very cheefest is to knowe what bookes we are bound to esteeme holy, which point is confessed impossible for the scripture it selfe to teach: And l. 2. Sect. 4. page 102. fine. for if any one booke of scripture did giue testimonie to all, yet still that scripture which giueth credit to the rest would require an other scripture to giue credit vnto it, neither coulde we euer come to any pause whereon to rest our assurance vnlesse besides scripture there were some thinge which might assure vs. &c. vpon which ground l. 3. Sect. 8. page 146. fine. he saith, VVe all knowe that the first out-ward motiue leading men so to esteeme of the scripture, is the authority of Gods Church: And Mr. Whitaker aduersus Stapletonum l. 2. c. 4. page 298. post med, saith: non nego traditionem Ecclesiasticam esse argumentum quo argui & conuinci possit qui libri sunt cano∣nici, qui non: (And ibidem page 300. ante medium) Hoc semper dixi sensi{que} & vide ibidem l. 1. page 25. ante medium. And in his booke against Mr. VVilliam Rainoldes page 44. circa med. In so much as the Protestant author of the treatise of the scripture and the Church (so greate∣lie commended by Bullinger in his preface before that booke) doth (after the Englishe translation thereof cap. 15: page 72:) say we coulde not beleeue the ghospell, were it not that the Church taught vs and witnessed, that this Doctrine was deliuered by the Apostles: And see further there cap. 19. page 74. & 75. that there-fore the same SCRIPTVRES do therein most euidently perforce reduce them to this foresaid triall by historie and Fathers: whereto if they stand, their ouerthrow (they see) is certaine, and in refu∣sing the same, their flight is shamefull. As for the further extremest bouldnes of such, who are in these straites (resolued not to acknowledge theIohannes Regius in libro apologetico &c. page 192. post medium: and 193. being vrged to shew wherein the Romane Church changed her faith, and not able to giue any one perticuler example thereof, betaketh him-selfe to this extree∣mest bouldnes. answering page 193. post medium: Sed deni{que} licet verum esset, Romanam Ec∣clesiam, in sua religione nihil mutasse, an propterea mox sequetur eam esse veram Ecclesiam? Non opi∣nor: In defence whereof he is not ashamed to alleadge sondry impertinent reasons vnwor∣thy of rehersall. Ro∣mane Church to be a true Church, though it were true, that she had not changed any thing in religion. We passe the same ouer as being most absurde, and much more worthy of contempt then answere.
THE SECOND TRACT FIRST CHAPTER. SECT. 1. THAT CHRISTS CHVRCH VVAS BY the Predictions of the Prophets foretolde to become vni∣uersall and to conuert with great increase the Kinges and Nations of the Gentiles. AND for so much (most GRA∣TIOVS SOVERAIGNE) as it hath bin the course of certaine our aduersaries (vnder the pre∣tence of onely scripture (to vn∣der take libertie of reiecting all our former confessed proofes drawen from the authoritie of Mircles, (though neuer so true & of Fathers though neuer so auncient) and so thereby in the end, ma∣king them selues and euery of their vulgar followers, IudgesLuberius in libro de prin∣cipijs christian. dogm. l. 6. c. 13. page 563. ant med. saith. Omnes publicos Iudices) vt interpretando er∣rare posse ostendimus, ita in iudicando errare posse asse∣rimus; priuati Iudices sun singuli fideles, hi etiam ha∣bent potestatem iudicand de doctrinis & interpretati∣onibus. And page 573. paulo ante med. he fur∣ther saith. Deus dedit cui. libet fideli non tantū spi∣ritum intelligedi, sed ¦tiam spiritum discerend falsam doctrinam á vera. And Mr. Bilson in his true difference betweene Christian subiection and vnchristian rebellion. part. 2 page 353. saith: The people must discerne who teacheth right before they beleeue. and againe afterwardes, the people must be discerners and iudges of that which is taught. And the same power Iudicandi & deci∣dendi &c. Of Iudgeing and deciding doctrine of religion, is no lesse fully giuen ad vnumquem∣qué priuatum hominem to euery priuate man, by Brentius in Prologomenis contra Petrum. a Soto & in confessione Witebergica cap. de sacra scriptura. both of scripture, and of all interpreters: Finally to restraine all thinges to that onely framed sense of scripture, which they them seluesZanchius de sacra scriptura page 412. initio. saith: concerning interpreters: Eate∣nus illorum interpretationes amplectamur, quatenus videmus allatas iuxta analogiam fidei, & ex. alijs erutas esse scripturis. And Mr. Whitaker de sacra scriptura: page 529 post med. saith of the vnlearned, debent illi alios se peritiores adire, Doctorum interpretum Commentarios consu∣lere &c. sed videndum interim est ne nimium illis tribumus &c. Sed caute semper at{que} ita vt no∣stram interim libertatem retineamus. And Mr. Carthwrite in mr. Whitegiftes defence &c. page 111. paulo post med. alloweth Caluines iudgement, yet with this cautell. So far (saith he) as we can esteeme, that, that which M. Caluine saith doth agree with the canonicall scriptures. vpon their conferring of places can collect for true. Plea∣seth
it your HIGHNES so much to afford vs your PRINCELY patience, as that we may (in further manifestation of the equitie of this our most humble Petition) yeeld to them though thus far for the time and thereupon (following thē in their owne course) briefly alledge from that confessed sence of scripture which euen them selues and their folowers do gene∣rally aknowledge, but two speciall points (amongst many other) which are most clearly auaileable to vs in this behalfe. The first is concerning the Churches continuing Catholicke or vniuerall after her frst increase and the predictions of the Prophetes affirming the same; to which purpose Esay foretellingSee the marginall notes of the English Bible 1576 in Esay 60. verse vlt. that the Churh should be miraculously mulplied: saith.Esay 60, 22. a litle one shal-become as a thousande, and a small one as a stronge nation. wherto our Sauiours like saying agreeth:Marc. 4, 31. and see the marginall notes of the En¦glish Bible in Daniel 2. verse 45. and spea¦king ofSee the marginal notes of the English Bible of 1576 in Esay c. 2. verse 2. at the letter a. and ibidem at the letter c. the restauration of the Church of Christ and the enlargement thereof. Esay foretelleth likewise, that all NationsEsay. 2, 2. shall flowe to it: and yet further concer∣ningSee in the English Bibles the contentes of the 60. chapter of Esay. the Gentiles coming to the Church in aboundanceEsay. 60, 5. thou shalt see and shine, thy harte shalbe astonied and enlarged, because the multitude of the sea shalbe conuerted to thee:Esay. 60, 9. the Iles shall waite for theEsay 60 10, 11. & vide Psalm. 102, 15. & Esay. 62, 2. their Kinges shall minister to thee: and thy gates shalbe continually open, neither day nor night shall they be shutt, that men may bri g to thee the riches of the Gentils. And that their KINGES may be brought:Esay. 60, 16. Thou shalt sucke the milke of the Gentiles & the breastes of Kinges:Esay. 49, 23. and see the marginall notes of the Englishe Bi∣ble of 1576 in Esa. 49, 23 Kinges shall be thy nursing Fathers & Queenes thy mothers:Psalm. 2, 8. I wil giue thee the heathen for thy inheritance, and the end of the earth for thy possession: In like manner it is saide in the person of the ChurchEsay 49, 20. The place is straite for me giue rowme that I may in∣habit: And againe to the Church:Esay 54, 2, 3: And see the Contentes of the Englishe Bible vpon that Chapter. Enlarge the place of thy tents, spread out thy Curtaines of thy habitation for thou shalt increase on the right hand, and on the left, thy seede
shall possesse the Gentiles and inhabit the desolate Cittie: And lastly it is foretoulde concerning the ChurchesEsay. 62, 6. watch-men: orSee the marginall notes of the english Bible in Esay 62, 6. Pastors thatEsay 62, 6. they shall not be silent or wanting, but dailyHieremie 33, 18, 21, 22. and that this is ment of Christes Church see in the Englishe Bible of 1576 the contentes of this chapter, and the mar∣ginall notes ibidem in ver 16. multiplied to minister to him not with interrupted seasons, but continually,Esay 66, 21, 23. and that this is ment of the Pastors of Christs Church see the marginall notes of the said englishe Bible ibidem. euen from mouth to mouth, and from sabth to saboth: And that albeit all other monarchies had end, (as the Assirians, Persians, Macedonians, and Romanes: yetDaniel. 2, 44. this King∣dome should not be giuen ouer to an other people (or altered as they were:) But should stand for euer asEsay 60, 15, 16. an exter∣nall glory and ioye, from generation to generation; and that the couenant (made of the premisses vnto Christes Church) shouldPsalm. 89, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. not be broken for any transgression committed by her children but should most assuredly be fulfilled:Hierom. 33, 20, 21, 25. referred to Christs Church by the contentes vpon that Chaper in the. Englishe Bible of Anno 1576. according to which confessed sense of the Catholike dispersion, & cōtinuance of Christs Church, her Kinges and Pastors. Occolampadius saith vpō IeremieOecolampadius in Hieremiam cap. 33. God speakth here of the Eternitie of Christes kingdome &c. He shall haue Kinges and Priestes and that for euer, and not a fewe, but as the starres of heauen, &c. for their multitude: In so much as that graue and lear∣ned man the L. Archbishope of Canterburie teach∣eth like-wise thatMr. Whitgifte in his defence &c. pa. 465. the Church of Christ is dispersed through the whole worlde. and cannot nowe (at any time) be shut vp in one kingdome for that he tearmethMr. Whitgift vbi supra. an im∣possibilitie: as also Mr. D. Whitaker saith of the fore alleaged scripturesMr. VVhitaker in his answere to Mr. VVil∣liam Rainoldes in the pre¦face pag. 37. ante medium, And in his booke contra Duraeum l. 7. page 472. he further saith, Quicquid de Ecclesia Propogatione amplitudine gloria, veteres prophetae praedixerunt, id perfactum esse Historia Luculentissime testatur, ta vaticinijs Pro∣phetarum, Ecclesiasticam historiam suffragari nulla Controuersia est. the promisses of God concerning the largenes and bewtie of his Church haue bene accomplished &c. with whome agreeth Mr. Henoche Clapham, saying,Mr. Henoch Clapham in his soueraigne remedie against schisme page 23 circa med The Church was to enlarge her tents and stretch her coardes vniuersally through the earth, for which cause it is called Catholicke.
THAT THE SAME VVAS NOT PERFOR∣med by Protestants during either the first or second 300. yeares after Christ § 2 TO examine now the accomplishment of these predictions, we will for the more plaine vnder∣standing thereof deuide the time of the Churches continuance into three seuerall stations orOf this diuision see the breife discourse of the Churches estate initio annexed to Crispinus his treatise of the state of the Church &c. Periods obserued and mencioned by our very aduersaries: The First which was from Christ till the Conuer∣sion of Constantine our first Christian Emperour, (which amounteth vnto some 320. yeares:) The Se∣cond from thence vntill the time of Bonifacius tertius Bishope of Rome Anno 607. (which wanted some thing of 300. yeares. And the Third from that time till Luthers first appearing, which was nine hun∣deth yeares and aboue. 1 Concerning the First it is without question, that during all the time after Christ vntill Constantines conuersion, the true Church remained so vnder per∣secution, as that the foresaide amplitude and glory, fore-toulde of her (concerning her greate increase of beleeuers and of Kinges and Queenes to serue her) was not as then fulfilled, to which purpose (if any question thereof were) the sayingsMr. Barlowe in his defence of the articles of the Protestants religion pa. 34. post med. saith, In the primatiue nonage of the Church this promise of Kinges allegeance there-vnto, was not so fully accomplished, bi∣cause in those daies that pro∣phesie of our Sauiour was rather verified, you shallbe brought before Kinges for my names sake, by them to be persecuted euen to death: the best of the Kinges for a longe time, reaching but Kinge Agrippa his in modico a slen¦der inclination to religion. And see S. Austine ep. 48. And see Mr. D. Fulke in his treatise against Sta∣pleton and Martial. page 51. of our learned aduersaries are very pregnante. 2 And for the Second it is like-wise euident that du∣ring the 200. and odd yeares from Constantines raigne till the time of Boniface the third, there were fewe or rather almost no Kinges that then professed the Christian faith, the Emperours of the East and West onely excepted, and of those fewe, some re∣uolted
(as IulianSee Mr. Cowpers Chronic. fol. 128. b. & 129. a. the Apostata, & sondry other) were (as Mr. FulkeMr. Fulke in his answere to a Coun∣terfaite Catholicke p. 15. fine. And in his reioinder to D. Bristowe pag. 375. obserueth) Arians as Con∣stantius,Mr. Cowpers Chro∣nic. vbi supra fol. 126. a. at Anno 340. ValensMr. Cowper vbi supra fol. 129. b. at Anno 368. & fol 131. a. at Anno 380. &c. And did for a greate parte of that smalle time, so greuously persecuteLuc. Osian∣der in Epitom. cent. 4. pa. 255. 256. &c. and p. 449. 451. & cent. 5. pag. 425 432. fine. And centur. 6. p. 91. fine. And see further hereof Carion in Cronic. pag. 281. & 282. 283. 284. &c. the Catholicke professors, that the Protestant wri∣ters doubt not toObiected by Mr. Fentō Preacher of Graies Inne in his booke against Alablaster the 4. motiue p. 21. fine. & 22. initio. obiect the persecution and pan∣cetie of Christians in those very times as a stronge argument against the Churches vniuersalitie: And therefore for such other Princes of those times, as were neither Apostataes nor Arians, although they had bene for number so many, and had also for cur∣rent of ages so long continued as were aunswerable to fulfill the saide predictions of the Protestants, (as it is most cleare by the premisses that they neither were, nor in so short a season possiblie coulde be) it is yet at the least questionable that they were in re∣ligion not Protestants but Catholickes, whereof euen for the first and best of them namely Constan∣tine our first Christian Emperour and the Church in that age (the example whereof. your MAIESTIEIn the summe of the conference before his MAIESTIE had with the Bishopes and other of his Clergie &c. pag. 69. post med. not vnworthely seemeth to affect) sondry (and those not obscure) probabilities are remaining and confessed. THAT CONSTANTINE OVR FIRST Christian Emperour was not of the Protestants but of the Catholicke Faith. § 3. FOR it is euident that ConstantineEuseb. de vita Con∣stantini l. 3. c. 47. erected Tē∣ples in memorie of MartirsEuseb. ibidem l. 4. c. 58. 59. dedicated a most sump∣tuouse Church in memorie of the Apostles.Euseb. ibidem l. 4. c. 60. Prouided his Sepulcher there to the end that after his death he might he made partaker of the praiers there offered.Centur. Magdeburg centur. 4. col. 452. line 30. He celebrated the dedication of the Temple with a yeerely festiuall day. HeIbidem cent. 4. col. 497. line 50. caused Churches new builded to be consecrated, for ser∣uice
therein to be celebrated, in so much asZozomen hist. l. 1. c. 8. versus finem. He carried about with him a portable Tabernacle or Church, and Priestes and Deacons attendig it for celebration of the diuine Misteries.Centur. 4. col. 497 line. 48. & col. 410. li. 7. He had lightes in the Church in the day time.Hierom contra Vi∣gilantium ante med. saith, Constantinus Imperator san∣ctas Reliquias Andreae Luae & Timothei transtulit Con∣stantinopol in apud quas dae∣mones rugiunt. He translated to Constantinople the holy Reliques of St. Andrew, Luke, and Timothie.Cent. 4. col. 457. line 58. & col. 458. vnder him in that age were Pilgrimages.Cent. 4. col. 704. line 11, 21. In his time it was decreed by Councell that Priestes might not marrie.Cent. 4. col. 467. line 10. & Euseb. de vita Constantini l. 4. c. 28. & Zozomen hist. l. 1. c. 9. He honoured sacred Virgins professing perpetuall chastitie.Cent. 4. col. 1294. line 50. 51. Vnder him were Monckes throughout Siria, Palestine, Bithinia, and the other places of Asia.Cent. 4. col. 1306. line 19. 20. Also throughout Africa. andSozomen hist. l. 1. c. 13. initio. He greatly reuerenced Anthonie the Moncke whose religi∣ouse and austere life Protestants termeOsiander in Epi∣tom. cent. 4. c. 2. p. 100. superstiti∣ouse.Euseb. de vita Con∣stantini l. 3. c. 2. He signed him selfe with the signe f the Crosse.Zozomen hist. l. 1. c. 4. & 8. prope finem. And Euseb. in orat. de Laudiu Constan¦tini ante med. saith, Imperator triumphale signum honorat: And Prudentius in apotheosi doth ac∣cordingly affirme this vsage in the auncient Emperours, saying thereof Vexillum{que} Cruci summus dominator adorat. And Szegedinus in his speculum pontificū pag. 229. saith, Crux hono∣rari capit Constantini tempore. Honoured the same signe. Had affianceEuseb. de vita constantini l. 2 c. 7. and successe of victorie in the virtue thereof. andEuseb. ibid. l. 1. c. 25. & l. 2. c. 3. & l. 3. c. 48. erected it publickly HeZozomen hist. l. 1. c. 9. post med. ordayned that the decrees of Councels should be kepte firme and inuilable.Euseb. vbi supra l. 3. c. 10. fine. And Theodoret hist. l 1. c. 7. circa med. And the Centurie writers cent. 4. col. 460. line 31. He would not sitt downe at the Coun¦cell of Nyce till the Bishopes had therto giuen him their assent. HeAmbrose epist. 32. And Rufinus hist. l. 10 c. 2. And see this fully confessed and reported by Crispinus in his dis∣course of the state of the Church pa. 99. prope finem: where he thus writeth thereof. Con∣stantine said, God hath ordained you B shopes and hath giuen you power to iudge of your slues. By meanes whereof we yeelde our selues to your Iudgement, men may not Iudge you but God alone: And n Zozomen hist. l. 1. c. 16. Constantine saith, Mihi vero non est fas cum homo sim, Eiusmod tausaris cognitionem arrogare. would not vndertake the iudgement of Churche cau∣ses but committed the same ouer to Bishoppes:Cent. 4. col. 653. line 26. 27. He reproo∣ued Aesius the Nuaian for denying the power giuen Priests to remitt sinne.Centur. 4. col. 454. line 26. & Euseb. de vita. Consian. l. 4. c. 71. After his death praier was made for his soule: andEuseb. vbi supra. the mistical sacrifice offered. And as con∣cerning the Churches doctrine of that age, it was so
euidently our now professed Catholicke faith, that to omitt all other perticuler proofe, and what is by our other aduersaries confessedIn the breefe dis∣course of the Churches estate: &c. Annexed to Crispi∣nus his booke of the estate of the Church. it is affirmed how that aboute the el of this period (which continu∣ed vntill Constantine) the loue of solitude & Monc∣kerie, the abstinence frō ma∣riage & from certain meates on perticuler daies, many feastes and other seedes of su∣perstition after succeeding tooke a marueilouse roote, so the Commencement of praiers for the dead and sacrifice of the Masse, did discouer them selues: &c. in this behalfe, the centurie writers of Magdeburge, (whose writinges are by our English Protestants affirmed to beMr. D. Hill in his defence of the article, Christ descen¦ded in to hell: fol. 23. b. post med. worthie of immortall memorie do in their fourth Centurie (by thē dedicated to our late Souraigne Lady Queene Eliza∣beth) professe toCol. 278. line 16. sett downe the peculier supposed errors of the doctor of those times, and do charge them in perticuler (by collection from their owne writings) withCent. 4. col. 291. freewill:Cent. 4. col. 292. Iustification by workes:Cent. 4. col 293. Meritt of workes:Cent. 4. col. 425. l. 54. & col. 426. line 10. & col. 294. Confession of Sinnes: and Penance: withCent. 4. col. 425. line 60. absolution of such as had confessed. with affirmingCent. 4. col. 1243 line 33. And see Caluin in institut l. 4. c. 19. sect. 17. Pe∣nance to be the second table after shipwracke. & error inCent. 4. col. 231. line 12 & col. 294. line 1. the doctrine of penance: withCent. 4. col. 295. line 58. & col. 296. 297. Inuocation af Saintes,Cent. 4. col. 304. line 42. 43. &c. Purgatorie,Cent. 4. col. 409. line 15. 25. Aultars,Cent. 4. col. 295. line 3. & 40. & col. 985. line 30. Transubstantiation,Cent. 4. col. 456. 457. & 482. line 44. & col. 1250. line 45. tran¦slation of Saintes Rlickes: and their worship.Cent. 4. col. 457. line 58. & col. 458. line 1. 2. 3. Pilgrimage to holy places.Cent. 4. col. 470. line 20. Heremites,Cent. 4. col 300. line 39. & col. 301. line 46. & col. 464 465. Monckes, theirCent. 4. col. 464. line 59. & col. 301. line 28. 29. &c. volunta¦rie pouertie: theirCent. 4. col. 471. l. 23. & col. 474. l. 10. 11. 22. 23. abstine ce from certain meate, & other austeritie of life: theirCent. 4. col 472. l 20. Cowle, girdle, and other religiouse habites: their vndoubted and greatCent. 4. col. 493. l. 18. MiraclesCent. 4. col. 301. l. 1. 2. 3. 54. & col. 706. l. 57. & col. 847. line 50. the Vowed chastitie of VirginsCent. 4. col. 467. l. 8. 9. &c. Monasteries of vowed Vigins.Cent. 4. col. 495. l. 18. Rising in the night to praier. also
also withCent. 4. col. 302. line 9. 10. 14. &c. And col. 495. line 30.31. And Mr. Fulke against Heskens San∣ders &c. pag. 657. circa med. Affirmeth that Rufinus and Cirill had a superstitiouse estimation of the signe of the Crosse: & that also by the reporte of Paulinus the Crosse was by the Bishope of Hie∣rusalem brought forth at Easter (yearely) to be worshipped of the people: And Danaeus in prime par∣tis altera parte, ad Bellarminum 5. controu. respons. pag. 1415. initio. Affirmeth that Paulinus Cirrill and sondry other Fathers were plainely super¦stitiouse & blinded with this enchauntment of the Crosses adoration. attributing to much the signe of the Crosse: withCent. 4. col. 417. 418. 419. Abrenunciation, ANNOILING, threefould Immersion. And sondry other like Ceremonies vsed in Baptisme: withCent. 4. col. 415. line 25. Baptisme of laye persons in case of ne∣cessitie: withCent. 4. col. 1160. line 53. & col. 143. line 39. Remission of sinnes (not signified but) gi¦uen in Baptisme: withCent. 4. col. 415. line 44. Consecration of the water of Bap¦tisme, with teaching thatCent. 4. col 303. line 18. & col. 704. line 11, 21. & col. 1293. line 5. & 17. Priestes might not marrie: thatCent. 4. col. 303. line 10. & col. 847. line 47. & col. 1293. line 25. Bigamus (or he that hath bene twise married) may not be Priest: also with Consecration of religiouseCent. 4. col. 874. line. 11. women: and their religiouse habite: withCent. 4. col. 873. fine & col. 874. initio. Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolites, Exorcistes, Readers, Dorekeepers: and the speciall rites vsed in making of them. withCent. 4. col. 497. line 50. Sumptuouse Churchs consecrated, and superstitious insolencie in celebration. Of the Mass appointed to be said in no places but such as were hallwed by a Bish ppe: with affirmingeCent. 4. col. 555. line 30. & col. 557. l. 45. & col. 558. line 54. & 1250. line 2. the Church to be built vpon Peter. and frther teachingCentur. 4. col 551. l. 31. & col. 556. line 15. & 1074. line 13. Peters macie. And lastly euen with sondry no∣ted examples ofCentur. 4. col. 549. line 39. & col. 550. line 26. & col. 551. line 36. & col. 529. lie 20. Primacie in the Bishope of Rome. In so much as certaine Protestants doubt not to deale plainely with vs herein, affirming that Helene mother to Constantine wasCentur. 4. col. 458 line 5. a superstitiouse woman: and the vi∣sible Church in his timeMr. Iohn Nappeir vpon the reueltions pag. 68. post medium. Antichristian, and papi∣sticall. Whereuon we doubt not in behalfe of our religion to say now to our aduersaries. as did your MAIESTIE (most religiously) to the Puritanes in defence of the Crosse in Baptisme vsed in Constan∣tines time,In the summe of the Conference before his MAIESTIE had with the Bishopes and other of his Clergie page 69. post med. Is it now comen to that passe, that we shall appeach Constantine of superstition, if then it were vsed, I see no reason, but that still we may continue it. So cleare it is by the premisses, that the foresaide predictions of the Prophetes were not accomplished by the Church which continued the 300 yeares next after Constan∣tine, and that though we should admitt they were, it was that Church not protestant but Catholicke.
THAT AFTER THE SECOND 300. yeares after Christ the foresaid predictions were not performed by the Protestants Church and were accomplished by the Catholicke Church. Sect. 4. NOvv for the third, namely the wholle residue of time frō Bonifacius the third till Luther which conteine the last 100. yeares in which (for that time) the predictions of the Prophetes concerninge the Churches increase, and continuance of Kinges and Pastors, were most euidently fulfilled: that the same were not yet during that time fulfilled, (otherwise then in and by ourThe centurie writers men¦tion the Conuersion of sondrie Nations wrought since the time of Gregory the first, and Boniface the third by our Catholicke Romane Church: as of Germanie (cent. 8. c. 2 col. 20.) Of the Vandalls (cent 9. c. 2. col. 15.) Of the Bulgarians, Sclauonians, Po¦lonians, the Danes, and Mo∣rauianes. (cent. 9. c. 2. col. 18.) and of sondry Kings and Kingdomes (cent. 10. c. 2. col. 18, & 19.) and of a greate parte of Hungarie (centur. 11. c. 2. col. 27.) and of the Norueigians (centur. 12.) As also the Protestant writer Osiander in his Epitomes hist. Ecclesiasticae Centuriae. 9.10.11.12.13.14. & 15. mencioneth the like Conuersion of sondry Nations performed by our Catho∣licke Church since the times of Gregorie and Boniface. As namely of the Danes page 16. initio & 94. fine. the Morauians. (p. 16. fine.) the Polonians: (p. 36. circa med.) the Sclauoniās. (p. 36. circa med: & 16. post med.) the Bulgares: (p. 36. post med.) the Hunnes. (p. 37. initio.) the Normanes: (pag. 72. post med.) the Bohemianes: (pag. 77: fine) the Suecians: (pa. 21. circa med. & 90. post medium.) The Noruegianes: Liuonians, and Saxones: (pag. 86. circa medium.) Tee Vagarians pag. 104. circa med. The Rugij Thuscanes pag. 99. post med. of Scandia (p. 111. circa med.) Maiora (p. 341. circa med.) of Tunes in Africa: (p. 377. fine.) & of sundry other Nations: (p. 342. ante med. Whereunto might be added sondry other like testimonies men¦cioned by Osiander in his Epitome cent. 7. pa. 73. & 168. & cent. 8. pa. 48. 112. 121. & 127. and the like knowne conuersion of sondry Nations wrought in this age in the East In∣dies, the VVest Indies and Africa confessed by our aduersarie Simon Lithus in respons. Altera ad Alterā gretsert apolgiam p. 331. where he saith, Iesuitarum seges &c. paucorum annorum spacio &c. non contenta europae finibus, Asiam, Aphricam, Americam suis idolis compleuit. A thing so euidently performed only by our Catholicke Church, that Mr. VVintaker answering ther∣unto (l. de Ecclesia contra Bellarminum p. 336. ante med. saith, Respondes illas Conuersiones tam multarum gentium post tempora Gregorij, de quibus hic Bellarminus loquitur non puras & integras fuisse, sed corrupta: And Danaeus in respons. ad disput. Bellarmini part. 1. pa. 780. fine, answe∣reth thereto in like manner saying, Propogatio autem illa quam Gregorius primus, Conon, Zacha s & al Grgori secerunt sit iriatio meretricis mn facta, de qua est apoc. 17. versi. 4. & 18. vers. 3. As concerning examples to be giuen of Protestants cōuerting hethē Nati∣ons, we finde one only endeuour of the Caluinists lboring to preach to the Indians, but their labour tooke no effect, as is confessed by their Francis Gnarum in sculo verae Eccle∣siae page 161. fine. & 168. post med. And see further thereof Villagag. con. Caluin. and Episto∣lae Iudicae. Catholicke Church) is in it selfe so certaine, and withall so euidently confessed by our learned aduersaries, as that we will not seeke for other proofe therof.
To this end one of them affirmeth that AnnoSee Symon de Voyon his discourse vpō the Catal∣log. of Doctors &c. in the epistle there to the reader post medium. 605. when Pope Boniface was Stalled in his Papall throne, then falsehood got the victorie &c. then was the wholle world ouerwhelmed in the dregges of Antichristian filthines, abho∣minable superstitions, and traditions of the Pope. Then was that vniuersall apostasie from the saith foretould by Paule. To this end likewise saith Mr, Parkins:Mr. Parkins in his expositiō vpon the Creed page 400. We say that before the daies of Luther for many hundreth yeeres an vniuersall apostasie ouerspred the wholle face of the earth, and that our Church was not then visible to the world: and thatMr. Parkins vbi su∣pra page 370. during the space of nine hundredth yeeres the popish here∣sie hath spred it selfe ouer the wholle earth: In so much that wheras it isHeretofore tract. 2 c. 2. sect. 2. & 3. heretofore confessed as euident, that the foresaide predictions of the Prophetes concer∣ning the conuersion of so many foretould Kings and kingdomes of the Gentiles, neither were nor could be fulfilled during the 600. yeeres next after Christ & before Boniface the third. And where also we haue giuen perticularSee this heretofore in the begining of this se∣ction, in the margent at this marke. *) instance of the more euident and cleare accomplishment therof begunne afterwardes and continued at & after the foresaid times of Gre∣gorie and Boniface, with most plentifull and answe∣rable successe in so many Kingdomes before menti∣oned. Our aduersaries are not now abashed,) an opi∣nion most dreadfull to be heard, or thought of) that where the foresaid predictions of the Prophets take their chiefest begining encrease and continuance in regarde of the Churches answerable accomplished enlargement, they doubt not euen then and there to place the very contrarie defection of Antichrist. Mr. Whittaker to that end (is before) affirmingeSee Mr. Whitaker alleaged ibidem. the Conuersion of so many Nations after the times of Gre¦gorie
to haue bene not pure but corrupte: Daneus also ter∣ming it inbriatio meretricis mundo facta de qua est Apoc. 17, vers. 4. & 18.See Danaeus his wordes alleaged ibidem. Turninge so most euidently the Churches most gloriouse foretould enlargement by the answerable cōuersion of so many heathen Kings and kingdomes fulfilled but since the times of Gre∣gorie and Boniface into their pretendedSee before in this Section at. n. o. p. vniuer∣sall Apostasie wrought by Antichrist.Hieremie 2, 12. O ye Heauens be astonied at this: Be afraid and vtterly confounded. Are they Christians who dare thus affirme the Churches foretoulde enlargement to be Antichristian? Is this the end or issue of our aduersaries DoctrineMath. 13, 9. He that hath eares to heare, let him heare. But to omitt the like further testimonie herein of Mr. D. Fulke:Mr. D. Fulke in his treatise against Stapelton & Martial p. 25. paulo post med. acknowledgeth that Some (Protestants) haue written that the Pope hath blinded the worlde these ma∣ny hundreth yeares, some say a 1000. yeares, some 1200 some 900. &c. Mr. Iohn Napeire affirmeth yet more fully both concer∣ning this time and the other former 300. yeares next after Constantine, thatMr. Napeire in his treatise vp¦on the reuelations pa. 43. versus finem. the Popes kingdome hath had power ouer all Christians from the time of Pope Siluester and the Emperour Constantine for these 1260. yeares: and thatMr. Napeire vbi supra p. 145. colum. 3. fine. From the time of Constantine till these our daies euen 1260. yeares, the Pope and his Clergie hath possessed the out-ward vi∣sible Church of ChristiansMr. Napeire vbi supra pa. 68. versus finem. Reigning vniuersally and with∣out any dbateable contradiction 1260. yeares:Ibidem p. 191. initio. Gods true Church most certainely abiding so long Latent andIbi∣dem pag. 161. col. 3 circa med. & pa. 156. ante med. & 237. paulo post med. & 23. fine. inui∣sible: with whome agreeth M. Brocard:Brocarde vpon the reuelations fol. 110. a. & fol. 123. b. And Mr. Napeire doubteth not to proceede yet much further, affirming that alsoNapeire vbi supra p. 191. initio. during euen the second and 3. ages (after Christ) the true Temple of God and lght of the ghospell was obscured by the Romane Antichrist him-selfe: But Seba∣stianus Francus reacheth the very point, and doubteth not to comprehend all the foresaide ages since the Apostles times, affirming that, Statim post Apostolos &c.Seba∣stianus Francus in Epistola de Abrogandis in vniuersum omnibus statutis Ecclesiasti∣cis. And Mr. Fulke in his aunswere to a Counter∣faite Catholicke pag. 35. post medium saith, The true Church decaied imediately after the Apostles times. Presently after the Apostles time, all things were turned vpside downe &c. And that fr ertaine through the worke of Antichrist: the externall Church togither with the faith and sacraments vanished awaie presently after the Apostles de∣parture, and that for ths thousand foure hundreth yeares the
Church hath bene no where externall and visible: So far hath the Protestants Church hitherto bene (euen by their owne testimonies) from fulfilling the foresaide fore∣toulde Conuersion, of so many KINGES and king∣domes of the Gentiles. THAT THE KNOWEN DEFECT THEROF in the Protestants Church aduantageth the Iewes against them, made Sebastian Castalio doubtfull of his faith and Dauid Georgean Apostata. §. 5. THESE thinges (most Gratious SOVERAIGNE) being thus explained and confessed, we do here as now insist, and most humblie appeale vnto your MAIESTIES Learned and equall iudgement betweene our aduersaries and vs concerning the ac∣complishment of the foresaid predictions, whether that the same may be said to haue bene hitherto per∣formed by our Catholike or their Protestant Church Here haue we often knocked at the dores of theire hartes, demaunding but with what probabilitie they can (before Luthers time) make good that which the scriptures foretell (as Oecolampadius and them selues vnderstand) concerning theOecolampadius al∣leageth before Tract. 2. Sect. 1. letter q. eternitie of Christs Kingdome, & the multitude of Kings to serue it: and which be those many Kinges and Kingdomes of the Gen∣tiles which their Church hath in all that meane time accordingly conuerted from heathenishe Paganisme to the faith of Christ, or how can their Church but be said (accordingly as the scripturesThe glorie of this last house shalbe greater then the first Aggeus 2, 10. the de∣solate hath more Children then the married wife (Esay 54, 1. & Galat. 4, 27. He is mediator of a better testamēt which is established vpon better promisses (haebr. 8, 6.) and Oeco∣lampadiusOecolampadius in Esay c. 2. vers. 2. saith, Greate is the dignitie of the Christian Church aboue the sinagoge of the Iewes, in that it shalbe most populouse, and of all Nations sondry shall Ioyne them-selues vnto it abundantly. from them teach, that the true Church ought to excell the Sinagogue of the Iewes: but so much as since the coming of the Messias (which was the ap∣pointed time of the Sinagoges decay and the Christi∣ans Churches increase) considering that it is hereto∣fore
fullySee heretofore tract 2. c. 1. sect. 4. confessed, and hereafterSee hereafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. 7. 10. further proued, that for the thousand yeares last before Lu∣ther, their Church hath continued vnknowen Latente and inuisible &c. whereas on the other parte it appea∣reth (by sufficient authoritie of histories in all times) that the Iewes during all those ages, and euer since Christes time, haue had theire Sinagogues (though vnder some kind of restraint) yet dispersed knowenPeter Martir in his common places in English part. 2. pag. 599. b. initio saith hereof. The Iewes as yet continew, and are kept in so greate aduer∣sities, in so diueres and gree∣uouse captiuitie and disper∣sion, they houlde still their religion, doubtles no aunciēt Troians, Lombards, Hunnes or Vandalles, haue so helde still their owne &c. & could shew theire originall and hi∣story set forth in most true writting, and being euery where dispersed as they were coulde neuertheles keepe their owne ordinances which for so much as it contineweth a∣mong the Iewes, is vndoub∣tedly a singuler worke of God &c. If now then Godes worke be such in the dis∣persed & reprobate Iewes afrer the time of their Si∣nagoges decay, shall it not much the rather bee more Gloriouse in his Church of the new testa∣ment, which according to Paule haebr. 8, 6. Is esta¦blished in better promises? Then euer was the other of the Iewes euer before the dissolu∣tion and end thereof? And see Peter Martir vbi supra pa. 328. b. fine & 329. a initio. & visible in the most notable prouinces of the world, as Greece, Italy, Spaine, France, Germanie, England, &c. And therfore here also againe we do submit to your MAIESTIES learned iudgement, whether we or they be the men, that can against the obiections in this kind of the doubtfull and misbeleeuing Iewes, maintaine that before Luthers time, the foresaid pre∣dictions of their Prophetes haue bene fulfilled, and so consequently that our Sauiour is the true Messias, which falleth necessarily into great daunger of fur∣ther doubt with them, if so many of their Prophecies as went of the Messias and his Church, haue for so many ages before Luther bene lefte vnaccomplished. Neither may the scandall or scruple hence arising be a stumbling blocke onely to the Iewes, but such as hath also distracted certaine of our learned aduersa∣ries: To alleage some few examples therof (and with∣all to omitt the straites and laborinthes into which certaine principall ProtestantCaluin in Daniell c. 2. vers. 44. and Luther tom. 7. printed at Witteberg Anno 1557 lib. de Iudaeis &c. writers haue bene driuen in their disputation had of this matter against the Iewes) Sebastian Castalio professor at BasillOsiander in Epitom. histor. Eccles. cent. 16. pa, 753. initio cal∣leth him, Sebastianus castalio vir apprime doctus, Caluinista tamen: Linguarum peritissimus &c. And Pantalion in his Chronographia p. 125. placeth him there in his catalog of the Fathers and lightes of the Church, saying further that for such, Guilielmus Farellus, Petrus Viretus & Se∣bastian Castalio agnoscuntur a
very learned Caluinist, and highlyCastalio cōmended by D. Humfrey de rat. interpret. l. 1. pa. 62. 63. and 189. And by Gesnerus in bibliotheca Sebastiā Ca∣stall: And by Fridericus Furius alleadged in Sebast. Castal. defens. suarum tran∣slat. pag. 236. commended by D. Humfrey and others,) hauing recited sondry of the foresaid Prophecies concerning the conuersion of Kinges, and the Churches foresaide happie estate and continuance, and looking to the accomplishmēt thereof, writeth thus perplexedly thereof to our late Soueraigne Lord King Edward the sixte.Sebastiā Castalio in his preface of the greate Lattin Bible dedicated to Kinge Edward the sixte saith, Equidem aut haec fu∣tura fatendum est, aut tam fuisse, aut Deus accusandus mendacij: quod si quis fuisse dicit, quaeram ex eo quando fuerint, si dicet tempore A∣postolorum, quaeram cur nec vndiqua{que} perfecta fuerit, & tam cito Exoleuerit dei cognitio ac pietas, que & aeterna & marinis vndi a∣bundantior fuerat promisse. Verely we must confesse either that these thinges shall be performed hereafter, or haue bene already, or that God is to be accused of lying: If any man answere that they haue bene performed, I will demaund of him when? If he say in the Apostles time, I will demaund how it chaunceth, that neither then the know∣ledge of God was altgither perfect, and after in so short space vanished away which was promised to be aeternall and more aboundant then the floodes of the sea? So plainely doth he more then insinuate this perilous scruple, (and which is most dangerous) withall leaueth the same not ex∣plained or answered but perplexed and doubtfull, saying yet further thereof,Castalio vbi supra saith Quo magis librs sacr cō∣sidero, eo minus hactenus praestitum video vtcun{que} ra la lla intelligas. the more I do peruse the scripturs, the lesse do I finde the same performed howsoeuer you vnderstand the said Prophecies. But much more greeuous is the example hereof in Dauid George the hollander, who for many yeeres continued at Basill professing there the Protestants religion, and by them well este∣med of till in the end he became a most blasphemous Apostata: and affirming our Sauiour to be a Seducer, drew secretly many to his opinion, the principall motiue of his reuolt, being, that:Historia Georgij Da∣uidis printed at Antwerpe 1568. in Octauo the Di∣uines of Basill published his historie. Si Christi & Apostolorum doctrina vera & perfecta fuisset &c. If the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles had bene true & per∣ft, the Church which they planted &c. shuld haue conti∣nued &c. But now it is manifest that Antichrist hath subuer∣ted the doctrine of the Aposls. and the Churche by them be∣gunne, as is euident in the papacie, thrfore the doctrine of the Apostles was false and imperfect. Thus far that wretched Apostata. By which two foresaid examples of Castalio and
Dauid Gerge, and other the premisses is fully discoue∣red not onely the not fulfilling of the foresaid Pre∣dictions in the Protestants Church, but also the dan∣gerous sequell which thence ensueth against theire wholle Church and religion in generall. A CONFVTATION OF THE PROTE∣stants obiections and answeres concerning their Churches not accomplishment of the said predictions. Sect. 6. AND we may not here dissemble but referre like wise vnto your MAIESTIES graue iudgmēt, the colours, rather then answers wherwith certaine our aduersaries do (in these straites) seeke to vphold them selues and their Church, 1 First some woulde enforce that the vniuersalitie which is foretould of the Church, was to be accom∣plished but afterThe Author of the booke entituled Antichri∣stus siue Prognostica finis mundi pag. 12. fine saith, spiritus qui annunciat futu∣ra non operatur nisi eunte E∣uangelio, quod sub finem ex confesso Lutherus primus in∣uexit: And pag. 13. post medium. he further saith, Non manifestatur autē per∣seudoprophetarum surrectio: nisi Euangelio: quod inde a primatiuo Apostolorum E∣uangelio ante Lutherum, vt diximus nunquam iuit, ne quis autem Hussiticum Euan¦gelium pertinere huc putet, id prohibet quod Christus il∣lud Euangelium edicit quod sub finem per vniuersum or∣bem esset iturum: porro Hus∣siticum Euangelium Bohemis tantum venit, signo ergo esse non potest, nam cōmune orbis Euangeliū signo esse voluit, non illud vnius gentis: Lutheri Euangelium per orbem volat tam voce, tam praelo. Luthers ghospell preached which long intermission til Luthers time, as it implieth a ma¦nifest breach of Gods foresaidHereof see heretofore Tract. 2. c. 1. Sect. 1. l. 0. Couenante: which foresheweth and assureth the Churches increase and prosperouse continuance thereof, and is directly a∣gainst the opinion of the most learnedMr. Whi∣taker in his booke Contra Duraeum l. 7. pag. 472. saith, Quicquid de Ecclesiae propagatione, am∣plitudine, gloria veteres Prophetae praedixerunt, id perfectū esse historia Luculentissime testatur &c. Prote∣stants who affirme that the foresaid predictions haue bene heretofore performed. And is also other-wise not answerable to the euent since Luthers time, for not so much as any one King or Kingdome of the Gentills is yet hitherto conuerted from paganisme by Luther or any of his followers: So likewise Chri∣stian hartes may hardly endure to thinke that we
haue for so many ages before Luther, wanted wea∣pons in this behalfe against the Iewes, or that God hath during the youth & middle time of his Church suspended his foresaid promises of her happie con∣uersion of Kinges and Nations to serue her, and is but now to fulfill the same in herIn hac mundi senecta post tenebras lucem Euange∣lij exorir: & prlucere voluit Deus. So say the Prote∣stant Diuines apud Osi∣andrum Centur. 16. page 872. post medium. declining and de∣crepit age. 2 Secondly others in steed of answere doe obiect that the Apostle foretelleth2. Thess. 2, 3. a falling away: In discharg wherof it is manifest, first that there is nothing in this place to prooue that the said falling away should con¦tinue for so many hundred yeares as are before pre∣tended: Secondly we say that this falling away is (as the Fathers vnderstand) not of the Church, whereofGloriosa dicta sunt de te Ciuitas Dei. psalm. 86, 3. glorious thinges are foretould, but ofAmbros. in hunc locum. & Tertul. de resurrect. carnis. & Aug. de ciuit. dei l. 20. c. 19. & Hierom. qu. 11. ad alga∣siam. the Romaine Empire, which did then2. Thess. 2, 7. hould or florish, and yet in the end mustSee Dresserus in mil lenar 5. pa. 92. fine & 93. initio. fall away, and that not in part. but as the texte there saith, must2. Thess. 2, 7. be taken away: which to referre to the Church, were as Mr. Witaker him selfe confessethMr. Whitaker against Mr. William Ray∣noldes in his aunswere to the preface pag. 33. saith: We beleeue that Christes Church shall neuer faile, & we account it a prophane he∣resie to teach that Christes Catholicke Church hath pri∣shed from the earth at any time, for this assertion sa∣keth the foundation of all faith: a prophane heresie. 3 Thirdly they do furthermore yet (in lieu of an∣swere) obiect with Mr. D. Fulke, that S. Iohn fore∣telleth that (by reason of Antichrists persecutionReuelat. 12, 6. obiected thus by Mr. Fulke in his answere to a Counterfaite Catholicke pa. 16. ante medium. the woman must flee into wildernes there to remaine a long sea∣son. Whereunto we likewise say, first that the same scripture witnesseth thatRenelat. 20, 2, 3. the olde Serpent Satan was bound for a thousand yeares that he should no more deceiue the Nations till the thousand yeeres were ended: and not loosedReuelat. 20, 7. Mr. Willet in his Sinopsis pa. 160. post med. thinketh these 1000. yeares to haue ended Anno Doni 1294. Mr. Foxe in apoc. c. 11. pag. 245. circa medium, thinketh then to haue ended Anno Domini 1300. And vide ibidem pa. 346. fine & 347 fine And see Hospianus in historia sacramentaria l. 4. c. 2. p. 295. ante med. & in Epist dedica∣toria antemed. And Bullenger vpon the Apolipps srm. 87. fol. 267. b. fine. Affirmeth hereupon that the gspell was preached not n r-mker, but most manifest, not short & pin∣ed, at pbshed by  space of a thousand yeare, and reeaued not of a fewe, but of all Nati∣ons: &c. till then. Which number though it be perhaps incertaine as signifying mo yeeres, yet fewer it can∣not
signifie. and therefore our aduersaries in placing Antichrists appearing and forecing of the Church to flie into wildernes, so many ages within the first thou sand yeeres after Christ, do therein affirme against manifest scripture, and the iudgmentFor it is affirmed & collected from the scrip∣tures, that Antichrist is yet to come by VVicelius in libro de singularitate Antichristi: by Hierome Zanchius in epist. Pauli ad Phillip. Collos. & Thes. page 245. a. and by Fran∣ciscus Lambertus whō Bul∣lenger vpon the Apocalips serm. 62. fol. 202. b. post med. commendeth for a most godly and excellent lear¦ned man: of whose iudge∣ment that Antichrist is not yet come, see the booke en¦tituled Antichristus siu prognostica finis mundi, printed at Basill. page 74. & 75. & 79. ante medium And concerning the like opinion of other Prote∣stants see Mr. Doue in his sermon of the second coming of Christ &c. versus finem where he saith: Some Pro∣testants being ouermuch mo∣dest make a doubt whether Antichrist be yet reuealed or not. And see Mr. Foxe act. mon. (printed 1576.) page 739. b. prope finem & printed Anno 1596. page 366. a. lin. 17 of theire owne brethren. Secondly we say that these foresaide wordes obiected, there to remaine a long season, being most materiall and inserted by Mr. D. Fulke, not as his owne wordes, but as in the seuerall print or letter of the scripture, are his owne negligent (or els more faultie) addition, and therefore that there is nothing in the texte to proue that this flight (though it were to haue hapned within the saide thousand yeares) should against so many foresaide Prophecies conti∣new for so lorge a season: as either of these last 1300. or 900. yeares, but only as the texte saith, modico tempore forReuelat. 12, 12. & 17, 10. & 20.3. Mr. Foxe in Apoc. c. 11. page 239. versus fi∣nem saith hereof: Ne{que} enim fieri potest vt longum tempus codem modico tempore figu∣retur, modico enim tempore, modicū tempus designatur: to which end he alleageth there Franciscus Lambertus and Dauid Chitraeus. & vide pag. 347. fine & 348. and see Fr. du. Ion. vpon the reuelations c. 20. page 257. & 258. a short time namelyReuelat. 12, 6. for a thousand two hundreth and sixtie daies: or as it is explained in other tearmes, forDaniel. 12, 7. & reuelat. 12, 14. a time, two times, and halfe a time: or as it is yet further explained forreuelat. 11, 2. & 13, 5. two and fortie monethes: all which aswell by ordinary computationMr. Dent in his ruine of Rome, or exposition vpon the reuelation page 134. as also by exposicion of the Fathers,Aug. de Ciuitat. Dei lib. 20. c. 23. & Hirom. in Daniel. c. 7. & Cirrill Catech. 25 & Ireneus lib. 5. fine. and others. in so much as Mr. Foxe in Apocalipsin. page 345. post medium saith hereof. Docti sancti{que} hic interpretes, plerique fere omnes quos hactenus videre contigit, nihil hic certi statuunt, nisi quod tempus, tempora, & dimidium temporis ad tres duntaxit annos & semialterum restringūt. & vide ibidem page 362. prope finem. and of that learned Protestant Hierom ZanchiusZanchius in epistolas Pauli ad Phillip. Collos. & Thessal. page 245. a. do amount but vnto three yeares and a halfe: during which time the hight of Antichrists persecution is in theire opinion here∣by
foretoulde to rage: Thirdly we further say that other Protestant writers (who dislike this exposition of three yeares and a halfe: and would enforce a longer terme as namely Mr. Forde,Mr. Ford in Apoc. c. 13. vers. 5. page 97. an∣te med. saith. Menses isti 42. designant paululum id temporis quod Diabulo con∣cessumerat supra c. 12, 12. videl. tempus grauissimae il∣lius persecutionis quae dura∣uit ad Constantinum mag∣num, supputandi sunt enim prorsus sicut sanctissimus pa∣ter Ioannes Foxus accepit, nempe per sabatha annorum, quomodo menses 42 efficiunt annos 294. quibus ex vice∣simo anno imperij Constantini (qui idē fuit Annus Christi 329.) subductis, Constabit Prophetiā istam statim post mortem Christi incepisse. and Mr. Foxe, do vnderstand by euery month a Saboth of yeares affir∣ming so by the 42. monthes to be ment. 294. yeares and that by theire opinion those 294. yeares begunne in the first persecutions of the primatiue Church, and so ended about the end of the first 300. yeares after Christ: which their expositiō as it altogither maketh with vs, strengthning our former assertion of the not fulfilling (during that time of the foresaid predictiōs concerning the Churches happie enlargement, so likewise it leaueth our aduersaries wholly as before chargeable, to answere for the fulfilling thereof in the ages succeeding. And thus much breistly to shew to your MAIES∣TIE 1 First That according to that confessed sence of scripture which Protestants them selues ac∣knowledge,Mr. Foxe in Apoc. page 346. fine & 365 ante med. expresseth his like iudgement affirming page 365 that this exposition was deliuered to him as it were by reuelation, arcano quodam admonitionis sibilo, siue voce tamen &c. and with this exposition agre∣eth Mr. Downham in his treatise concerning Anti∣chist c. 8. page 77 fine: the Church of Christ was fore toulde to continew after her first increase wonderfully enlar∣ged with conuersion of many KINGES and King∣domes of the Gentilles. 2 Secondly, that it is like-wise confessed that many Kinges and Nations of the Gentilles haue continu∣ally since the conuersion of CONSTANTINE our first Christian Emperour till Luther bene according∣lie conuertedHereof see hereto∣fore tract. 2. c. 1 sect. 4. in the margent there in the begining at this mark (*) by our Catholicke Church, & that our Church hath in that estate continued and flori∣shed, as Mr. Napire confesseth for these 1260. yeares Reining vniuersally &c. 3 Thirdly that by like confession of Protestants, their Church hath bene so farr from performing the like, that as them selues acknowledge, shee hath most cer∣tainely for so lnge remained Latent and inuisible: A scru∣ple so euident that Castalio there-vpon fell to doubt∣full speaches of our Christian faith, and Dauid George to plaine Apostasie
THE SECOND CHAPTER THAT THE TRVE CHVRCH MVST haue her Pastors, administration of the word and Sacraments euer-more to continew. SECT. 1. THE second pointe which we intend to offer to your MAIESTIE from that confessed sense of scripture which Protestants acknowledge, is tou∣ching the Churches continued and visible admini∣stration of the Word and Sacraments, which our Sa∣uiour hath ordained to serue as the necessary appoin¦ted ordinarie meanes of our saluation: for albeit that God was able to call, iustifie, and confirme the elect without any mediate meanes, yet hath he not as (Cal¦uine confesseth)See Caluin. institut. l. 4. c. 1. sect 5. initio. determined to accomplishe the same, otherwise then in and by the ministerie of his Church. To beginne therfore with the administration of the Word, the Apostle teacheth. .1. First that Christ hath placed in his CHVRCH,Ephes. 4, 11 12, 13. Pastours and Do∣ctors to continue to the consumation of Saintes, till we all meete in the vnitie of faith, euen as our aduersaries doe hereupon expound) for euer:Doctor Fulk against the Rhemishe Testament in Ephes. 4. sect 4. fol. 335 a. inition. And Caluin. in institut. Printed Geneua. 1550. c. 8. de fide sect 37 38. page 233. 234. Me∣lancthon. loc. commun. aedit. 1561. c. de Ecclesia And hence it is that they affirme, thatCaluin. vbi supra the Church can neuer want Pastors and Doctors. and which is more, thatMr. Fulke against Heskins, Sanders &c. pa. 539 prope finem. Christ will suffer no perticular Church to continue without a seruant to o∣uersee it: and thatMr. Fulke ibid. pag. 536 paulo post med. And mr. Sparke in his answere to mr. Iohn d' Albines p. 11. prope initium saith ac∣cordingly. The Church of Christ hath alwaies had and shall haue to the end succes∣siuely in all ages in one place or other, such as haue shewed the truth faithfully vnto o∣thers, as haue shined as lights in their daies set vpon a Can∣dlesticke. Pastors and Doctors must be in the Church till the end of the world: (euen) fromMr. Fulke ibid. page 569 initio. Christs time till Luthers age. In the like assertion wherof the other Protestant writersThe Confession of Heluetia cited in the har∣monie of Confessions pag 337. and Bertram de lo∣que. in his discourse of the Church p. 79. are plentifull. 2. Second∣ly that these Pastors must not be silent, the holy ghost testifieth, foretelling of the ChurchesEsa. 62, 6. Watchmen or Pastors.The margi∣nall notes of the English Bible 1576. in Esa. 62, 6. that they shall notEsa. 62, 6. be silent. But euen
as the Apostle saith.Rom. 10, 14. How shall they beleeue whome they haue not heard, and hw shall they heare without a Prea∣cher. So our aduersaies do accordingly hould con∣cernng preachers, that (as Mr. Fulke saith)Mr. ulke in his answere to a counterfaite Catholicke p. 100. initio. truth cannot be continued in the world but by their ministrie. That therforePropositions and principles disputed in the vniuersitie of Geneua pag. 245. circa med. the ministrie is an essentiall marke of the true Church: that also as Mr. Deering faithMr. Deering in his reading vpon the epi∣stles to the Hebrues ca. 3. lectur. 15. post initium. Saluation springeth in preaching of the ghospell, and is shutt vp againe with the ceasing of it. and thatIbid. c. 3. lectur. 16 fine. take away preaching, you take away faith: for which he citeth many scrip∣tures. 3. Thirdly our aduersaries do yet further con∣fesse, and the nature of the thing proueth it, (for o∣therwise they were no true Pastors) that these Chur∣ches Pastors (at the least some of them) shallMr. Fulke in his answere to a ounter∣faite Catholicke page 11 initio & 92 ante med. al∣waies resist all false opinion) euen with open reprehension: and thatMr. Deering vbi supra in c. 2. vers. 12. lect 10 circa med. &c. 3 lect. 12. fine. the religion beig of God, no feare of man shall keepe them backe, because as Mr. Deering saith here∣of)mr. Deering ibid. that were to keepe the honour of God for corners and sol tary places: for as the Apostle prescribethRom. 10, 10. with th harte a man beleeueth vnto righteousnes, and with the mouth confesseth to saluation. Concerning now the continued administration of Sacramēts. 1. First the scriptures affirme, that we are therby to1. Cor. 11, 26. shew the Lords death till he come. 2. Secondly our puritane aduersaries do acknowledge, and accor¦dingly teach, that there must beBeza in his sermons vpon the Canticles engli∣shed page 79. & 80. Pastors and Doctors to the end of the world for the administration of the Word and Sacraments: that therforeMr. Bancroft in the suruey of the holy preten∣ded discipline page 440 post medium. the ministrie of the Worde and Sacraments are in absolute degree of necessitie to saluati∣on. with whom our other Protestant aduersaries do agree: Mr. Whitaker saying to this end of the admi∣nistration of the Word and Sacraments, thatMr. Whitaker con¦tra Duraeum l. 3. pag. 249 ante med. saith. S adsunt Ecclesiam constituunt & tol¦lunt, si auferantur. be∣ing present they do constitute a Church, and being absent doe subuert it. and Mr. D. Wilet likewise saith of them:Mr. Willet in his synopsis page 71 fine. these markes cannot be absnt from the Church, and it is no longer a true Church then it hath these markes: for as he further saithMr. Willet vbi su∣pra page 69 finc. the onely absence of them doth make a nul∣letie
of the Church: with whom herein the Lutheranes alsoLobechius a Lu∣therane Doctor and pub∣lique Professor in the vni∣uersitie of Rostoche in dis¦put. theologic. pag. 213. sect. 44. affirmeth of these and of the Church, that tam areto & indistolubili nexu inter se copulata sunt, vt in coetu vocato∣rum, alterum sine altero esse non possit, & negato vno, alterum quoque ne∣gare necesse sit. do agree. 3. Thirdly our aduersaries do yet further hereupon affirme of these, thatMr Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 3. page 260. saith. Sunt Eccle∣siae proprietates essentiales. And see mr. Whitgifte in his defence &c. page 81. ante med. and see mr. D. Couell in his examination &c. page 21. ante med. & page 5. fine. they are essentiall notes of the Church: and thatHiperius in method. theolog. page 548 ante med. & page 532. prope finem. And Amandus Polnus in partition. theolog. page 304. ante med. these notes are needfull to distinguish the true Church from the false, that men carefull of their saluation may know where the true Church is and to which company cheifly thy ought to adioyne them selues. And tht therefore the Church militant is in some sorte euermore to remaine, not poore or slender in paucetie of professors, but rich and plentifull:Caelius secundus Curio writt a wholle booke hereof, entituled de amplitudine regni Dei. wherein read him lib. 1. page 1. 5. 14. 24. & l. 2. page 135. 148 167 183 232 233 243 246. &c. And he answereth the common obiections vrged to the contrarie l. 1 page 96. 97 100 106 108 115 117 120 128 131. neither obscure or latent but like toMath. 5, 15. & Esa. 2, 2. Concerning the answerable exposition of which textes see D. Humfrey hereafter page 84. in the margent vnder the letter. e. And S. Austin tom. 6. contra faustū. Manich. l. 13. c. 13. saith Propter hos enim motus paruuloum qui possint seduci ab hominibus, a manifestatione claritatis Ecclesiae, Dominus quoque prouidens ait, non potest Ciuitas abscondi supra montē constituta. And tom. 7. contra liter. Petil. l. 2. c. 32. he further saith. Hinc fit vt Ecclesia vera neminem lateat, vnde est illud, quod in Euangelio ipse dicit, non potest Ciuitas abscondi supra mon∣tem constituta: ideoque in eodem psalmo connectitur, In sole posuit tabernaculum suum, id est in manifestatione. a Citie placed vpon a hill that cannot be hid, knowen andBartholomeus Keckermanus in sistem. theolog. page 408. initio saith. Noui testam. Ecclesiae, ratione notarum & formae externae semper debet esse sensibilis, seu conspicua, vt nimirum reliquae gentes quae adhuc extra Ecclesiam sunt, scire possint cuinam Ecclesiae sese debeant agregare, id quod de ecclesia noui testam. Esa c. 61. ab initio magnificis verbis predixit. And Hiperius in method. theolog. page 552. prope finem, saith: Profectò nisi signa haec extarent, ac vera ecclesia sensibus deprehenderetur, qui scire possit homo cumam caetui salutis consequendae ergô adherendum sioi foret. And Peter Marter in his epistes annexed to his common places in English page 153. a. circa medium: reporting certaine pointes wherein he professeth to agree with vs Catholickes saith: We also doe not appoint an inuisible Church, but doe define Congregations, vnto which the faithfull may know that they may safely adioyne them selues. affirming further a little there be∣fore, that this opinion is (saieth he) Common with vs to Catholickes. conspicuouse: a truth so euident that they doubt not thereupon to
affirme and teach out of the scripturesMr. Henoch Cla∣pham in his soueraigne re¦medie against schisme. p. 18. after many proofes alleaged by him from the scriptures, and otherwise concludeth, saying. Not onely all auncientes euer holde the Churches euer visibilitie, but also all learned men of our age: In like full maner is the Churches visibilitie affirmed from the scriptures as well by Melancthon in loc. comun. edit. 1561. c. de Ecclesia, & in prefat. lib. corp. doctrinae Christianae in Ec∣clesijs Saxon. & mismicis electoris Saxon. impress. Lipsiae Anno 1561. And in Concil. theolog. part. 1. page 512. & part. 2. pag. 201. & 394. As also by D. Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. page 240. where he saith: Declaratum est nos Ecclesiam non in aere ollocare sed in terra, nos Ecclesiam confiteri esse opidum supra montem positum, quod abscondi non ptest. Math. 5. montem excelsum domus Dei cunctis collibus editiorem, ad quem omnes gentes confluent. Esa. 2. &c. Cur ergo anxie & curiose probant quod est a nobis nunquam negatum? &c. (And ibidem page 241. initio. he saith) Visibilis est propter exercitia pietatis, quae videntur ab omnibus in Ecclesia, nam dum ministri docent, alij discunt, illi sacramenta administrant, hij communicant. &c. qui ista non videt talpa est caecior, visibilis est quia notae sunt insignes & conspicuae &c. and page 242. initio. he saith, non enim clancularij seessus &c. conuocationes sunt Christianae. and page 281 fine he affirmeth concerning the Church militant (which is the onely pointe in question) portere Ecclesiam esse conspicuam, conclusionem esse clarissimam. the Chur∣ches euer visibilitie: condemning the contrarie opinion of the Churches pretended Latencie or inuisibilitie, for a monstrouseMelancthon in Con∣cil. theolog. part. 2. saith: necesse est fateri esse visibilem Ecclesiam &c. quo spectat haec portentosa oratio qua negat esse vllam visibilem Ecclesiam. page 393. fine. & 394 initio. assertion &Mr. Henoch Clapham in his soueraigne remedie against schisme page 17 ante medium saith. Contrary to all scriptures they do affirme that there hath bene no visibilitie of the Church for former hundreth of yeeres, whih position is against Psalm. 72, 3, 17. Esa. 59, 21. contrary to all scriptures: against which our Sauiour did (as they thinke) spe∣cially forewarne vs, saying:Math. 24, 23. whereupon mr. Hnoch Clapham in his soueraigne remedie against schisme page 23. post med. saith. Our Sauiour forbides going out vnto such desert and corner ghospels. Math. 24, 23, 24, 26. and S. Austine tom. 4. quaest. euang. l. 1. quaest. 38. saith, accordingly: Constituta ergo authoritate Ecclesiae per orbem terrarum clara at{que} mani∣festa, consequenter discipulos admonet & qui in eum credere voluerint, ne schismaticis at{que} hereticis credant: vnumquod{que} enim schisma & vnaquae{que} heresis aut locum suum habet in orbe terrarum partem aliquam retinens, aut obscuris at{que} occultis conuenticulis curio∣sitatem hominum decipit: Ad quod pertinet quod ait, si quis vobis dixerit, Ecce hic est Christus aut illic, quod significat terrarum partes & Prouinciarum. Aut in penetralibus aut in deserto, quod significat obscura & occulta conuenticula haereticorum. &c. And see him further contra Faustum Manich. l. 13. c. 13. If therfore they shall say vnto you, Beholde he is in the deserte, go you not forth: Beholde he is in secrete places beleeue it not. In so much as they al∣so affirme the visible dispersion therof euen for thatReuelat. 12, 12, & 17, 10. & 20, 3. short time during which she is foretouldReuelat. 12, 6. to flee
into wildernes by reason of Antichrists persecution: to which end Mr. Fulke (though most precise in this behalfe) is yet enforced to confesse, thatMr. Doct. Fulke a∣gainst the Rhemishe Te∣stament in 2. Thessa. 2. sect. 5. fol. 354. b. fine. the true Church thgh obscure and driuen into wildrnes by Anti∣christ, yet still continued dispersed ouer the world, and thatMr. Fulke ibid. fol. 355. a. initio. to this like effecte see Mr. Whitaker in his answere to master Rainoldes preface pag. 34 & 37. mr. Foxe in Apoc. page 349. post medium in the time of Antichrist it was not driuen into any corner of the world, but was, is, and shall be alwaies dispersed in many nations: and that not obscure, but (as Bullenger saith)Bullenger vpon the Apocalips fol. 200. a. fi∣ne. & b. initio. see the words of Bullenger here∣after in the margent at the figure 3. tract. 2. c. 2 sect 11. right famous: which pointe the text it selfe doth also most inuincibly argue: for as it affirmeth that the womans flight into wildernes must continueReuelat. 12, 6 1260 dayes: so likewise it affirmeth that the preaching of the Word, must as then continue in like maner du∣ring euen the same terme of 1260. dayes:Reuelat. 11, 3. and must so be as generall as the persecution: a matter so vn∣doubted, that Szegedine saith hereupon,Szegedinus in ta∣bul. Analatic. page 368 circa medium. the ministers of Gods word shall preach all the time in which Antichrist shall tread vnder foote the holy Cittie. And Mr. Gifford saith likewise,Mr. Gifford vpon the reuelations serm. 21. page 191. fine. these two witnesses are not to be taken for two and no moe, but for all those which were raised vp to impugne Antichrist: and that they should prophecie during all the time of Antichrists reigne. In like testimonie wher∣of, the otherSee Mr. Fulke a∣gainst the Rhemishe Te∣stament fol. 475. b. sect. 4. and Bullenger vpon the Apocalipes in c. 11. fol. 142. b. post medium. Protestant writers are very plenti∣full. THAT PROTESTANTS TO PROVE THE answerable performance therof (for former ages) in their Church do alleage promiscuously both Catholicks & knowne Heretickes as members of their Church. SECT. 2. THIS continued & visible administration of the Word & Sacraments, being the confessed sense of the scriptures, and without which the true Church cannot be, we will now examine somewhat concer∣ning the answerable performance therof: In which
point when we prouoke our aduersaries, there is no∣thing more vsuall with them, then (for theire owne defence in this behalfe) to search out in the examples of former times, for all such whatsoeuer, as may be said (though often falsely) in any sorte to haue im∣pugned the Pope, but so much as in any one pointe either of manners or doctrine: And although they were otherwise neuer so different from Protestnts, yet are they (in these straites) promiscuously registred by our aduersaries in the Catallog. of the Doctors of their Church. In this sorte are namedSee hereafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 7. in the mar∣gent there at the figure 2. concerning Ioannes de Ru∣pe Scissa, and Willm. de S. Amore: and see cōcerning Peter Bloix (claimed by Mr. Gabriell Powell in his consideration &c. pa. 52. initio.) Osiander incentur. 12. page 281. post med. where he saith: Pe∣trus Blesensis &c. Pricipum Prelatorum religiosorum & priuatorum peccata gra¦uiter arguit. &c. non ta∣men Pontificios errores refutauit was this man then a Protestant? Ioannes de rupe Scissa Willielmus de S. Amore, and Peter Bloix. for thei onely reprouing the life & maners of the Clear∣gie, for this onely cause also are namedConcerning Willm. Occam read act. mon. prin¦ted 1596. page 358. a sin. 88. & b. line 40. and of Scotus see Foxe ibid. page 130. b. line 8. & Osian∣der cent. 9. page 44. and of Ioannes Gaudauensis read Foxe vbi supra page 358. 2. line 88. William Occam, Iohn Scotus, and Iohn Gaudauensis. In like vniust maner is namedBy Mr. Sparke in his answere to Mr. Iohn d' Al∣bines page 64 prope finem And by Simon de voyon in his discource vpon the Ca¦tallog. of the Doctors of Gods Church, in the table. numer. 11. Alcuinus Archbishoppe of Canter∣burie, and scoller to S. Bede for his onely opinion vn∣truely pretended against the Reall presence, the con∣trarie wherof is by his owne writings more thenAlcuinus in lib. de diuinis officijs c. de Missa. saith: Consulens Deus infirmitati nostae, qui non solemus carnes crudas mandu∣care, & sanguinem bibere, facit vt in pristina remaneant forma, duo illa munera, & est in veritate corpus Christi & sanguis. euident. So likewise do they nameDoctor Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. page 326. initio. And Simon devoyon vbi supra in the table numer. 107. and claime S. Bede him selfe whom others of them do more true¦ly and plainely reiect, for a confessed Papist: euenLuke Osi∣ander in epitom. cent. 8. page 58. initio. see this heretofore tract. 1. sect. 1. in the mar∣gent at the letter g. in all those articles wherin Protestants do at this day distent from the Pope. In like manner Peter Lumberd master of the sentences is by them sortedSymon Pauli. in method. aliquot locorum doctrin. &c. tradit. Rostochij. fol. 12. b. in the Catallog of the Doctors and restorers of the heauenly doctrine, andSymon Pauli ibid. fol. 15 b. and Hiperius in method. theolog. in praefat. page 1. fine & 2. cita & post medium. placed euen with Husse and Luther, who was so eui∣dently a knowne Catholicke, that Mr. Foxe therfore termeth himActes and monuments page 41. b. circa medium. an Archpiller of papistrie. We coulde
giue like exampleMr. Gifforde in his ser∣mons vpon the reuelati∣ons page 195. post me∣dium giueth instance in Ioannes Picus Earle of Mi∣randula. And Simon de Voyon in his discource vpon the Catallogue &c. page 126. post medium: nameth S. Bernard. And Mr. Foxe in his Callen∣der placed in the begin∣ing of his actes and mo∣numents placeth Erasmus and Picus Mirandula and yet Erasmus (in whō they do more pretend) doth in lib. 16. ep. 11. excuse him selfe briefly and fully to the contrarie: saying. Christum agnosco, Lutherum non agnosco, Ecclesiam Ro∣manam agnosco. of S. Bernard, Erasmus, Picus Mi∣randula, & sondry other knowne Catholicke writers, whom our aduersaries do in like maner most iniustly claime to be of their Church. And as with Catho∣lickes so likewise in this exigeme of need, are they constrained to make like claime toMr. Foxe actes monu. page 70. a. ante medi. Almericus, theLike claime is made to the Al∣bigenses by mr. Sparke against mr. Iohn d'Albines. page 58. ante medium. by mr. Fulke contra Stapletonum, de successione Ecclesiae page 112. & 271 initio. And by Chrispi∣nus in his booke of the estate of the Church page 350 ante medium. But see plaine testi∣monie of the execrable errors of the Albigenses in Osiander Centur. 13. page 329. And in Cesarius, Cistert. 5. dist. dial. and Luxemb. haer Albig. See also hereafter tract. 2. c. 2 sect. 3. in the margent at the figure 2. Albigenses, and sondry otherOf like claime made to Peter Bruis, and the Henricianes or Apostolici: see Catallog. testium veritatis printed Anno 1597. tom. 2. page 561 & 562. confessed and knowne heretickes. In diuers of whom Mr. Iewell (to omitt others)See these other Protestants so disclaiming hereafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3. in the margent at the letter .o. is enforced to disclaime, say∣ing expresly of them:Mr. Iewell in his defence of the Apologie page 48. And see certaine of Almaricus his confessed errors mencioned hereafter tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 3. in the margent at the let∣ter o. And by Chrispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church page 349 post medium And see also thereof Cesarius lib. dial. d. 5. and Gaguinus lib. 6. franc. and Gerson trct. 3. in Matt. and Paulus Amilus l. 6. hist. Galliae. and Genebrardus in Chron. Anno 1208. they are none of ours. In ex∣aminatiō therfore of these & such other like knowne impertinēt exāples, we will not be so Idly tedious as to trouble your Maiestie, but will make triall of those in whom our aduersaries haue greatest confidence, as namely, Waldo, Wicliff, and Husse, and in their se∣uerall followers, and see if that these can vpholde the Protestant Churches administration of the word and Sacramentes, but so much as for those seuerall ages in which they liued: in whom if our aduersaries doe faile, then remaine they for any hope to be had of the other no lesse then desperate.
THAT VVALDO (WHO LIVED ANNO Domini 1220.) was no Protestant and that there∣fore the examples of Waldo and his followers is not suf∣ficient to proue (but so much as for their times) a continuance of the Protestants Churches administration of the Word and Sacraments. SECT. 3. TO beginne then with Waldo the Protestants ad∣mnstration of the worde and sacraments is so litle proued by his example to haue bene but so much as in beinge imediatlye befo e and at the time of his first appearing, that (in clre prooffe to the contra∣rie he (as Mr. Foxe testifieth) was then a Catholike lay-manAct. mon. page 628. b. circa med. a rich marchant of Lyn and soact. mon. pag. 628 b. paulo post medium. vnlearned that he gaue rewardes to certaine learned men to translate the holy Scriptures for him and certaine other workes of the Do∣ctors: and being thus holpen, did as Mr. Foxe repor∣tethact. mon. vbi supra. conferr the forme of religion in his time to the in∣fallible worde of God: where vpon saith Mr. Foxeact. mon. page 41. b. paulo ante medium sprong vp the Doctrine & name of tose which are called Wal∣denses:act. mon. p. 628. b. ante medium. or (as he saith page 41. b. circa med. About Anno. 1160. Anno 1218. 2 Seacondlie he had no ordinarie vocation or cal∣ling by man for our Catholicke Church condemned him, and his proceedings, and therfore would not, call him, and as for any other Church then being of his profession to call him, there was noneSee herafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3. at this marke (¶). at that time, so much as but in being or knowne to him. For which cause he and his followers contemned all calling, teaching thatIlliricus in Catal. testium page 730. 731. 732. 740. 745. And Osi∣ander in epitom. histor. eccles. cent. 9.10.11 &c page 287 fine & 440 Laye men and woemen might Consecrate (the sacraments) and Preach. And as for any pretence of extraordina ie calling by God, (which euerie sectmaster may arogate) euen as by the Pro∣testants grauer assertion, it had euermore when it
was in vse,Amandus Polanus in partition. theolog. l. 1. p. 308 saith: Ministrorum extraordinarié vocatorū etiam dona extraordina∣ria fuere, nempe Prophe∣tiae, donum edendi mira∣cula: &c. And Musculus loc. comun. page 394. saith: Vocatio quae ime∣diaté est a Christo, iam in vsu non est, vt erat olim, habebat sua signa vnde cognosci potuit, de quibus memenit Marcus Euangelista. cap. vlt. dicens, predicauerunt &c. sequentibus signis &c. And mr. Henoch Clapham in his soueraigne remedie against schisme page 25. initio doth vpon this ground reprehend Browne for that he did take vpon him extraordinarie calling, & wanted Miracles: and Luther in loc. comu. Clas. 4. c. 20. initio p. 38. post med. admonisheth to this end saying: Hoc explores an vocationem suam possint probare: ne{que} enim Deus vnquam aliquem misit nisi vel per Hominem vocatum, vel per signa declaratum, ne ipsum quidem filium. And Luther tom. 5. Ien. Germ. fol. 491. a. b. saith: Vnde ve∣tus? quis te misit &c. vbi sigilla quod ab hominibus missus sis? Vbi sunt miracula quae te a Deo missum esse testantur? Also Luther admonished the Senate of Milhouse against Mun∣cer the Anabaptist saying: Si dicat se a Deo at{que} ipsius spiritu missum esse quemadmodum Apostoli: probet hoc signis & miraculis editis, vel nolite ferre vt concionetur, nam vbi∣cun{que} Deus ordinariam viam mutare vult, ibi semper miracula facit: Luther tom. 2. Ien. Germ. fol. 455. b. & 456. a. and hereof  Sleydon lib. 3. An. 25. Also Sigwartus in his 23 disputationes theologic. &c page 207 sect. 8. saith: Haec vocatio semper extraordi∣naria quaedam & diuina dona comitantia habet quae sunt tanquam sigilla doctrinae &c. cu∣iusmodi fuerunt miracula &c. Miracles adioyned thereto in testimo∣nie that it was from God, (which were wanting in Waldo) So likewise as the learned Protestants them selues graunt, it is now since the Apostles timesMusculus vbi supra and Lobechius in disput. theo∣log. page 358 fine & 359 initio. saith: Imediatam porrò vocationem cum mediata ab Apostolis permutatam esse scriptura testatur &c. credimus imediatae vocationis vsum Deo in hoc mundo nullum (amplius futura, nullam quippe de ea dedit promissionem, nullum mandatum. And D. Sarauia in his booke of the diuers degrees of Ministers page 9. initio∣termth extraordinary calling an vnknowne coast out of which (the now defendors thereof) can no waies wind them selues. And see mr. D. Couell in his defence of mr. Hooker pag. 86. fine & 87. initio. and see Sarauia in defen. tract. &c. contra resp. Bezae p. 306 & 307. And ibid. page 37. circa med. he saith Sed speciem illam extraordinariae vocationis ad Ecclesiae ministerium &c. cum nullo testimonio scripturarum, nec exemplo certo doceatur, non admitto, est enim periculi plena, & noui mali{que} exempli &c. ea sola fretus nemo se mini∣sterio Ecclesiastico ingerere debet. And see there page 35. 36. 38. &c. ceassed and not t be expected as being without all proofe or testimonie in the writings of the new testa∣ment. If now therefore Waldo did (as appeareth by Protestants them selues vndertake toSimon de Voyon in his discource vpon the Catalog. of the Doctors &c. page 132. post medium, and Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church page 339. ante med. Preach being (but) a Lay sculer man, and so wanted callng, much lesse then could he conferre calling to others: there∣fore both he and all his followers which discended
from him were through theire want of callingNo man taketh the honour vnto him, but he that is called of God, as A∣aron: hebr. 5, 4. How shall they preach excepte they be sent. Rom. 10, 15. Who so entreth not in by the dore in∣to the Sheepefould but cly∣meth vp an other way, is a theefe. Iohn. 10, 1. intrudors, hauing no more authoritie to celebrate and administer Sacraments (excepted only Baptisme in time of necessitie whichBaptisme by lay per¦sons in time of necessitie is affirmed by the Fathers as witnesseth. Caluin. in∣stitut. l. 4. c. 15. sect. 20. confessing & saying here∣of. Multis abhinc seculis, adeo{que} ab ipso feré Eccle¦siae exordio vsu receptum fuit, vt in periculo mortis Laici Baptizarent si mini∣ster in tempore non ades∣set. It is in like manner affirmed by the Lorde Archbishope of Canter∣burie in his defence a∣gainst Carthwrite pa. 518 & 519. ante med. & ma∣ny other Protestants. a lay person may do) then they had power to create a new world, so litle is the continuance of Protestantes administration of the Word & Sacraments enabled by Waldo. 3 Thirdly concernng the Protestantes doctrine of Iustification by onely faith, which is in their iudgmētMr. Clarke in the disputation had in the Tower with Edm. Camp. the 4. daies conference Arg. 1 D. iiii the soule of the Church:The Cofession of Bohemia in the har∣monie of Confessions in English page 253. of all other points of doctrine the weightiest. & which saith: Mr. Foxeact. mon. page 402. a. circa med. Luther opened as being long hid before. It was so vnknowne to Waldo, and he so wholly affected to our Catholike doctrine of merittes and Workes (which Protestants termePenrie in his booke entituled Mr. Some laid open in his colours page 29. 30. the very harte, life, and soule of Papistrie,) that he didD. Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. page 270 circa medium: and Mr. Foxe act. mon. page 628. b. fine forsake all thinges that being poore he might follow Christ and the Euanglicall perfection: which our aduersaries reiectMr. Fulke against the Rhemish testament in Math. 19. sect. 9. fol. 38. b. And mr. Perkins in his reformed Catholicke page 241. and Caluin. institut. lib. 4. cap. 13. sect. 13. for Popish: In so much as he and his fol∣lowers were a very profession of begging Friars, and therfore calledactes and monuments page 41. b. circa medium & page 629 a. ante medium. the poore men of LyonsDoctor Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. page 270 circa medium. professing (as D. Humfrey vrgeth) a kind of monasticall life: wher∣in they were so forward, that they afterwardesVrspergenses in Chronic. Anno 1212. made means to Innocentius the third then Pope to haue their order by him confirmed, but could not preuaile 4 Fourthly the Waldenses held sundry grosse errors. as namely their deniallSee Guido and Antoninus de Waldensibus: and Aeneas Siluius in his Bohemica historia de Waldensium dogmatibus: And Luxemb. in haer. Paup. de Lugduno. of all iudgement to blood. andSee Illiricus in Catal. testium veritatis page 748. prope initium. of the Saboth. In regard of which latter they
were also calledAct. mon. page 41. b. circa med. & see Simon de Voyon in his discource vpon the Catallog. of the Doctors of the Church. p. 134 insabalistes. They also further taughtIlliricus in Catal. testium veritatis p. 731. fine. & 745. ante med. & 730. circa med. & 732. initio 740. ante medium. that Layemen & women might Consecrate (the Sacrament) & preach. ThatIlliricus ibid. page 729. circa med. & 747. post medium. & 760 circa med. Cleargie men should haue no Possessions or propertie. thatIlliricus ibid page 729. post medium there should be no diui∣sion of Parishes, nor Churches: forIbid. page 749. ini∣tio: & 733 circa med. & page 760 fine. a walled Church they reputed as a barne &. alleaging textes againstIbid. pag 749 initio Churches made with handes: thatIlliricus ibid. page 735. ante med. & 756. ante med. & 752. initio. men ought not to swere in any case.Ibid. page 731 cir¦ca med. & 743 post med. they condemned the Sacrament of marriage: affirming that thoseIbid. married persons mor∣tally sinned, who accompanied togither without hope of issue. they heldIbid. page 746. ante medi. & 731. post med. all thinges done aboue the girdle, by kissing, touching, wordes, compression of the pappes &c. to be done in charitie, and not against continencie. That alsoIbid. page 760. cir¦ca med. & 740. ante med and teste Osiandro in e∣pitom. histor. Eccles. cēt. 9. 10. 11. &c. page 440 post med. neither Priest nor ciuill Magistrate being guiltie of mortall sinne did enioy their dignitie, or were to be obeyed.Illiricus in Catall. test. Ver. page 735. post med. & 755. post med. They condēned Prince & Iudges.Ibidē. page 730. fine. They affirmed singing in the Church to be an infernall clamor. And (to omitt sondry other), they taught that they might dissemble their religion, & so accordinglyIbid. page 734 paulo post med. they went to the Catho∣licke Churh dissembling, and offered, confessed, and Com∣municated dissmblingly. By reason of which their dis∣simulation they secretely increased in sondry places to a great number before they could be discouered: for which our aduersarie IlliricusIlliri∣cus ibidem page 722. ante med. faith of them: Non est quidem id omnino probandum, quod in multis locis diù sine vlla publica Confessione fuerint. not vnworthe∣lie reproueth them. And if Protestants will not beleeue the writers of those times reporting these and sundry other grosse errors of them, why then may they not excuse in like manner Peter Bruis, Almericus, the Albigenses, and the Apostolici, or Henricianes: all which liued in that age and are confessed to haue heldPeter Bruis denied Transubstantiation, Masse, Praier for the dead, the single life of Priestes and Monckes, Veneration of the Crosse, Church musicke &c. Osiander centur. 12. page 282. 283. and see Catallog. te∣stium veritatis printed 1597 tom. 2. page 561. & 562. Almericus denied the Reall Presence Cnsing of Churches with frankencence: he also taught that, euery faithfull person ought to beleeue his owne saluation, as surely any article of his faith. Hereof see Vincentius in speculo historial. and Ber¦nardus Lutzemb. de hae∣resibus) & Osiander cen∣tur. 13. page 327. Also he denied Images. Foxe act. mon. fol. 70. vpon the A. side col. 1. ante med. and denied likewise Trāsubstantiation, Aultars, and praying to Saints. her∣of see mr. Mores Table page 74. fine. And Pantaleon in Chronograph. page 98. the Albigenses denied Praier for the dead, Purgatorie, Confession, Extreme Vnction, the Popes authoritie, Images, Pardons, Ceremo∣nies, and Traditions: Hereof see Foxe act. mon. fol 71. vpon the B. side col. 2. post med. And Cesareus Hesterbachius l. 5. c. 21. and Antoninus 4. part. tit. 11. c. 7. the Apostolici or Henricianes, Burned Crosses: denied the Reall presence and Sacrifice of the Masse: Also Festiuall daies, consecration of Chrisme and Oyle, Purgatorie, and Prayer for the dead, Prayer to Saintes. &c. Hereof see Petrus nasis lib. contra haereses &c. S. Bernard. serm. 66. in Can∣tic. And Bernardus Boaualensis vitae S. Bernardi l. 2 c. 5. and Osiander in Epiom. &c. Centur. 12. page 291 ante med. and Pantaleon in Cronograph. page 92. sundry of the
Protestants opinions as well as did the Waldenses: and are yet neuerthelesse by learned Protestants reiected and reputed forThe Apostolici are censured for Heretickes by mr. Fulke in his retentiue against Bri∣stow &c. page 124. and by Osiander centur. 12. page 291. ante med. And Mr. Iewell in his defence of the Apologie page 48. disclaimeth in Almaricus, the Albigenses, and Aposto∣lici, saying expresly of them: they be none of ours. And Peter Bruis is censured for an Here∣ticke by Osiander centur. 12. page 282. 283. And see the seuerall absurd errors of Alma∣ricus reported by Osiander in epitom. hist. Eccles. centur. 9. 10. 11. &c. page 326. and of the Apostolici reported by Osiander ibidem page 291 ante med. and of the Albigenses reported by Osiander ibid. page 329. and o Peter Bruis reported by Osiander in cent. 12 page 282 & 283. and see further heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 2 in the margēt at the letters q. and r. And Hospinianus in historia Sacramentaria lib. 4. page 361 post medium saith: Henricus quidam cum Petro Bruis circa Annum Domini 1140 docere caepit semel tan∣tum in ipsa vltima Domini caena Apostoli Christi corpus vere datum sub specie panis, de∣inceps autem eram deceptionem esse quod Sacerdotum ministerio dicitur aut creditur: testis est & refutator huius erroris Petrus Cluniacensis qui eodem tempore floruit, in tra∣ctatu de Sacrificijs. Heretickes, in regard onely of those sundry other most absurd hereticall opinions, wherwith the writers of those times do in like sorte charge them. Or why also may not the now suc∣ceeding ages say as much hereafter in like excuse as well of Barrowe, Browne, Hacket: Ardington &c. as al∣so ofMr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfaite Catholicke. page 62. the horrible heresies of the Anabaptistes, Liber∣tines, Swenfeldianes, and such otherlike of this age as haue sprong from Protestnts, holding as yet most of their opinions? Or with what credit can Prote∣stants them selues al eage the same writers to proue that the Waldenses held certaine points of thei faith? for if they depend vpon their testimonie in that, how
can they vpon meere supposall make it doubtfull in the other? considering it is euident that in those for∣mer times the saide reporters indifferently and alike condemned all those opinions wherin the Waldenses did as then dissent from the Romane Church, as not foeknowing which of those opinions we of this age would a low or reiect. This point is yet made much more euident by example of the foresaide Albigenses whose execrable errors are specially acknowledged andOsiander in centur. 13. l. 1. c. 4. page 329. initio. saith: Exorta est haeresis Albigentium &c. Dogmata haec illis attri∣buuntur, duo esse princi∣pia Deum viz. bonum & Deum malum, hoc est Di¦abulum, qui omnia cor∣pora creet, bonum autem Deum creare anims: &c. Baptismum abijciunt, ire in Ecclesias vel in eis ora∣re nihil prodesse &c. Ma∣trimonia damnabant, pro¦miscuos concubitus eos{que} nefarios, sanctos ducebat Corporum resurrectionē negant: &c. Quod Christus non fuerit verus homo, nec verè comederit: &c. And a little after there, he further saith. Hae propositiones cum sint absurdae, impiae & hereticae &c. Cum Albigenses admonitiones non admitterent, sed in erroribus & sceleribus persisterent. Adhortante Pontifice Romano, magistratus polliticus, collecto exercitu, duabus vicibus aliquot millia Albigensium trudarunt: multi etiam Capitibus truncati & cremati legun∣tur qui hinc inde sunt deprehensi: fuit enim Albigensis furor Anabaptisticus, qualis Anno 1534. nostro seculo Anabaptistarum monasterientium erat; See also further hereof the centurie writers of Magdeburg. centur. 13. c. 5. and mr. Marbecks common places page 22. may now mr. Foxe and Chrispinus alledge these thousands thus slaine in their Catal∣logue of Protestant Martirs? reported by sundry Protestant writers, and they theeupon reiected for confessedMr. Iewell in his defence of the Apologie page 48. disclaimeth in the Albigenses, and others there named, saying expresly of them, they be none of ours. and Osiander cent. 13. page 329. saith, as is before alledged that their opinions were absurd, wicked, and hereticall that they admitted no admonition, but persisted in their errors and wickednes: and calleth them yet further an anabaptisticall furie. And Pantaleon in chro¦nographia page 98. numbreth them amongst Heretickes. And so likewise doth Mr. Mar∣becke in his common places page 22. Heretickes. Now these Albigenses liued in the same time with the Wales, and were (as Mr. Fulke and other Prote∣stant writers do acknowledge)Mr. Fulke de successione ecclesiastica con∣tra Stapletonum page 332. ante medium. saith of the Waldenses: Iam dixi a Papistarum vulgo nomen hoc ilis inditum, vt aliás dicti sunt pauperes de Lugduno, Leonistae, Albi∣genses, & quicquid placuit Antichristi Scurris: And ibid. page 333. circa med. he saith: Quae Antoninus etiam & Matheus paris. de Albingensibus quos eosdem esse cum Walden∣sibus illa Archiepiscoparum epistola probat &c. & vide ibid. page 359. post medi. And Mr. Sparke in his answere to mr. Iohn d'Albines page 58. saith to Albines concerning the Waldenses, your frendes call them Waldenses, Albigenses pauperes de Lugduno &c. changing their titles and names according to the diuersitie of places and times they liued in, howsoeuer their religion was all one. of the same secte with thm bing therfore by him and others chal∣lengedHereof see heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 2. in the margent at the letter. q. as members of the Protestants Church,
and called Albigenses onely of the countreyMr. Sparke vt supra and Simon de Voyon in his defence vpon the Catall. of the Doctors of Gods Church page 138. initio saith they inhabited the Coū¦trie about Tholouse & Albi. in which that company remained, as in like resemblāce the Hugonottes of France, and Puritanes of Scotland, and England professe to be of one religion notwith∣standing the diuersitie of name, wherby they be di∣uersly called or knowne in those seerall countries. Hereunto we could (in further explanacion of this point) also add the sundry confessed and knowne doctrines & rebellions of the Waldenses of latter times condemned by Protestants and testified by Melan∣cthonMelancthon. in con¦cil. theologic. part. 2. pag 152. ante med. in an epi∣stle to a frend of his who ministred the Communi∣on to Infants: saith. Gau∣deo te de summa doctrinae nobiscum sentire, Wal∣denses scio dissimiles esse & quidem nimis morosé defendant quaedā, de qui∣bus aliquādo cū eisrixatus sum quidā nolunt absolue re Lapsos, qui ad poenitē∣tiam redeunt, negant con¦iugium suis Sacerdotibus. and other ProtestantBenedict. Morgen∣stern. in tract. de ecclesia page 79. paulo post med. saith: Dii autem possunt noui Waldenses (ex seip∣sis nati) vel participantes quia partem capiunt a Pa¦pistis, partem a Sacramentarijs, partem meliorem a Lutheranis vel fratres (quo nomine valde gaudent) sed falsi, vel certé ignorantiae, quia lucem doctrinae diuinitus accensam hoc saeculo supercilio se neglexerūt, & errores crassissimos etiā ab ipso Luthero An. 1523 mon¦stratos &c. clam scriptis apud suos mordicus defenderunt, id quod demū post obitum Lu∣theri innotuisse. D. D. Ioannes Hedericus scribit &c. And ibid. pa. 124. he saith to them. Antichristi institutum de numero sacramentorum confirmatis. licet id quidem saepius in alijs articulis fecistis, vt in doctrina, de celibatu, votis, sacra scriptura, bonis operibus, Iu∣stificatione, Baptismo paruulorum, nec non de Purgatorio. Et vide ibid. pag. 154. & 226. fine. See Seluecerus his testimonie of the Waldenses false doctrines, and grosse errors not to be suffered. And in the booke de Russorum, Muscouitarum, & Tartarorum religionis. pag. 96 Lascitius a Protestant writer, affirmeth the calling of their Clergie to be by casting of lottes. Persuasi Deum moderatorem sortis futurum. writers, euen after that they were altredLaconici Antisturmij Spongia ad∣uersus Lamberti Danaei Antiosiandrum. pag. 35. initio. mencioneth their being altred by Luther. in many things by Luthers instruction. Vpon which premisses concerning Waldo and his folowers for so much as it is made euident therby. 1 First that imediately before his first appeaing he was a Catholicke, and not member of any other Church to him then knowne or in being a matter fur¦thermore so manifest that the Protestant writers do therfore affirme his first proceeding to haue bene in time ofCrispinus in his discource of the estate of the Chucch. page 338. paulo post medium. thicke darkenes, and as a first and litle begin∣ig of the instauration of the Christian religion 2 Secondly that he was then also, but a lay man, and so wanted calling. 3 Thirdly that his opinion concerning Iu∣stification, and sundry other pointes of faith were
Catholicke. 4 Fourthly and lastly that he and his followers held sondry grosse and damnable errors. We do humblie as now submitt to your MAIES∣TIES learned iudgement, whether that Protestants may alledge this example of the Waldenses as suffici∣ent to continue and vphould the administration of their Churches Word, and Sacraments. But so much as at and since that foresaid timeSee before tract. 2 cap. 2. sect. 3. b. x. y. of Anno 1218. in which Waldo first appeared. THE LIKE IS SHEVVED OF VVICLIFFE (Who liued Anno Domini 1370.) and his followers. SECT. 4. AS concerning Iohn Wycliffe and his followers, he as Mr. Foxe reportethAct. mon. 85. a. post medium. florished Anno Domini 1371. was our countrie-man and so farre before his first appearing from being of any Church in which the Protestants administration of the Worde and Sa∣craments was then contnued: (whereof as appea∣reth by Mr. FoxeMr. Foxe act. mon. p. 85. b. initio. affirmeth that, out of all doubt all the world was in a mst desperat & vile estate, and that lamentable ignorance and darkenesse of Gods truth had ouershadow∣ed the wholle earth, when Iohn Wycliffe stepped forth. &c. as the morning starre in the middest of a cloud. And mr. Foxe act. mon. prin∣ted. 1596. page 391. b. line 60. saith, that in times of horrible darknes whē there seemed in a manner to be no one so little sparke of pure do∣ctrine lefte or remaininge, Wycliffe by Gods prouidence rose vp, through whom the Lord would first waken and raise vp againe the worlde. &c. And Osiander in his epitom. hist. Eccles. centur. 9. 10. 11. page 439 post med. saith. Libri Wycleu non per om∣nia sunt pur, non enim habuit tum coaetaneos qui potuissent eum (sicubi longius extra metas progres∣sus fuisset.) fraterne admonere. and others not so much as any entrie or being could be to him then knowne.) that he himselfe was then before a Catholicke Priest, e∣uen theMr. Stowes Annales of England faithfully collected &c. Printed 1592. pa. 464 initio. Parson of Lutterworthe in Leicestershire: And as Mr, Stowe in his Annualls or chronicle dedicated to the new Lord Archbishop of Canterburie abrid∣geth his storieStowe ibid. pag. 425. post med. He (first) Inueyed against the Church fr that he had bene depriued by the Archbishope of Canterbu∣rie from a certaine benefie &c. And hauing so vpon this occasion seperated him selfe from the Church in which he formerly wasStow vbi supra. He with his disciples went barefooted and baselie clothed in course russet garmentes
downe to the heele: andStow ibidem. page 426 ante medium. seemed to contemne all temporall goodes for the loue of aeternall riches, adioined him selfe to the bgging Friar approuing theire pouertie and extolling theire perfection: reteining also his fo mer Catholicke opinion concerningWycleuus de blas∣phemia ap. 17. mencio∣ning aqua benedicta saieth withall in proofe therof, Habuerunt Christi Discipuli potestatem corpora tam rati∣onabilia quam irrationabi∣lia consecrandi. Holie Water:Wycleuus de Eucha¦ristia cap. 9. saith, adora∣mus imagines vnde vt sig∣na &c. conceditur ergo quod reliquiae, imagines, & sacramenta sunt cum prudentia adoranda. And in decalogo super primo mandato cap. 15. he saith Introductae sunt imagines in Ecclesiam vt sint libri Laicorum & signa recor∣datiua singulis Christia∣nis vt adorēt debitè San∣ctos Dei. the worshipping of Reliques, and Images:Wycleuus in serm. de Assumptione Mariae, saith: Hic videtur mihi, quod impossibile est nos praemiari sine Mariae suffragio &c. the intercession of our Blessed Ladie, St. Marie: TheWycleuus de tractatu degradati∣onibus scholasticis c. 3. saith of them: Sunt docta implicitè in sua specie vel suo principio, (and that) supposita quacun{que} tali caeremonia virtuosa vel licita, fuit docta per appositiones in su principio. apparell and tonsure of priestes: TheWycleuus de Apostasia c. 18. mencioneth and alloweth them: And Ioannes Przibrauus (an hereticke who liued neere the same time) in professione fidei c. 28 saith Ioannes Wycleuus libro de Apostasia cap. 18. approbat totum ritum Missae a principio ferè vs{que} ad finem &c. Rite: and Ceremnies of the MasseWycleuus ad caput primum prioris ad Corinth. saith: Vnctio ex∣trema est medicina ad sanandum peccatum, vt patet Iacobi. 5. (affirming there further that it is made) cum oleo oliuae ab Episcopo consecrato. Extreme Vnction. and allWycleuus in Postilla super 15. c. Marci numbreth and mentioneth them all. and in postilla super 1. Cor. 1. he further saith quae∣dam sacramenta &c. per se promulgauit (Christus) vt Baptismum, Eucharistiam, Ordinē, & Poenitentiam: quaedam autem per Apostolos vt Confirmationem & Extremam Vnctio∣nem &c. the sauen Sacraments, and all those sundry other pointes of our Catholicke faith now in question, with deniall whereof he is not found so∣much as charged. 2 Secondly he held sondrie strange and damnable heresies, as (amongest other) thatAct. mon. page 96. a. art. 4. & b. art. 15. Osiander in epitom. hist. Eccles. centur. 9. 10. 11. & pag. 452. art. 4. if a Bishope or Priest be in deadlie sinne he doth not order Consecrate nor Bap∣tizeact. mon. page 96. a. fine & 93. b. art. 12. & Osiander vbi supra page 453. art. 10. & page 458. art. 36. that ecclesiasticall ministers should not haue any tem∣porall pssssions orMelancthon in epist. ad Frideric. miconium (extante) in libro epistolarum Suinglij & Oecolampadij page 622 initio. saith of Wycliffe. Contendit Presbiteris non licere vt possideant quicquam propriū. propertie in any thing. but shouldMelancthon. loc. comun. de potest. eccles. ante med. sath. illa Wycleuica superstitio pernitiosa & seditiosa est, quae adigit ministros ecclesiarum ad mendicitatem, & negat eis licere proprium tenere. begge.Osiander vbi supra p 459. art. 43. He condemned lawfull oathes. Sauoring therin (saith Osiander) of Anabaptisme. he also taught thtOsiander cent. pag. 457. prope initium. all thinges come to passe by absolute necessitie. whih is
Stoicall. and as for the Protestants doctrine of Iustifi∣cation, it was so vnknowne to him that as Waldensis (who liued in the same time with him) affirmeth he exceeded in the contrarie, defendingWaldensis tom. 3. cap. 7. 8. 9. Humaine mer∣rittes as the damnable hereticke Pelagius held them. In so much that Melancthon saith accordinglie of WicliffeMelancthon in epist ad Frideric. mico. in lib. epist. Suinglij & Oeco∣lampadij page 622. prope initium saith. prorsus nec intellexit nec tenuit fidei iustitiam. verily he did not vnderstand nor hould the Iu∣stice of faith. and doubeth not with all to say of him,Melancthon ibid. I haue found in him many other errors whereby one may iudge of his spirit. Lastlie (to omit diuers other) he held as Melancthon tearmeth itMelancthon ibidem saith of Wycliffe. De do∣mino ciuili sophisticè pla∣né & seditiosè rixatur. a se litiouse doctrine, and mother of all rebellion, teachingOsiander in epitom. histor. Ecclesiast. centur. 9. 10. 11. 12. &c. page 454. fine art. 15. & Con∣cil. Constantien. Sess. 8. art. 15. And Melancthon in disput. de Iure magistra∣tuum saith hereof. Insanij Wycleuus qui sensit impi∣os nullum dominium ha∣bere. And in Commen∣tarijs ad politica Aristo∣telis, he further saith, mi∣ras tragedias excitauit Wi∣cleuus, qui contendit eos, qui non habent spiritum sanctum amittere domi∣nium, & colligit multas so phisticas rationes ad con∣firmandum hoc dogma. &c. recitabimus quaedam argumenta Wycleu &c. that there is no ciuill Ma∣gistrate whilest he is in mortal sinne: and thatOsiander in epitom. centur 9. 10. 11 &c. page 405 art. 17. the peo∣ple may at theire pleasure correct Princes when they do of∣fend. and according to this principleMr. Stowes An∣nales &c. page 550. post med. the fauourers of wycliffs doctrine did (as Mr. Stow reporteth) n e vp schedules vpon the Churches dores of London conteining that there was a hundreth thowsand men readye to rise against all such as could not awaie with theire sect. In somuch as Sr. Iohn Ouldcastle Wycliffes cheife disciple oract. mon. page 268. b. fine And Mr. Stowes Anna∣les &c. page 550. post medium. followerMr. Stowes Annales ibidem. to whose force and witt these other trusted Burst forth intoMr. Stowe vbi supra page 566. initio. also his enditement of high treason is extant of record, and set downe by Mr. Foxe act. mon. printed 1596. pag. 529. b. where he more bouldly then aduisedly laboureth vpon surmises to discredit the said record. treason against the King andMr. Stowe ibidem pag. 551. prope initium. did confederate him selfe with others to fight against the King in St. Giles feelde. At that timeMr. Stow ibid. pag. 551. circa medium. were taken fourescore men in armour of that faction. AndIbid. page 551 prope finem. 37. of thē (publikely) condemned and executed. And Sr. Iohn Ouldcastle him selfe being at the last taken, was likewise executed in the said feilde of St. Giles, at what time he was so fan∣tasticall, that at the time of his executionMr. Stow ibid. 572 fine. when
many honorable persons were present, the last wordes he spake was to Sr. Thomas Erpingham, adiuring him, that if he sawe him rise from death to life againe the third day, he would procure that his sect might be in quiet. By all which pre∣misses concerning Sir Iohn Ouldcastle, taken from Mr. Stowes Chronicle (dedicated to the now Lord Archbishope of Canterburie) it seemeth that Mr Foxe was in extreme need of examples to maintaine the continuance of his visible Church, when in his actes and monuments he so publickely and seriously registred this Sr. Iohn forAct. mon. page 261 b. and see there the title of Ouldcastles historie. and see Mr. Downeham in his treatise concerning Anti∣christ. pag. 41. prope ini∣tium. a valiant and most wor∣thie Mrtir for the true profession of Christs Ghospell. And thus much briefly (to omitt much moreIoachimus Vadia∣nus a Swinglian of Zuriche de Eucharistia lib. 5. page 161. saith of Wycliffe. In nonnullis faede lapsus est. &c. He was fowly ouerseene in sundry pointes of religion and more giuen to scoffinge and pratinge then became a sober Deuine. And Panta∣leon in Chronolog. page 119. ante med. accoūteh Wyclffe for an Hereticke. And placing him there in his Catallogue of Heretickes. saith. Ioannes Wyclefius cum Lolhardis in Anglia suam haeresim predicat. &c. And Mathias Hoe in his tractat. duo &c. tract. 1. de disput. page 27. expresly placeth and numbreth the Wclenistes and Hussistes in the ranke of Heretickes, calling them and others by him there named most monstrous monsters. Also it ap∣peareth by mr. Foxe that Wicliffe was an vsuall dissembler of his faith: and that to preuent daunger of trouble he did ordinarily practize the same, to which purpose mr. Foxe. act. mon. page 95. a fine, saith. Wcliffe being beset with troubles was forced once againe to make con∣fession of his doctrine, in which confession, as occasion serued for to auoid the rigor of thinges he an∣swered with intricate wordes &c. Anno. 1381. And page 91. a. versus finem. he signifieth Wicleues often recantation: alledging Wicliffe saying. And now againe as before, also I doe reuoke & make retractation &c. by meanes wherof as Mr. Foxe confesseth a litle there before Wicliffe wonde him selfe out of the Bishopes snares Anno 1377. And p. 846. a. paulo post med. it is testified how that Wycliffe in an epistle written by him ad Ioannem Episcopum Lincolien∣sem, retracted his former doctrine against the Reall presence of Christes Bodie in the sacrament and in the Masse, reconciling him selfe in that article to the Church of Rome: and page 98. b. post med. and 99. a. it appeareth that Wicliffe Anno. 1384. (which was not three yeeres before his death) in his epistle to Pope Vrbane doth purge him selfe to the Pope, acknowledg∣ing that, the Bishope of Rome is the Vicar of Christ here vpon earth. with much more other like dissimulation: By eason of which kind of practize, Wicliffe so escaped the aggrauated dan∣ger of those times, that as Mr. Foxe witnesseth pag. 98. a. paulo ante med. He returnd a∣gai to his parish of Lutte worth wherof he was parson, and quietly there (saieth mr. Foxe) Slept in the Lord vpon St. Siluesters day ann 1387. that might be said (concerning Wycliffe and his fol∣lowers) wherin is shewed. 1 First that imediately before his first appearing he was a Catholike Priest, and no Church of Protestants then knowne to be so much as but in being. 2 Secondly that after his re∣uolte he reteined still sundry Catholicke pointes of faith. 3 Thirdly that he held sundry grosse and dam∣nable
errors. 4 Fourthly and lasty that his doctrine was treasonable and his followers were notable cō∣uicted traitors: whereupon we referre (as before) to your Maiesties learned iudgemēt, whether that the example of Wicliffe and his followers doth enable the cōtinuance of the Protestants Churches admini∣stration, of the Word and Sacraments, but so much as for and since that time in which he first appeared. THE LIKE IS SHEVVED OF HVSSE (who liued Anno Domim 1400.) and his followers. SECT. 5. AS concerning Iohn Husse, who was brought in questionSymon de Voyon in his discource vpon the ca∣tallog. of the doctors of Gods Church pag. 159 about the yeare 1405. litle is need∣full to be saide, for his chiefe trouble was for vrging communion to the lay people vnder both kindes, (which pointe Protestants acknowledge to be but a matter of indifferencie,Melancthon in cen∣tur. epist. theologic. page 252. initio. and see the protestant writers alledg∣ed, and by mr. Iewell not denied, in his replie page 110. & 109. and for his affirmingact. mon. page 230. b. art. 1. & 2. and confe∣ssed of Husse by Osiander in epitom. cent. 15. page 469. paulo post medium. where he repeateth Wy∣cliffe & Husse his doctrine saying: Nullus est Dominus ciuilis, nullus est Prelatus, nullus est Episcopus, dum est in mortali peccato: haec propositio approbari non potest, sed passus est Ioannes Husse hac in parte ali∣quid humani vt supra demonstrauimus. of Wicliffes seditious doctrine against Princes, Priestes, and Bishopes, if they committed mortall sinne: other wise he beleeuedAct. mon. page 216. a. fine & b. initio. seauen Sacraments.act. mon. page 209. a. fine & b. initio. & post med. & page 197. b. fine. Transub∣stantiation.Mr. Iacob in his defence o the Churches and ministerie of England page 13. ante med. & act. mon. page 227. b. art. 7. & 8. & pag. 216 are. 12. and Luther in assertioni∣bus Art. 30 saith. Ioannes Husse non repugnare videtur quo minus sit Monarchia Papae. (and a litle there before) he further saith of Wicliffe. non parum detulit romano idolo. the Popes Primacie. andLuther in colloquijs germanicis cap. de Missa saith: Missa priuata multos sanctos decipit a tempo∣re Gregorij per Annos. 800. Ioannes Husse codem reti captus fuit. the Masse it selfe: and being a Catholicke Priest saidMr. Iacob. vbi supra. And Hulderich Reichentale who was a Citizen of Constance and liued in that time testi∣fieth the same in hist. teutonic. de conil. Constantiens. Masse euen to his dying day: and was so Catholickly resolued in other points of faith, that Luther saith.Luther in colloquijs germa∣nicis cap. de Antichristo. the Papistes
burned Iohn Husse when as yet he departed not a finger breadth from the Papacie, for he taught the same which the Papistes do, onely he found fault with their vices and wicked life, a∣gainst the Pope he committed nothing. And the same is yet further testified of Husse byMr. Foxe in Apoc. c. 11. page 287. post med saith: Hieronimus Lau∣dans Ioannem Hussium ait, nihil illum aduersus Ecclesiae statum comme∣ruisse, tantū abusus, Cle∣ricorum superbiam, fastū ac Pompam Prelatorum ferre minus potuisse. Hierome of Prag, who liued in the same time with him: a thing so euidently true that no meaner a witnes then Mr. Foxe, testifi∣eth the same as yet much more fully, rebuking for that very reason the Popes causing Husse to be bur∣ned: to which end Mr. Foxe saith:Mr. Foxe in Apoc. c. 11. page 290. post med. saith. Hussium & Hiero∣nimum vt haereticos tra∣ducunt, quid ita obsecro? &c. Addo aliquid amplius si hereticus est, qui a pla∣citis Romanae Ecclesiae de flexit, quid vnquam do∣cuit, aut in concilio de∣fendit Hussius in quo non cum Papistis superstitiosé cōsentire videbatur? quid de Trāsubstantiatione sta¦tuit fides Pontificia quod ipse pariter cum ijsdē Pon¦tificijs non confirmauit? Quis Missas illo religio∣sius celebrauit, aut vota sacerdotalis celibatus ca∣stius obseruauit? Adde huc quod in dogmate Ca∣tholicorum de libero ar∣bitrio, de Predestinatione de fide formata, de iustificationis causa, de meritis bonorum operum, quid aliter sentit ille quam quod docetur Romae, quam ille vnquam statuam aut diui imaginem eiecit é templo suo Bethlehem? &c. Agedum, quid igitur commeruisse illum dicemus, in quo aut non ipse pariter cum Romana Sede condemnandus sit, aut cum eadem absoluendus? What did Husse at any time teach or defend in the Councell, wherin he did not rather seeme superstitiously to consent with the Papistes? what did the popish faith decree cōcerning Transubstantiatiō which he likewise with the Papistes did not confirme? who celebrated Masse more religiously then he, or more chasilie obserued the vowes of Priestlie chastitie? Add further that in the doctrine of Cathlickes concerning freewill, Predestination, informed faith, the cause of Iustification, and merit of good works? what other thing did he hould then is taught at Rome? What image of any Saint did he euer cast out of his Church at Bethleme? &c. What therfore shall we say him to haue committed for which he is not together with the Romane see to be cōdemned, or with it to be absolued? And Mr. Foxe repor eth ac∣cordingly of Husse his followers the Bohemianes thatAct. mon. page 260. b. ante med. being demaunded in what points they did diffr from the Church of RomeIbidem circa medium. the onely propositions which they (ther∣vpon) propounded were theseAct. mon. page 260. ante medium. And see the very same testimonie hereof in Dresserus his millenar. 6. page 255. post medium. foure articls: First the necessitie of Communion vnder both kindes: the Second that all ciuill dominion was forbidden to the Cleargie. the Third that the preaching of the Word is free fr all men and in all places. the Fourth that open crimes are in no wise to be suffe∣red
for auoidig of greater euell. So euidently also did the Bhemianes in all other pointes of faith embrace the Catholicke doctrine. And thus much brielie concerning Husse and his followers that they were not of the Protestants Church, and therefore cannot iustlie be alledged as examples sufficient to vphould their Churches ad∣mnistration of the Word and Sacraments: A truth made so euident by the premisses as we hould it al∣together vnworthie of your MAIESTIES further consideration, onely we cannot but (as before) so here also admire Mr. Foxe his extreme boldnes or rather need of protestant Pastors and professors, when he so seriously registred Iohn Husse forAct. mon. page 190. b. ante med. & page 241. b. post med. Ad Mastr Dowaeham in his treatise ō¦cerning Antichrist pag. 40. fine. a most holy martir, of their Church: not doubting likewise so vnaduisedly to honour, the succesfull for the time (though barbarouse)Of their barbarous crueltie, see act. mon. pag 253. b. insurrection of hisAct. mon. pag. 250 b. post medium. dis∣ciples and adherentes in Bohemia (who proceededAct. mon. pag. 251 a. post medium. to reuege his death withAct. mon. ibid. an armie of. 40000 men and confessedAct. mon. page 252 a. ante mediū. Mr. Foxe saith of them, they rebelled out of hand. and Osiander in epitom. histor. eccles. centur. 9. 10. 11. &c. pa. 472. circa med. saith of them. Cum Bohemi de ex∣ustis duobus Martiribus Io∣anne Husso & Hieronimo Pragēsi certiores facti essent vehementer exasperati sunt, a Magistratu politico ali∣quot Templa extorserunt in quibus Conciones ab Hussiacis ministrs audiuerunt & Sa∣cramenta perceperunt. postea progressu temporis monasteria quaedam & Templa pontifi∣cia destruxerunt, Sacerdotes quosdam pontificios trucida∣runt, deni{que} multa designa∣runt, quae Hussus si in viuis adhuc fusset minime appro∣basset. &c. rebellion against their Soueraigne) with the vnfitting title ofact. mon. pag. 258. a. initio. the ghospells increase. THAT THOVGH VVALDO WICLIFFE and Husse had bene Protestantes yet theire ex∣amples are insufficient in this case. SECT. 6. HITHERTO we haue proceeded that neither Waldo, Wicliffe, nor Husse were of the Prote∣stants Church, and that therefore theire examples are impertinently alledged: onely now we will sup∣pose for the time that they had bene all of them full Protestants in opinion, and withall yet appeall to your MAIESTIES learned iudgmēt, whether their foesaide examples be not altogether insufficient to proue a continuance of their Churches administra∣tion of the Word and Sacraments, but so much as for
those only times in which they liued, and that for two speciall important reasons. As 1 First in that neither they all (nor so much as any one of them) were before their first appearing members and professors of the said supposed Prote∣stants Church and faith, but were (as appeareth by the premisses,) all of them originally professed and knowne Catholikes: as in like maner were Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Pelagius, Eutiches, and the other ould Sectmasters before their times, who all being first Catholickes (through Innouation afterwardes and noueltie of opinion)1. Iohn. 2, 19. & act. 15, 24. went out from vs: the very brand or character wherwith the holy scriptures, & ProtestantsMr. Alison in his confutatiō of Brownism. pag. 1. initio. them selues doe note false teachers. And therfore the foresaid example of Waldo, Wicliffe, and Hsse, who before their first appearing were Ca∣tholickes supposing they were afterwardes Prote∣stants) proueth in steed of continuance rather a ma∣nifest defection, and not being of their Churches ad∣ministration of the Word & Sacraments, at and ime∣diately before the first begining of euery of them. 2 Secondly, as Luther saith:Luther vpon the e∣pistle to the Galathianes englished in c. 1. fol. 10. b ante medium. It is not enough for a man to haue the word and puritie of doctrine, but al o he must be assured of his calling, and he that entreth without this, cer∣tainely entreth to no other end but to kill. &c. to which purpose the scripture saith:Rom. 10, 15. How shall they preach except they be sent.Hebr. 5, 4 No man taketh to him the honour of Prieshood but he that is called of God as Aaron was:Iohn. 10, 1 Who so entereth not by the dore into the sheepfolde, but climeth an other way, is a theefe. And for so much as the refuge of pretended extraordinary calling hath bene here∣toforeSee heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 3 in the mar∣gent there at the letter z. and in the margent at the letter a. sufficiently discouered, and reiected, by learned Protestants, Lutheranes, and Puritanes: the Churches ordinarie calling by man, being, (as the auncient FathersCiprian. l. de sim∣plicitate Prelatorum con∣demneth such as want the Churhes calling saying. I sunt qui se vltio apud te∣merarios conuenas sine diuina dispositione praesiciunt, qui se praepositos sine vlla ordinatio∣nis lege constituunt: qui nemine episcopatum dante Episcopi nomen sibi assumunt. And Ciprian. l. 1. ep. 6. ad Magnum. sayeth of Nouatianus: Nouatianus in Ecclesia non est, nec Episcopus computari potest qui Euangelica & Apostolica traditione contempta, nemini succedens a seipso ordinatus est, habere nam{que} aut tenere Ecclesiam nullo modo potest qui ordinatus in ecclesia non est (and a litle afterwardes) nemini succedens & a seipso incipiens, alienus fit & prophanus. Vpon this ground Tertulian. in libro de prescrip. vrgeth the Hereticks of his time saying: Edant origines ecclesiarum suarum, euoluant ordinem Episcoporum suorū ita per successionem &c. And Optatus l. 2. contra Parmen. vrgeth in like maner the Dona∣tisies saying. Vestrae Cathedrae vos originem ostendite qui vobis vultis sanctam ecclesiam vindicare: mistus est Victor ex Africa Romam, erat ibi filius sine patre, sequens sine Ante∣cedente And St. Austine ex quaest. in nouo & vet. Test. quest. 100. saith of Heretickes. Or∣dinem ab Apostolo Petro caeptum & vs{que} hoc tempus per traducem succedentium Epis∣coporum seruatum perturbant, ordinem sibi sine origine vendicantes &c. and them seluesLuther vpon the epistle to the Galathianes fol. 10. a. circa med. saith: God calleth vs at this day to the ministerie of his word not imediately him selfe but by man. And Piscator. volum. 1 thesium. theolog. pag. 405. circa med. saith. Post tempora autem Apostolorum vocauit, & adhuc vocat, & ad finem vs{que} mundi vocaturus est Pastores, Doctores & Presbiteros per Ecclesiam &c. And see D. Couel. in his defence of Mr. Hooker page 86. fine & 87. initio. and in his examination &c. page 131. fine & 106 initio. do yet fur∣ther confesse) the established course of the new Te∣stament, without which no man may vndertake the
publique charge and administration of the word and sacraments: To which end the now Lord Bishop of Winchester affirmeth that,Mr. Bilson in his per¦petuall gouernment of Christs Church. c. 9. pag. 111. ante medium. the moderation of the keies and imposition of handes were at first setled in the Apo∣stles: and that they can haue no part of Apostolike Comissi∣on that haue no shew of Apostolicke succession &c. and ther∣fore thatIbid. page 111 post med. and see the like in Mr. D. Couel. in his exa∣mination page 97. circa med. & 106 initio. Pastors do receaue by succession the power and charge of the Word and Sacraments from and in the first Apo∣stles: against all which, the vulgar obiections which some precisians vrge (contrarie to scriptures, and so many of their owne writers) ofObiected by master Fulke against the Rhemish Testament in Rom. c. 10 fol. 255. a. paulo post me. Aedesius and Fru∣mentius (two lay persons) Conuerting a great nation of the Indianes: and of a captiue woman conuerting the nation of the Iberianes, and grossely mistakenMistaken and imperti∣nent, for though it be re∣ported that Aedesius and Frumentius did by priuate exhortation perswade the people of that Nation to the Christian faith, a thing which Laye persons may do: yet is there no mention that either of them did vndertake the administration of the Word and Sacraments, vntill such time as Frumentius went to Alexandria to Athanasius who gaue to him the holy function of a Bishop. The∣odoret (after Christofersons translation. hist. l. 1. c. 23.) wherewith he returned to the said nation and so proceeded to their conuersion. In like maner it is not said that the cap∣tiue woman did vndertake the administration of the word and sacraments, but that Priests onely were wanting, which she perfited by perswading the King to send to the Emperour of Rme for some Doctor &c. Whervpon a certaine worthy man was made Bishope and sent to preach to the na∣tion of the Iberianes. Thendoret hist. l. 1. c. 24. versus finem. See also the former example of Frumentius answered in this sorte, by D. Sarauia in defens. tract. &c. contra respons. Bezae. c. 1. page 46. ante medium. and imperti∣nent.
If now our Catholicke Church be a true Church able to conferre this calling so by herWhittaker contra Duraeum. l. 9. page 820. saith hereof to Duraeus: Fuit Lutherus vestro etiam ritu Presbiter at{que} Doctor &c & talem fuisse Suinglium, Bucerum, Oecolampadiū alios{que} innumerabiles con¦stat. &c. And see Ioannes Regius in libro Apologe∣tico. &c. page 122. ante med. & page 121. giuen to Husse, Wicliffe &c. and that it was sufficient to them, why then do our aduersaries so greeuously accuse & maligne our said Church for false and Antichristian? And if according to their doctrine the Pope be An∣tichrist and our Church Antichristian, then follow∣eth necessarily that which them selues therupon say, namely that,Propositions and Prin¦ciples disputed in the Vniuer¦sitie of Geneua. page 245. circa med. And Mr. Ga∣briell Powell in his con∣sideration of the Papistes reasons &c. page 71. saith the Popish ordination is no∣thing els but meere propha∣nation: &c. there is no true Ecclesiasticall vocatiō in the Papacie. &c. And see fur∣ther hereof mr. Sutliffe in his answere to the Masse Priestes supplication to the 19. section And Mr. Fulke in his an∣swere to a counterfeite Catholicke page 50. circa med. saith, to vs, you are highly deceiued if you thinke we esteeme your offices of Bishops Priestes and Deacons any better then Lay men, and you presume to much to thinke that we receiue your ordering to be lawfull. And page 51. ante med. he answereth & giueth reason, why he alloweth our Baptisme though not our orders. And see Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum. l. 9. page 821. initio. there is in Babilon (thereby meaning our Church) no holy Order or ministrie in deed, no lawfull calling but a meer vsurpation: Fr it must needs to all men seeme absurd that Chists Ministers shoud re∣ceiue then spirituall power and Comission from An∣tichrist: and then also not onely Waldo the ay man, and all those who discended from him (which is here¦toforeheretofore tract. 2. c. 2 sect 3. prope initium. in them made most euident) but likewise euen Husse, Wicliffe, and Luher him selfe (who had no other calling but from our Church) and so many o∣ther as haue afterwards claimed vnder them, are de∣stitute hitherto of all lawfull calling,The Protestant Lascius in proofe hereof alledgeth (in the booke entituled de Russorum, Muscoutarum, & Tartararum religione. page 23. Caluine saying, quia Papae Tirannide abrupta fuit vera ordinationis series, nouo subsidio nunc opus est &c. at{que} omnimò extraodinarium fuit hoc munus quod Dominus nobis iniunxit &c. so say they fleeing to extraordinarie calling. And Beza in the Conference at Poyssie being demaunded of the calling of him selfe (and his other then associates) affirmed the same to be extraordinarie. Here∣of reade Saraua in defens. tract. contra respon. Bezae page 59. fine. & 60. post medium. & 74. fine. the true suc∣cession
of ordination being (as our aduersaries therupon affirme) then broken of: which needfull continuance of personall succession or calling, seemeth further∣more so manifestly defectiue or wanting in the Prote¦stants Church, that euen sundry of themselues, (who as Sadell complaineth therat)Anthonie Sadell in his booke entituled de rebus grauissimis controuersis disputationes theologicae page 719. ante med. saith hereof, hoc ipsa rei veritas ab illis obtinuit, veram, at{que} expresso Dei verbo fundatam esse eam doctri¦nam, quam ecclesiae no∣strae amplexae sunt: sed af∣firmāt ministros esse apud nos legitima vocatione de¦stitutos, cum non habeāt perpetuam ac visibilem ab Apostolis ad haec vs{que} tem¦pora successionem. &c. acknowledge the do∣ctrine which their Church doth embrace to be true and groun∣ded vpon the expresse word of God, do yet affirme the ministers with them to be destitute of lawfull calling: &c. In which opinion they are so resolute that Sadell did therefore write a speciallThe title of that trea∣tise is, de legitima vocati∣one Pastorum Ecclesiae re¦formatae aduersus eos, qui in hoc tantum capite se ab Ecclesia reformata dissen∣tire profitentur: and begin¦neth page 719. of the booke aboue alledged. treatise therof against them. And thus much briefly whether Waldo, Wicliffe, Husse, and Luther, had suficient calling or not to admi∣nister the Protestant Churches word and sacramēts: which if they had not, thē admitting that we should for the time suppose them to haue bene full Prote∣stantes in opiniō, and also neuer to haue bene reuol∣ted Catholicks, but orignally professors of the Pro∣testants Doctrine, yet all ths notwithstanding there appeareth by reason of their foresaid alledged onely want of true ordination, a conessed and vnanswe∣rable defecte or downefall (for so many hundreth yeares last past) of theire Churches administration of the word and sacramēts, without which (as them selues haueSee heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. at x. y. z. heretofore confessed frō the scriptures) it were no Church. THAT THE EXAMPLES OF BERTRAM Berengarius & others (who liued before Waldo) are also insufficient to answere in this behalfe for their times. SECT. 7. HAVING spoken thus fully of Waldo, Wycliffe and Husse in whom remained our aduersairies greatest confidence, it shalbe lesse needfull to make this point more manifest as yet in the other seuerall ages precedent to theire times, as well for that thus
much onely may suffice as haue bene already said of the Protestants foresaide defection (though but du∣ring the seuerall times or ages of Waldo, Wycliffe, Husse or any of them) concerning their Churches then eui∣dent want of administration of the worde and Sacra∣ments which (acording to their formerSee heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 1. at. t. v. and ibid. x. y. z. b. c. confessiō) must euermore continue and be in the true Church, as also for that their like manifest defect, euen also in those other precedent ages is by our learned aduersa∣ries no lesse thē very plainely acknowledged. To ad yet somwhat to that which hath beneSee heretofore tract 2. c. 1. sect. 4. heretofore most fullie confessed, in that behalfe, the other lear∣ned Protestants (such as are more wary and sparing what to saie or write thereof) do acknowledge thatMr. Fulke in his an∣swere to a counterfait Ca∣tholicke page 36. prope initium. and Mr. Gabriel Powell in his Consideration of the Papistes reasons &c. page 105. fine. saieth. I graunt that from the yeare of Christ 605. the professani company of Popery hath bene very visible and perspicuous. Anno 607. (at the furthest) from Christ the papistes religion preuailed,Mr. Fulke ibid. pag 27. circa medium. all Popes from Boniface the third being Antichristes. And that since that time theire ChurchMr. Fulke ibid. pag. 16. paulo ante med. fled into the Wildernes there to remaine a long season in∣uisible now Waldo (who was many yeares before Wicliffe & Husse) begunne butAct. mon. page 628 b. ante medium. Anno 1218 so that be∣twixte him and the foresaid yeares of 607 were sixe hundreth and odd yeares, for and during all which time no lesse then for the time since Waldo, our aduer∣saries rest chargeable againe to answere for their chur¦ches continued administration of the Word and Sa∣craments, wherat they stand wholly silent, and con∣fesse as before their defect therin, being vnable to af∣ford but any one exāple so much as of any one King∣dome, Cittie, or Village vpon the wholle face of the earth, nor so much as of any one person liuing in the world, professing their religion and celebrating their sacraments, but during any one moment day or time within any one of all those said sixe hundreth yeares. In further triall wherof to deale as now liberally with them, and to admitt for true, as well that Apo∣criphall and forged epistle, printed lately at Basill, & written in behalfe of Priestes marriages in the name
of Vtricke Bishope of Augusta vnto Pope Nicholas,For Pope Nicholas the first, to whom this V∣tricke should write was made Pope Anno. 858. & enioying the same nyne yeeres two monthes xx. daies dyed Anno. 867. as testifie Onuphrius in libro de Ro∣manis Pontificibus: & vi∣de Anastasiū Bibliotheca∣rium de vitis Roman. Pon¦tific. &c. Printed Magnu∣tiae Anno. 1602. pag. 305 fine. & 328. initio. And Pantaleon in cronog. p. 70 wheras Vtricke was not made Bishope of Augusta till after the death of Pope Nicholas viz. Anno. 924 (Vide Vrspergensem in chronic. & Chitreum in Chronic. & Pantaleon in chro¦nic. page 75.) and continuing Bishope 50. yeares: dyed Anno. 973. Beuther l. Fastorum page 209. And see Pantaleon in Chronograph. page 75. and Osiander in epitom. histor. ec∣cles. cent. 9. 10. 11. 12. &c. page 99. fine. & 100. ante medium. sundry yeares, either before that Vtricke was borne, or els after that Pope Nicholas was dead: as also that other though perhaps more auncient, yet no lesse forgedIt appeareth by the booke of Pope Adrian vnto Charles, (which booke is extant tom. 3. Concil. and in many thinges long since specially cited by Iuo, and purposely written in confutation of that other booke vnder Charles his name) that the same was then forged by some hereticall enimie against Images. and lying booke written against imagesCaluin. in institut. l. 1. c. 11. sect. 14. Insinuateth it to be for∣ged about Charelemaines time, saying: extat refutatorius liber sub Caroli magni nomine, quē ex dictione colligere licet eodem fuisse tempore compositum. Vnder the name of Carolus Magnus, who in deed was not onely an extreme enemieIoanas Aurelianensis (who liued in those times) affirmeth (l. 1. pro imaginibus) that Claudius Taurinensis who im¦pugned images durst neuer publish his doctrine therof during the life of Carolus magnus. And Paulus Aemilius l. 2. hist. Franciae such, that Carolus magnus sent 12. Bishops vnto a Councell holden at Rome by Pope Stephan in confutation of the error of the Greekes against images. Hereof also see the Centurie writers cent. 8. c. 9. col. 570. And Mr. Cowper late Bishope of Lincoln in his Chronic. fol. 174. b. circa med. repoteth of certaine Bishops sent by Adrian to Charles, who held a Councell in Fraunce against the condemnation of images. &c. to all those that im¦pugned Images, but was also (as the learned Prote∣stantsHereof see Luc. Osiander in epitom. hist. eccles. cent. 8. pag. 101. circa med. and Mr. Cowpers Chronic: fol. 173. a. post med. & 175. b. paulo ante med. Foxe in Apoc. page 436. paulo post med. And Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church: page 221. paulo post. med. & 226. initio. & circa med. And Hospinianus in epistola dedicatoria. hist. sacramentar. circa med. saith. Imperator (Carolus magnus) non solum publicis edictis mandauit, vt ceremoniae & ritus, item{que} Missa latina Rom. eccles. alia{que} decreta placita & instituta Romani Pontificis per totum imperium obseruarentur, sed ipsemet etiam carceribus ac varijs suppliciorum ge∣neribus ad hoc ipsum cogebat ecclesias: was this man then like to impugne the Church of Rome in her doctrine of Images. confesse) wholly denoted to the Romane Church. And to admit likewise the booke written of the Sacrament, and set forth lately (not without greatIn so much that Pantaleon in his chronogra. pag. 65. men∣cioning Bertram and his other writings, forbeareth yet to mencion this booke or to charge him with this pretended opinion. suspition) by Oecolampadius vnder Bertrams name to be in deed that aunciēt booke which Bertrā is mencioned to haue written de Corpore & Sanguine
Dmini, to King Charles the balde: and that also this present booke were not doubtfullThis booke is so per¦plexedly and doubfullye penned, and vseth the wordes figure spirituall & misterie, with such qualifi∣cations, and so fully also withall affirmeth the pre∣sence of Christs Body vnder the veile or couerture of bred that it affordeth no plaine sense against the Reall pre¦sence. but plaine and direct against the Reall presence, which thing the Centurie writers vtterly denie:Centur. 9. c. 4. col. 212. It is said: Transub∣stātiationis semina habet Bertramus. In so much also, as our auncient Catholicke writers nearer to those times, doubteth not to honour Bertram,Hospinianus in hist. sacramentaria. l. 4. page 317. paulo ante med. men¦cioneth this at large. for a holy Martir of their Church, and Illiricus accordingly for beareth to name him in hisIlliricus in Catall. test. ver. printed Basiliae Anno 1556. Catalog. of Protestant witnesses. And to admit lastly the exāple of Berenga∣rius Archdeacon of Angiers, denying Transubstantia∣tion, and that he had not, (as he after did)Act. mon. pag. 13. a recan∣ted that his opinion, and had also bene free from all those other confessed errors wherwith Oecolampadius and other Protestant writers charge him,Oecolampadius in libro epistolarum Oeco∣lampadij & Suinglij l. 3. page 710. fine. saith: Be∣rengarius nonnulla affir∣mabat aduersus Coniugiū & Baptismum paruulorum (and page 711.) deinde etiam Berengarius parum candidè incessisse depre∣henditur. (and page 712. initio.) Damnata est Berengarij opinio, nimirum sacerdotio pa∣rum, Christiano minus tribuens: And see Papir. Masson in Annalibus Francorum. l. 3. in Hugone, & Roberto: where it is said that Berengarius and his followers denied the grace of Baptisme, denying that men committing mortall sinne could euer obteine pardon therfore. and that Beside this he was an enmie to marriage. &c. And Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church. page 289. ante medium saieth: Although Berengarius had the truth on his side, yet had he a certaie hatred aginst Lafrancus and Rgerius mingled with glorie. &c. He mingled with all certaine speeche of mriage and the Baptisme of little children &c. So t commeth to passe when without the Lords feare w will mntaine the cause of the Ghspell. yet what do all these, or any one of them, or any other like that may be alledged, conuince in this behalfe? euery of them, (though thus admitted) extendeth on¦ly but to some one parte or small time of the said 600 yeares: and is also for the most parte but the exam∣ple of some one or other priuate man, being at first Catholike & begining afterwards to holde some one onely singuler pointe of the Protestants faith, remai∣ning in al other matters of controuersie still Catho∣licke: which thing Mr. Fulke did well foresee, and therfore being prouoked in this kind, he iumpeth quite ouer these foresaid examples, and all the saide sie hundreth yeares, and giueth his first instance in Wilff saying:Mr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfeite Catholicke. page 34. paulo ante med. Wicliffe I weene you will not deny but he was of our Church: and as to Bertra & those other
who seuerally impugned Images and the vnmaried life of Priestes, he saith expresly of them:Mr. Fulke ibidem. Al∣though these and such like defended some parte of the truthe which we holde against you, yet least you should obiect it was but in some one or two pointes, I passe them ouer with silence. So manifestly are these foresaid exāples of Bertram and the rest found impertinent (though we should admit them for true) and so plainely withall are the said 6. hundreth yeares betweene Boniface the 3. and Waldo, found destitute of all examples wherby to vp hould the Protestant CHVRCHES administration of the Word, and Sacraments: which pointe Master Iohn NappeirMr. Nappeir vpon the reuelations in c. 20. page 239. ante med. af∣firmeth that for the space of a thousand yeares from the daies of Pope Siluester the first (who liued Anno Dom. 320.) to the daies of Pope Boniface the .8. the seate of Rome had no match nor encounter (neither) euer suf¦fered any to be seene vouch∣able or visible of the true Church but thence forth such hotte warres fell betwixt the empire of Rome and the ma∣humeticke empire, that at vn¦wares diuers true professors openly & vowably did arise, as Iohn de Rpe scissa Anno 1240.. Guilielmus de sancto Amore. Anno. 1260. &c. Wicliffe Anno. 1390. Iohn Husse, and Hierome of Prag. Anno. 1415. So plainely doth Mr. Napeir disclaim in Bertram Vtrike and all those other foresaid exam¦ples which were before Boniface the 8. As for Ioannes de Rupe Scissa (whom Mr. Napeire nameth) he liued not Anno. 1260. but (as Mr. Foxe) act. mon. printed. 1596. page 359. a. line 70. testifieth Anno. 1340. of whom Mr. Foxe there saieth, that he for rebuking the spiritualtie for their great enormities, and neglecting their office was cast in prison: otherwise he was in Religion Catholicke, and wholly ignorant of the Protestants doctrine. In like ma∣ner concerning Willm. de S. Amore. his trouble is by Mr. Foxe (vbi supra page 287. b. line 60.) and by Crispinus in his discourse of the estate of the Church page 359.) mencioned to be onely for writing against the Friars and their hypochrisie in so much as Pantaleon (in chro∣nographia page 102. initio) saith. Guilielmus de S. Amore, Monachos ex elemosina in ocio vi∣uentes non saluari scribens a Papa hereticus censetur; and to the like effect testifieth Osiander centur. 13. page 367. ante med. as for any further prooffe of him being a Protestant there is no testimonie; to such impertinent examples as our aduersaries enforced for vpholding of their Churches continuance. (though our aduersarie) doth as yet much more fully acknowledge. Add but now hee∣vnto in full conclusion or demonstration that neither Hsse, Wil ff, Waldo, nor any other within the fore∣said 600. yeres betweene Boniface the 3. & Waldo were professed members of the Protestants visible Church, a briefe repettion of that which the leaned Protestants thē selues haue heretofore most plainely acknowledged: to this end saith Mr. PerkinsMr. Perkins in his exposition vpon the Creed page 400. We say that before the daies of Luther for many hundreth yeares an vniuersall Apostasie ouerspread the wholle face of the earth and that our Church was not thē visible to the world: wherof he giueth the reason saying,Mr. Perkins ibidem. page 307. during the space of nyne
hundreth yeares the popish heresie hath spread it selfe ouer the wholle earth. To omit the like acknowledgment of Mr. D. Fulke concerning the Churches remainingMr. Fulke in his an∣swere to a counterfeit Ca¦tholicke. page 16. ante medium. invisible a long season, after Anno. Dom. 607. Master Iohn Napeire confesseth as before thatMr. Nappeire vpon the Reuelations. pag. 145 colum. 3. fine. the Pope and his Cleargie hath possessed the outward visible Church of Christians 1260. yeares,Mr. Nappeire ibid. page 191. initio. Gods true Church most certainly abiding so long Latent, and invisible:Ibid. p. 161. col. 3. circa med. & page 156. ante. med. & 237. paulo post med. & 23 fine. and Sebastianus Francus affirmethSebastianus Frācus in epistola de Abrogan∣dis in vniuersum omnibus statutis ecclesiasticis. that for certaine, through the worke of Antichrist, the externall Church togither with the faith and sacraments, vanished away presently after the Apostles de∣parture, and that for these thousand foure hundreth yeares, the Church hath bene no where externall and visible. A CONFVTATION OF THOSE PROTE∣stants who answere that their Churches administration of the Word and Sacraments did during all those times continue in being & yet withall remaine as then inuisible or vnknowne; with solution to the vsuall obiection of Elias complaint that he was left alone. SECT. 8. AND for so muh as in this extreamest need, Anthonie Sadell offereth his last helpeSadell de rebus gra∣uissimis controu. disputa. &c. pa. 783. prope initiū. affir∣ming that although their Pastors, Doctors, admini∣stration of the Word, & Sacramēts, had for so many suerall hundreth yeeres together, bene to the world so invisible and vnknowne as the premisses argue, that yet notwithstanding they were at all times in euery of those seuerall ages most certainely (though so vnknowne yet) daily extant and in being, euen as those 7000.1 Of Kings. 19, 18 faithfull, though vnknowne in like manner to Helias, when he thought1 Of Kings. 19, 10 him selfe alone were yet neuerthelesse at the same time reserued and remaining.
we humblie pray your highnesse of patience to vouchsaue our examination of this their last and dis∣pairing refuge: in full discouery whereof, we saye: 1 First that though those .7000. of that one speciall time were vnknowne as thē to Elias, yet this proueth not (which is the onely matter pertinent hereby to be proued that therefore they should be as then vn∣knowne also to all others of the same time, and much lesse therfore can this perticuler exāple proue, that all the faithfull not of one speciall time onely, but also of so many seuerall hundreth yeares as are before examined should all of them during all those ages continew so generally Latent and vnknowne (not to one Elias onely but) to the whole world, as that there should remaine no memorie or notice of the needfull preaching, and administratiō of Sacra∣ments to haue beene performed, so much as by any one of thē in any one Nation of the earth, for any one moment of all those times, 2 Secondly we say that this example of Elias maketh wholly for vs & against our aduersaries, and is there∣fore by them either ignorantly mistaken, or wilfully misapplied: for it is euident that Elias1 Of Kings. 19, 3. And see the contents of the Englishe Bible vpon that Chapter. fleeing the face of Iezabell wife to Achab, who soughtIbid. vers. 2. his life, laye therupon secret inIbid. vers. 8. & 9. a Caue vpon Mount Horreb. in the wildernes at the time of his foresaid complai∣ning that he was left alone, the which he then vttred not generally but in regard onely of that countrie of Israell which was the kingdome of Achab (wherein he then a stranger laye secret) as appeareth most plainely aswel in that God himself accordingly an∣swered his said complaint, with like respect to that onely countrie, saying as is obiected,Ibid. vers. 18. I haue lefte to me in Israell 7000. &c. as also for that in those very times the Church did greatly florishe in the other next adioining kingdome of Iuda, and was as then to him there, both knowne and visible, vnder two
good kinges Asa and Iosaphat, who reigned euen in the time1 Of Kings. 22, 41. of Achab: at what time the number of the faithfull was there so exceeding greate, that the souldiers onely were numbred to many2. Chron. 14, 8, 9. & 17, 14, 15.16, 17, 18, 19. hundreth thowsands: so visible and knowne was the Church at that time, and so euident withall is the truthe of this our answer, that this very obiection, is in this sort an∣swered and refelled, not onely byMr. Clapham in his soueraign remedy against schisme pa. 17. paulo post med. saith. Our ignorant reformists say, the Church was invisible in the time of Helias▪ wherto he answe∣reth saying, the holy Ghost recordeth Helias to haue spo∣ken this against Israell, not against Iuda, for as he knew that good Iosophat at that time reigned in Iuda: So he well knew that there, was not onely the Church visible, but also mightely reformed. & vide ibid. page 18. ini∣tio. & circa med. Mr. Henoch Clapham an English Protestant, but also (as certaine of our other aduersaries do thereatBenedict morgen∣stern. in tract. de Ecclesia pag. 4. saith: Mirum quod Philippus ea quae dicuntur de inuisibili Ecclesia ita prorsus reijcit, vt illud e∣tiam Domini verbum ad Eliam, reliqui mihi 7000 &c. ad visibilem Ecclesiā detorqueat. complaine) euen by Philip Melancthon.Melancthon in cor∣pore doctrinae. page 530. and that the Churches Pastors & Doctors should for so many ages together be in being and withall vnknowne, is yet otherwise at the least in it selfe inexplicable if not cōtradictorie, for what do our aduersaries affirme to be the reason of this their pretended latencie, al they can aledge is persecutiō. But against this we say 1. First that the Churches persecutiō maketh her the more knowne, for who are persecuted but knowne men, this Mr. Cathwright confesseth calling theefore the Church vnder persecution.Mr. Carthwrite in Mr. Whitgiftes defence &c. page 174. paulo post med. And he saith there further: What a conclusion is this, the Church were few in number because they were vn∣der the Crosse &c. To let passe both scriptures and stories Ecclesiasticall, haue you forgotten what is said in the first of Exodus, that the more the children of Israell were persecuted the more they increa∣sed. visible and sensible, for els (saieth he) how could it be persecuted and Mr. Iewell saith ac∣cordingly,Mr. Iewell in his replie page 506. circa med. And see Mr. Iewell in his defence of the Apologie printed 1571. page 33. & 34. the Church is placed vpon a Mount her Per∣secutions cannot be hidde. In cleare demonstration wher∣of, it is euident, that although the primatiue Church during the first 300 yeres, after Christ, enduredHereof see Mr. Foxe in his actes & monuments Printed 1576. from page 34. till page 86. describing the first tenne Persecutions. And see the Centurie writers of Magdeburg. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 2. col. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. & Cent. 2. c. 2. col. 10. 11. 12. 15. 16. 17. 18. 20. 21. 22. &c. & Cent. 3. c. 3. col. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. &c. incomparablie the most vniuersall and violent perse∣cutions that euer were, (yet the same notwithstan∣ding)
our aduersariesCentur. 1. & Cent. 2. & 3. throughout. And Pantaleon in Chronogra. & Functius in Chronolog & Osiander Cent. 1. 2. & 3. & Foxe act. mon. in his discourse of the tenne first Persecutions of the primatiue Church. And Dresserus in millenar. 5. pag 11. & 12. And of the sundry Councells or Sy∣nodes then assembled and had. See Mr. Fulks booke de successione Ecclesiastica, contra Stapletonum. pa. 246 ante med. the Centurie writers, and sundry otherrs, do at this day take certaine and per∣ticuler notice, of the Catholicke Bishops and Pastors by name in euery of those ages, of their administra∣tion of the Word and Sacraments, and their open impugning of Heresies. 2 Secondly we say that for so much as (according to many beforeSee heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 1. recited plaine testimonies from scrip¦tures and Protestants) it is euident & confessed that the Church is to continue so knowne, that all menSee heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. l. c. and in the margent there. carefull of their saluatio may know where the true Church is, and to which company they ought to adhere: that therfore no force or persecution of man can or shall be able to dissolueAct. 5, 39. If this worke be of God you are not able to dissolue it. or make frustrate the ordinance of God made in this behalfe. 3 Thirdly we say that euen common vnderstanding argueth this inuincible, from the very nature of the Church, for we must needes affirme of the Church vnder Persecution, that either she doth in some sorte or other make profession of her faith, and also open∣ly refraine the externall communion of all Idolatry, false doctrine, and sacraments, or els that she doth not professe and refraine as beforesaid, if the latter, then (as appeareth most euidently by the premisses)See heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 1. she is not the true Church: if the first then is she thereby made knowne and visible, for besides her foresaid profession consisting in administration of the Word and Sacraments, and impugning of errors; which being done (though neuer so priuately) is im∣possibleHumfred. in Iesui∣tismi. part. 2. rat. 3. page 241. initio. saith hereof. Dum Ministri docent, alij discunt, illi Sacramenta administrant, hij Commu¦nicant, omne Deum inuo∣cant, & fidem suam pro∣fitentur, qui ista non videt talpa est caecior. &c. to be in so many countries kept secret, for any smaller time, much lesse for so many ages to∣gether, her onely foresaid open refraining or recu∣sancie (wherto she is by the iudgment of ProtestantsThat Protestantes thinke them selues bound to auoide the open profe∣ssion of our Catholicke faith and communion of our Sacraments, is made more thē euident by their recusancie, to be so much as present only at our ser∣uice whereof more is side hereafter. tract. 3. sect. 1. in the margent at the letter c. no lesse in dutie bound) lieth euermore open to be discerned, and by how much the persecution is more grecuous, so much the lesse can this recusancie be kept secret or vnespied, as appeareth most plain∣ly
by that small resemblance had therof in the exam∣pleFor if during but the last 20. yeeres, we of this one nation in comparison but few, could not so escape the mileder search of Protestant Magistrates, but that by our onely re∣cusancie we were daily discerned, could thē all Christians supposed to be dispersed through out so many nations of the world, escape for so many hundreth yeeres togither, that in∣quisition of our Church, which Protestants affirme to haue bene vniuersall and farre more greeuouse. onely of our owne times and nation. A CONFVTATION OF THOSE WHO AN swere that their Churches administration of the word and Sacraments, continued during all those seuerall ags in being and also knowne and that as now through the iniurie of later times no testimony or notice therof is to vs at this day remaining. SECT. 9. IF now any of our aduersaries doe disclaime in vr∣ging as before the foresaid example of Helias, and in the foresaide opinion of affirminge their Chrch to haue bene for so many ages in being, but yet vn∣known, & will now in steed therof lastly say, (which is all that can be imagined to be left for them vnsaid) that their Churches Pastors and Doctors, their im∣pugning of errors, their administration of the word and sacraments were in euery of those foresaide ages knowne, and visible to the worlde, though now si∣thence, all testimonie and record thereof is through the late violence of the Pope and his clergie vtterly suppressed and made awaie, the idle vanitie of this conceipt is many waies discouerable. As, 1 First in that it is but a meare imagination whereof is nei∣ther testimonie nor proofe. 2 Secondly in that all proofe and experience is most cleerely and directly to the contrarie, as appeareth by example of Husse, and Wicliffe, whoseOf the writinges of Husse and Wicliffe yet ex∣tant, and printed at Nori∣berg. See Iunius his Ani∣maduersiones ad contro∣uersiam quintam &c. de membris Ecclesiae militā∣tis, quam Bellarminus ex∣arauit &c. l. 1. page 14. circa med. And Illiricus in Catallog. testium veri∣tatis page 847. & 850. prope finem. maketh like mencion of their writings yet extant. And mr. Foxe act. mon. printed 1596 mencioneth Wcliffes wri∣tinges page 428. a. lin. 35 and so likewise doth Cris¦pinus in his treatise of the estate of the Church page 419. initio. And Mr. Fulk saith. Nondum interie∣runt Brtrami, Valdi, Ioan¦nis a Gādauo, Wicleui, Hussi plena pietatis ac Christi∣anae doctrinae monumēta Fulke contra Stapletonū de successione ecles. pag. 308. initio. and ibid. pa. 349 initio. he saith. scrip∣ta Wcleu, Bertrami, Hussi &c. extant. & vide page 320. writinges are yet extant: al∣so
to our aduersaries, by like example of their other foresaid aledged epistle of Vlrike in defence of Priests marriage, of Charlemaines booke against images: and of Bertrames booke concerninge the Sacrament: in like maner by the decrees of our Catholicke Coun∣cells daily condemning and reciting all such arising opinions as were cōtrary to the same, likewise by the many and ample now extant volumes of our Catho∣licke writers in euery age reciting in like maner, and at large confuting all appearing Doctrines contrarie to the Roman Church. Lastly (as Mr. Whitaker con∣fesseth) by our eclesiasticallMr. Whittaker contra Duraeum. l. 7. page 469. prope initium. obseruing for true that all opinions contrarie to the Romane Church are mēcioned by our historiographers, and being enforced for the vp¦holding of the Protestāts Church, to make claime almost to all such as in any sort resisted the Pope (whereof see heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 2.) saith deinde post Apostasia inuectam, & tirannidem Antichristi constitutam, nullus vnquam historiam scripsit, qui non ecclesiae nostrae doctrinam, mores instituta, semitia aduersa∣rios commemoret ita ve∣stris historijs nostrae Ec∣clesiae memoria viget: & qui Pontificij regnires nar¦rare conati sunt, ij nostrae ecclesiae testes sunt. &c. historiographers of euery age, who make this the very argument of their writing: in so much that nothing is as now better knowne to vs, then that which the Church of Rome hath heretofore impugned, and many an hereticke is hereby likewise mde noted and infamouse to all suceeding age, whose better obscuritie would other¦wise haue beene buried in forgetfulnes. And that all this is most true is yet furthermore so euident, that our verie aduersaries them seles, do from hence take notice, and in there owne writingesThis is at large per∣formed and set downe by the Diuines of Magde∣burg. in their seuerall Cen¦turies. by Pantaleon in his Chronographia. by Luc. Osiander in his epi∣tom. eccles. hist. and by Illiricus in his hooke entituled Catallogus testium veritatis qui ante nostram aetatem recla∣marunt Papae. And see further hereof Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum. page 276. initio. & 469. ante medium. make menti∣on of the daily opinions condmned in euery age by the Church of Rome, of which opinones certaine also (which maketh this point most euident) were often times euen some one or other speciall DoctrineBesides the foresaid examples of seuerall doctrines of the Pro∣testants reported and condemned in Waldo, Berrengarius, Wicliffe and Husse. See also here∣tofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3. in the marent vnder the letters n. o. The other like examples of sundry articles of the Protestants faith, mencioned and condemned in other confessed Heretickes, as namely in PETER BRVIS, Almericus, the Albigenses and the Apostolici. so plainely were the Protestants seuerall doctrines, not purposely suppressed or passed ouer in silence, but in all times (euer as they appeared) specially recorded and condemned. now sithence taught by Protestants, and here∣tofore seuerally profeed by soe one or other per∣ticuler cōdemned person of those times: 3. Thirdly
(supposing with Protestants that their Church is a true Church) it is against manifest scripture, which testifieth of the true Church thatEsay. 60, 20. her sonne should not be set nor her moone hid: that sheDaniel. 2, 44. should not be ge∣uen to an other people, but should stand for euer, asEsay. 60, 15, 16. an e∣ternall glorie and ioy from generation to generation. 4 Lastly it is against the euident confession of our learned aduersaries who acknowledge their owne Church to haue bene (in regard of externall profe∣ssion) for many hundreth yeeres pastSee before tract. 2. c. 1. sect. 4 post medium. inuisible andSee Mr. Iohn Nap∣peire vpon the reualatiōs in c. 12. page 161. col. 3 circa medium. withdrawne from open assemblies to the hartes of parti∣culer godly men. THAT EVEN LVTHER HIM SELFE WAS no member of the English Protestants Church: nor professor of their Religion. SECT. 10. LIKE as it appeareth by the premises, that our aduersaries are not able to find out any testimo∣nie or proofe of their Churches administration of the word, and sacraments for so many seuerall ages be∣fore Luther, their principall examples of Waldo, Wi∣cliffe, Husse &c. being heretofore discouered for alto∣gether insufficient, so likewise in further euidence we will now shew, the like insufficiencie also euen in the very example of Luther him selfe: concerning whom we will endeuour two speciall points, the First that Luther neuer was of the Englishe Protestants now faith and religiō. Secondly that though he were, yet is his example therin of no force in this behalfe: not for so much as for his owne time. Now concerning the First namely that our aduer∣saries may not challenge Luther to haue bin of their now Church and religion, appeareth by his sundry grosse and confessed errors, wherin they are enfor∣ced to disclaime.
As for example 1 First cōcerning the successe and preseruation of our Christian profession in generall: he affirmed and taught (to the great daunger therof) thatLuther in assertionibus damnat. per Leonem de∣cimum Artic. 34. which was praeliari aduersus Tur¦cas est repugnare Deo vi∣sitanti iniquitates nostras per illos. And in explicat. articuli. 34. he saith emong his other defence therof. Ite praeliamini contra Turcas vt resistatis virgae Dei, & cadatis sicut & Achab ce∣cidit. And in epistola con¦tra duo mandata imperia∣lia (he further saith) Oro cunctos pios Christianos, ne vllo modo sequamur vel in militiamre vel da∣re aliquid contra Turcas, quandoquidem Turca de¦cies prudentior probior{que} est quám Principes nostri. to warre against the Turkes, was to resist God visi∣ting our sinnes by them: the which opinion he did also afterwardes more at large defend, concluding and sayingLuther in explicat. Art. 34. prope finem. and hereof see the treatise a∣gainst the defence of the censure page. 230. ante med. & 231. initio. Luther in his booke de bello contra Turcas, affirmeth that the Deuill by Gods permissi∣on did gouerne & hinder the Councells and assemblies of the Princes of Germanie for no other cause, but that his article of not warring against the Turke might remaine in force and vn∣condēned. He that hath eares to heare let him heare, and abstaine from the Turkish warres whiles the Popes name pre∣uaileth vnder heauen: I haue saide: And wheras Doctor Fulke doth excuse all this, asMr. Fulke in his Apologie of the professors of the Gospell &c. against Pe∣ter Frarine page 31. initio. meant of those Chri∣stians which were vnder the Turkes Dominion: It is so di∣rectly against the scope andHis former mencion of God visiting our sinnes by the Turke and likewise of the Pope, and also of the Princes of Germanie, and the wholle passage of his treatise made therof at large, auoideth this answere, in so much as the author against the defence of the censure page 231. laboureth to excuse Luther otherwise. circumstance of Lu¦thers wordes, that Roff nsisRoffensis in confut. Assert. Luther. printed 1523. Art. 34. did therefore write specilly against this his foresad doctrine, at large eciting and confuting his reasons: which foresaid doctrine of Luther was also so knowne &Hereof see Belforest in Cosmogra l. 2. c. 7. col. 579. grate∣full to the Turke, that as (Luthers owne choller re∣porteth)Manlius in loc. comun. pag. 636. fine. the Turkish Emperour (to the great shame of Luther hearing therof) demaunded our Christian Embassadour how oul Luther was, and wished him yonger, promisig to be his good Lord. And the Duke of Saxony (a professor of Luthers doctrine) was accordingly charged,Hereof see Slei∣dā. l. 18. fol. 277. ante med as being confederate with the Turke. In so much has Erasmus (whom our aduersaries thinke to haue bene indifferentlyAct. mon. pa. 404. a. fine. affected towards Lu∣ther) saith hereofErasmus in epistola ad fratres inferi∣oris Germaniae. pag. 39. many of the Saxones following that first doctrine of Luther, denied to Cesar and King Ferdinando aide against the Turke &c. and saide they had rather fight for a Turke not baptized, then for a Turke baptized, therby meaning the Emperour.
2 Secondly concerning the Canonicall scriptures it is euident that Luther denied sundry cōfessed parts therof: concerning the Apocalips Bullenger giueth testimonie saying.Bullenger vpon the Apocalips englished c. 1. serm. 1. fol. 2. a. post med Doctor Martine Luther hath as it were sticked this book by a sharpe preface set before his first aedition of the new Testament in dutch, for which his iudgmēt good and learned men were offnded with him: and concer∣ning the epistle of S. Iames, Luther saith therof.Luther prefat. in e∣pist. Iacobi in aeditione Ienensi. The Epistle of Iames is contentious. swelling, dry, strawne, & vnworthy an Apostolicall spirit. In so much as liliricus Luthers scholler expresseth and defendeth Luthers foresaid iudgment saying.Illiricus prefat. in Iacobum. Luther in his preface vpon S. Iames epistle giueth great reasons why this epistle ought in no case to be accounted for a writing of Apostolicke authoritie vnto which reasons I thinke euery godly man ought to yeeld, which foresaid iudgmēt of Luther concerning these, and other partes of the new Testament is yet to this day so continued and defended by Luthers owne schollers, that (to omitt sundrySee Pomeran. in e∣pist. ad Rom. c. 4. And Vitus Theodorus in An∣not. in nou. test. pag. vlt. And the Centurie writers of Magdeburg. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. & cent. 2. l. 3. c. 4. And Hastenrefferus in loc. theologic. l. 3. stat. 3. loc 7. page 292. And Ada∣mus Francisci in Marga∣rita theologic. page 448. saith: Apocriphi libri no∣ui testamenti sunt epistola ad haebreos, epistola Ia∣cobi, secunda & tertia Io∣annis, posterior Petri, e∣pistol Iudae & Apocalip. other of them) Chemnitius (Luthers greatest scholler) affirmeth thatChemnitius in En∣chirid. &c. page 63. And see Chemnitius in his exa∣men. Concil. Tridēt. part. 1. page 55. the second epistle of Peter, the second and third of Iohn, the epistle to the hebrues, the epistle of Iames, the epistle of Iude and the apocalips of Iohn are apocriphall asChemnitius examen part. 1. page 56. b. initio. not hauing sufficient testimonie of their authoritie, and therfore thatChemnitius ibidem page 57. a. nothing in controuersie may be prooued out of these bookes Concerning now the other bookes of scripture, al∣though Luther acknowledged them for canonicall, how far yet he was changeable otherwise in misse translating them, we will (omitting perticulers) re∣ferre to the credit of Zuinglius his testimonie, who saith hereof to Luther.Zuinglius. tom. 4. ad Luther. l. de sacram. page 411. & 412. Thou doest corrupt (Luther) the word of God, thou arte seene to be a manifest and common corrupter and peruerter of the holy scripture, how much are we ashamed of thee, who haue hitherto esteemed thee beyond all measure, and now prooue thee to be so false a man. 3 Thirdly as concerning faith, he reprooueth as well such Protestnts as sayLuther vpon the Ga¦lathians englished in c. 2. fol. 67. b. post med. neihr can faithe be
true faith without charitie, as also those other who teachLuther ibid. fol. 67. circa medium. though my faith be neuer so perfect, yet if this sait be without charitie I am not iustfied calling itLuther ibid. fol. 68. b. prope finem. & fol. 126 b. and see Luther in his sermons Englished. &c. page 204. circa med. impietie to affirme that saith except it be adorned with charitie iustefieth not, nay e proceeded so far, as he douted not to say,Luther. tom. 1. prop 3. Fides nisi sit sine &c. Faith vnlesse it be without euen the last good workes doth not iustefie, nay it is no faith. which saying of his master D. Couell specially ac∣knowledgeth and reciteth, tearming itMr. Couel. in defence of Mr. Hookers fiue bookes of Ecclesiasti∣call policie. page 42. ante med. harsh andMr. Couel. ibid. iustly called in question, by the Church of Rome. He al∣so further taught thatLuther de captiu. Babilon. and see further hereof the treatise against the defence of the Censure. page 198. a Christian or Baptized per∣son is so rich, that although he would he cannrt lose his sal∣uation by any sinnes how great soeuer, vnlesse he will not be∣leeue: wherof he giueth his reason els where saying.Luther in loc. com∣mun. &c. Class. 5. c. 27. page 68. initio. As nothing iustefieth but faith, so nothing sinneth but vnbeleefe. 4 Fourthly as concerning workes: he teachtehLuther in his sermōs Englished &c. page 147. ante medium. that works take their goodnes of the worker: and thatLuther ibidem page 276. ante medium. no work is disalowed of God, vnlesse the author therof be dis∣alowed before: saying therfore further.Luther ibidem page 278. ante medium. Such a one worketh nothing but good workes, neither can it be but good, which he being good before shall do. And as concerning the necessitie of good workes (affirmed against him by English Protestants)The necessitie of good workes is affirmed by Mr. Willet in his tetra∣stilon. Papismi. page 90. fine. by Mr. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament in 2. Petr. 2. sect. 3. fol. 444. a. post med. and by Mr. Whitaker against mr. Rainoldes page 350. post medium. Of the dissention had herein betweene the Diuines of England and the Luthe∣ranes in Germanie, speciall report and mention is made, in colloquio Altenburgens. fol. 168 a. fine. And also in actis colloquij Adelburgensis page 102. circa med. & 483. circa medium. it is so farre disclaimed in by him and his followers. that they denyIlliricus in prefat. ad Rom. & vide Conradum Schlusselburg. in catal. hereticorum l. 13. & vlt. pag. 819. circa med. good workes to be so much as causa sne qua non of saluation, affirmingIlliricus in prefat. ad Rom. And see colloquium Altenburgense. fol. 210. a. b. & 231. 324. 382. & 352. the controuersie with the Papistes to be (not onely) whether good workes do iustefie, (but also) whether they be in any respect necessarie to sauation: which last position they callIlliricus vbi supra. a papisticall error: tearming itIlliricus. ibidem. the doctrine of the new Papists as perniciouse as the ould,
to say (as English Protestants do) that the Apostle ment to exclude good workes from iustification, not simplie and as due, but onely as meritoriouse and cause efficient: they will not in the point of our iustification grauntConradus Schlussel¦burg. in catal. Heretico∣rum. l. 13. in epist. dedi∣catoria pa. 22. paulo post med. good workes to be necessarie (necessitate presenti) so much as with a necessitie of presence: condemning their bre∣threns contrarie doctrine forIlliricus de originali iusticia ac iniu∣sticia in appendice page 163. worse then is the Pa∣pistes doctrine concerning good workes: they fortefie them selues herein with the testimoniesSee Luthers sayings alledged in actis colloquij Aldeburgensis pa. 8. circa med. and in Illiri∣cus in prefat. ad Rom. of Luther, and haue proceeded so farr against all necessitie of good workes, that some of them (as namely Amsdorphius) doubt not to affirme, thatHereof see acta col∣loquij Aldeburgensis page 120. sect. 11. initio. And pag. 443. paulo post initi∣um. & pag. 293. paulo ante medium. good workes are not onely, not necessarie to saluation, but also hurtfull to it.Vide ibid. pag. 205. post med. & fine. alled∣ging Luther in proofe of this opinion.Vide ibid. pag. 120 sect. 11. initio. & 293. paulo ant medium. the which Illiricus doth allowe and defende by publique writing. And all this so grossely and intollerably, that sundry o∣ther Protestant writers, who acknowledge Amsdor∣phiusD. Amsdorphius piae memoriae. so called ibidem pag. 206. circa med. for a man (otherwise) of godly memorie do yet neuerthelesse in this, professe toIbid. pag. 205. fine. & 206. initio. It is saide hereof nos quidem ipsos (Lutherum & Amsdor∣phium) interse committi∣mus, hanc propositionem non vsurpaturi. leaue both him and Luther to themselues. 5 As concerning marriage and diuorce: Luther saith:Luther in serm. de matrimonio. Si non vult vxor, aut non possit, veniat ancilla: If the wyfe will no, or can not come, let the maide come: and whereas Mr. Whitaker (who would make the best gloze hereof) answerethMr. Whtaker in re∣spons. ad rat. Campiani rat. 8. pag. 150. circa med saith therof. Lutheri autē istam de ho diuortij ge∣nere sententiam, ego minime defendo. hereunto, that Luther hereby meant first to diuorce and then after to marry the maide, yet is this diuorce (though vpon such foresaid occasion either of infirmitie or wilful∣nes) vtterly reiectedWhitaker ibidē vt supra & contra Duraeum l. 8. pag. 687. fine. euen by Mr. Whitaker him selfe: and neuerthelesse Luther was so vehement a∣gainst the wiues froward refusall of her husbandes bed, that he further saieth therof,Luther tom. 5. Witteberg serm. de matrimonio fol. 123. a. verius sinem. See also Luthers wordes cited in the treatise against the defence of the cen∣sure pag. 219. post med. the Magistrates duetie is to bridle this wyfe, yea and to put her to death, this if the Magistrate omit, the husband must imagine that his wyfe
is stolne awaie by theeues, and dead, and consider how to mar∣rie, an other: (for saith he yet further,See the foresaid trea¦tise against the defence of the Censure page 213. pro¦pe finem. And see Luther tom. 5. Witteberg. in 1. Cor. 7. fol. 113. a. initio we cannot stopp St. Paules mouth &c. his wordes are plaine that a brother or sister are free from the law of wedlocke if the one departe or do not consent to dwell with the other, neither doth he say that this may be done once onely, but leaue it free, that so often as the case shall require he may either proceed or stay: in which case (as he signifieth) a manSee the treatise a∣gainst the defence of the Censure page 213. paulo post med. And see Luther tom. 5. Witteberg. fol. 112. b. fine. may haue tenne or moe wyues stedd from him and yet liuing: nay he doubteth not in case of adulterie cōmitted by a maried man or married woman to giue libertie euen to the offen∣ding adultererIn aliam profugere treram. maechus potest, ibi{que} si continere nequeat vxorem ducere rursum. Luther tom. 5. Witteberg serm. de matrimonio. fol. 123. a. initio to flee into an other countrie and marrie againe: so dangerously doth he incline to poligamie, the which (to be sparing herein to his otherMusculus in epist. Pauli ad Phillip. Colloss. &c. in 1. Tim. 3. page 396. circa med. thinketh that Poligamie was tolle∣rated by the Church in the Apostles times. and see the Alphabeticall table there at the word (Poligamie) And see Poligamie defended by Bernardinus Ochinus l. 2 dial. 21. page 200. & 204 cōmended in the treatise of the life and death of Pe∣ter Martir (ante med.) for an excellent & learned man. schollers) himselfe els where seemeth to defend, af∣firming thatLuther in propositi∣onibus de Bigamia Epis∣coporū aedit. Anno. 1528 propositione 62. 65 66. & vide Lutherum in explicatione Geneseos edit. Anno. 1525. in Commentario. c. 16 poligamie is no more abrogated, then is the rest of Moises law, and that it as free, as being neither com∣manded nor forbidden: in respect whereof he signifieth thatLuther. in Genes. c. 16. edit. Anno. 1525. he will neither bring in poligamie nor condemne it: which foresaid errors concerning marriage, diuorce, and poligamie were so plaine and grosse in Luther, thatWicelius in his method. concor∣diae Ecclesiasticae c. 9. initio saith. Reducat ad calculum Lutheri factio & retractet quae portenta & quam non pudicè admodū scripta ediderit, de coniugio, de diuortijs, de itrā∣do post diuortia, de gradibus, de poligynecia populi &c. Wicelius (a learned Protestant) doth there∣fore specially charge and reproue him. 6 As concerning Magistracie, how fully, plainely and directly he impugned the same (especially be∣fore the Princes of Germanie had vndertaken the defence of his doctrine) is by his owne writinges more then manifest,See hereafter tract. 3. sect. 5. in the margent at the figure 3. and hereafter in part from thence declared: onely now I will add as not alto∣gether improper hereunto the base and inuectiue ca∣lumniacions wherewith he charged (to omit sondrie other Princes and Magistrates) our late soueraigne K. HENRY the 8. of famouse memory calling him
Luther in libro con∣tra Rege Angl. in prefat. an enuiouse mad foole, babling with much spittle in his mouthIn the same booke ex∣tant in tom. 2. Wittēberg fol. 333. & 334. more furious then madnesse it selfe, more doltishe then folly it selfe, endued with an impudent and whorish face without any one vaine of Princely blood in his body, a lying sphiste, a damnable rotten worme, a Basilike and progenie of an adder, a lying surrill couered with the title of a King, a clownishe wit, a doltishe head, most wicked foolish and im∣pudent Henry. and saying furtherIbid. fol. 338. he doth not onely lye like a most vaine scurre, but passeth a most wiked knaue:Ibid. fol. 339. & vi∣de 442. thou liest in thy throe foolish & sacriligious King. Wher∣unto might be added his exceeding many othemoe like dispitefull and surill wordes vsed against his Maiestie, some of them being so immodestly base,Ibidem fol. 333. & 337. where he saith. Ius mihi erit Maiestatē tuam Angelicam stercore con∣spergere (and.) Sit ergo mea haec generalis respon¦sio ad omnes sentinas in∣sulsissimae huius laruae (&) haec sunt Robora nostra aduerius quae obtumesee∣re cogūtur, Henrici, Tho¦mistae, Papistae, & quic∣quid est faecis, sentinae, la∣trinae, impiorum & sacri∣legorum eiusmodi: Sor∣des istae & labes hominū Thomistae & Henrici sa∣crilegus Henricorū & asi∣norum cultus: furor in∣sulsissimorum asinorum & Thomisticorum porcorū∣os vestrae dominationis impurum est sacrilegum. W th infinite moe such like. as we are ashamed to english them. 7 Concerning the administration of the word and sacraments he maketh it cōmon to lay men with the clergie, sing to this endLuther tom. 2. l. de ministris Ecclesiae instituendis fol. 362. & vide ibid. l. de abrogā∣da Missa priuata. & in libro de captiu. Babilon. c de ordin. And see Hospinianu in hist. sa∣cramētar. page 22. paulo post med. the first office of a Priest is to Preach the word &. But this is cōmon to all, next is to Bap∣tize, and this alo may all do euen women &c. The thirde is to Consecrate bread and wine, But this also is common to all no lesse then Priests, and this, aunh by the authoritie of Christ him selfe, saying, do this in remembrance of me, this Christ spoke to all there present and to come afterwardes whosoeuer should eate of that Brad and drincke of that Wine &c. this also is witnessd by St. Paue, who .1. cor. 11. repeating this, applieth it to all the Corinthians: making them all a him selfe was, that is to say Conscrators: &. if then that which is greater then all be giuen indifferently to all men and women, (I meane the word and Baptisme) then, that which is l sse. (I meane to Consecrate the supper) is also geuen to them. And the like doctrine doth he affirme no lesse plainlyLuther in assertionibus damnatis per Leonē de∣cimum art. 13. saith. In sacramento poenitentiae ac remissione culpae, non plus facit Papa, piscopus, quam infimus Sacerdos. Immo vbi non est Sacerdos aeque tantū quilibet Chri¦stianus etiamsi mulier aut puer estet &c. quod autem absente Sacerdote etiam puer aut mulier & quilibet Christianus absoluere potest Mat. 18. clare patet vbi Christus omnibus Christianis dicit quodcun que solueritis super terram solutum erit in coelis, hanc inuictam authoritatē non mihi subuertent. And see further in loc. comun. class. 2. page 136. & 138.
in other of his writinges, being (as Mr. D. Couel. af∣firmeth)Mr. Couel. in his de¦fence of Mr. Hookers 5. bookes of ecclesiasticall policie Art. 15. pag. 101 post med. And see Luther de Missa priuata. editio. Anno. 1534. And see Hos∣pinianus in histor. sacra∣mentar. page 22. paulo post medium. not afraid to affirme that sacraments are affe∣ctuall tough administred by Satan him selfe: this did Lu∣ther write against the POPE, though els where to serue his owne turne against the Anabaptistes (who vsed the very same weapon against him) he presseth and chargeth them for their want of ordinarie cal∣ling: so variable,Zuinglius in respon∣sione ad confessionē Lu∣theri saith. Lutherus nunc hoc nunc illud de eadem repronunciat, nec vsquā sibi constat, haud dubé ea inconstantia & leuitate in Dei verbo vtendū esse existimat, qua effrictae frontis scurrae, inter aleam vti consueuerunt. inconstant, and tmporizing (as ocasion requiered) was he in his doctrine. 8 Concerning the sufficiencie of our redemption by our Sauiours Passion in his humane nature vpon the Crosse, Luther taught thus farre to the contrary, as that notLuther in con∣fessione maiore de caena Domini. saith: Cum credo quod sola humuna natura pro me pas∣sa est, Christus ille vilis nec magni praetij Saluator est: Immo ipse quo{que} saluatore opus ha∣bet. onely the humane nature of Christ suffered for vs, for (saith he) in affirming but so much,Luther vt upra. Christ is a Sauiour of vile and small account, and needeth him selfe also a Sauiour. But also thatLuther libro de concilijs part. 2. saith of the Zuingliās Pertinacissié cōtra me pugnabāt, quod diuinitas Christi pati non posset. &c. And see Lu∣ther further. tom. 3. germ. Ien. fol. 455. b. the Diuinitie of Christ did suffr which his opinion of the Godhead suffering is admired and yet further taugh by AndreasSiluester Czecanorius in dial. de cor∣ruptis moribus vtrius{que} partis fol. 5. saith. Andreas Musculus non veritus fuit palám docere diuinā Christi naturi, qe Deu est, vn cum human anatura mortuā fuisse in Cruce &c. nec destirit. &c. id dogma de mortua diuinitate publiè profiteri ac spargere, adiutore Io∣anne Islebio. Msulus and sundrieNicholus Seluecerus in confut. accusat. sol. 192. saith. Nemo di∣cere posset vel debet Dum non este pssum vel mortuum: And the same doctrine is in like maner affirmed by Stephanus Gerlachius contra Busaeum pag. 24. & 126. And by Iacobus Andreas. Wherof see in Respons. ad acta colloq. Montisbelgar. pag. 82. versus finem. & 92. versus finem. other of Luthers schol¦lers, and so inollerablie and grossely, that they are therfore thein speciallyBeza in epistolis theologicis. ep. 60 initio. And after the Geneua Print of Anno. 1573. pag. 285. saith. Non potest a nobis satis bene disputari de sententia Islebij & Musculi Andreae, contendentium Christum in vtraque natura passum esse &c. istorum sententia Prophetarum & Apostolorum & ominum orthodoxorum sanae doctrinae aduersari videtur. Whereupon he doth at large confate that opinion there. pag. 286. 287. 291. And see Beza hereof further in respons. ad acta collo∣quij Mentisbelgar part. 1. pag. 82. versus finem. & 92. versus finem. And Sil∣uester Czecanorius vt su∣pra at 5. and Luther vt su∣pra at 4. contradicted by diuers other leaned Protestants.
9 Concerning his contempt of the ancient Fathers and his owne great vndertaken knowledge: he saith.Luther in libro ad Ducem Georgium. And Luther ad cap. 1. ad Gala∣tas. saith: Esto, Ecclesia, Augustinus, & alij Do∣ctores, item Petrus, Apol¦lo, imo Angelus e coelo diuersum doceant, tamen mea doctrina est eiusmo∣modi quae solius Dei glo∣riam illustrat &c. Petrus Apostolorum summus, vi¦uebat & docebat extra verbum Dei. And after the English translation fol. 33. b. paulo post med. & 34. a. initio. since the Apostles times no Doctor or writer hath so excel∣lently, and clearely, confirmed instructed and comforted, the consciences of the seculer States as I haue done: By the singu∣ler grace of God this certainely I know, that neither Austine, nor Ambros, who are yet in this matter the best, are aequall to me herein. And againeLuther in serm. de euersione Hierusalem. the Ghospell is so copiously prea∣ched by vs, that truely in the Apostles time it was not so cleare In what strange maner he contemneth, Origen, Atha¦nasius, Chrisostome, Basill, Ciprian, Hierome, and Gregorie: I passe ouer as being els whereSee this in Gasper V∣kenbergius in his booke enti∣tuled, graues & iustae cau∣sae, cur Catholicis in Cō∣munione veteris eius{que} ve¦ri Christianismi constan∣tèr vs{que} ad vitae finem, permanendum sit &c. Printed Anno. 1589. causa. 7. pag. 175. & 176. And see Coccius his thesaurus tom. 1. pag. 1118. b. collected speci∣ally from his owne perticuler sayings ouer tediouse and vnworthy here to rehearse. How highly he e∣steemeth of such doctrine as him selfe collecteh from the scriptures and how much he preferreth him selfe therein before the Fathers, him selfe signifieth sayingLuther tom. 2. l. con∣tra Regem Angliae. fol. 342. Gods word is aboue all, the Diuine Maiestie maketh for me, so as I passe not if a thowsand Austines, a thowsand Ci∣prians, a thowsand King Harrie Churches stood against me. Nay he doubteth not in plaine tearmes to exempteLuther aduersus falso nominatum ecclesiasticum sta∣tum saith: Scire uos volo quod in posterum non amplius vos hoc honore dignabor, vt sinā vel vos, vel ipsos Angelos de coelo, de mea doctrina iudicare &c. nec volo meam doctri∣nam a quoquam iudicari, at{que} adeo ne ab Angelis quidem, cum enim certus de ea sim, per eam quo{que} & vester & Angelorum iudex esse volo. his doctrine from all iudgement of men & Angells, ma∣king him selfe therby iudge of both: and will our English Diuines allow this in the doctrines of Reall presnce, Images &c. wherwith they chargeHereof see Mr. Bridges in his de∣fence of the gouernment &c. pag. 559. Mr. Perkins in his foure treatises how to applie Gods word &c. sect. 10. initio. And see Mr. Whitgiftes defence. &c. pag. penult. and reproue Luther. 10 As concerning the implacable contentions be∣tweene him & the Zuinglians or Caluinists (to whō our English Diuines adhere) and how they disclai∣med
ech in other Luther expresseth saying.Luther contra Arti∣culos Louanienses. thess. 27. tom. 2. Wittenberg. fol. 503. And in epistola ad Iacobum Presbiterum he further saith. Beatus vir qui non-abijt in concilio Sacramentariorum, nec stetit in via Zuinglianorū, nec sedet in cathedra Ti∣gurinorū, habes quid sen∣tentiam. We censure in earnest the Zuinglians and all the Sacramentaries for Heretiks and alienated from the Church of God: andSee Luther. tom. 7. Wittenberg. fol. 380. 381 & 382. I do protest before God and the world that I do not agree with them nor euer will while the world standeth, but will haue my hande, cleere from the blood of those sheepe, which these Heretickes do driue from Christ, deceiue, and kll And againe in the same place: Cursed be the charitie and conord of Sacramentnries, for euer and euer to all eternitie. And a little before his death, he protesteth say∣ing.Luther de caena Do∣mini tom. 2. Germ. fol. 174. And see this a so re∣ported by the Tigurine Di∣uines in confess orthodox Ecclesiae. Tigur. tract. 3. fol. 108. And Luther tom. 3. Germ. fol. 264. calleth them Persons condemned in their owne knowledge with whom he will haue no enter∣course neither by letters wri∣tings or wordes. I hauing now one of my feete in the graue, will ca∣rie thi testimonie and glorie to the tribunall of God, that I will with all my harte condemne and eschue Carobastadius, Zuinglius, Ocolampadius and their schollers, nor haue wih any of them familiaritie, neither by letter or writiges, nei∣ther by wordes nor deedes accordingly as the Lord hah com∣manded. with infinite much more to the same effect: To make this more euident as yet by the like an∣swerable testimonies of the Zuinglians and Calui∣nistes: The Tygurine, Diuines say hereofTigurini tract. 3. cō¦tra supremā Lutheri con∣fessionem pag. 61. And the Author of the treatise a∣gainst the defence of the cen∣sure doth hereupon charge Luther with breach of all Christian modestie & im∣moderate zeale. pag. 155 circa med. euen farre be∣yond the bondes of cha∣ritie and modestie. page 101. ante med. Nos condemnatam & execrabilem vocat sectam &c. Lu∣ther calleth vs a damnable and execrable sect, But let him loke that he do not declare himselfe an Archereticke, seeing he will not nor cannot haue any scietie with those that con∣fesse Christ: But how marueilously doth Luther here bewray him selfe with his diuells? What filthie wordes doth he vse, and such as are replenished with all the diuells in hell? For he saith that the Diuell dwelleth both now and euer in the Zuin∣glianes, and that they haue a blasphemous breast insathani∣zed, supersathanized, and persathanized, and that they haue besides a most vaine mouth, ouer which Satan beareth rule, being infused, perfused, and transfused to the same: did euer man heare such speeches passe from a furious Diuell him selfe? In so much as Zuinglius saith of him,Zuinglius in respons. ad confessionem Lutheri saith. En vt totum istum hominem Satan occupare conctur. Behoulde how Satan doth endeuour wholly to possesse this man. And Oecolampadius accodingly forewarneth Luther,Oecolampadius in responsione ad cofessionē Lutheri. Least that being puffed vp by Arrgancie and pride, he
be seduced by Satan: whereunto might be added sun∣dry other like testimonies:Conradus Regius in li∣bro Germanico cōtra Io∣annem Hussium de caena Dom. saith. Deus prop∣ter peccatū superbiae qua sese Lutherus extulit, quē∣admodum pleraqué ipsius scripta testificantur, verū illi spiritum abstulit, vti Prophetis illis. 3. Reg. 22 at{que} in eius loco iracundū, fostuosum, at{que} mendacē spiritū dedit. And the Ti¦gurine Deuines in confessi∣one Germanica impresta. Tiguri. Anno. 1544. in octauo. fol. 3. say. Supe∣rioribus diebus edidit Ma¦tinus Lutherus librum quē inscripsit (breuis confessio de Sacramēto) in quo non obscurè pro hereticis sa∣cramentarijs & sceleratis∣simis hominibus, habet & condemnat Oecolampa∣dium, Zuinglium & om∣nes Tigurinos, liber ple∣nus est demonijs, plenus impudicis dicterijs, sca∣ter iracundia & furore. &c. This contention be∣tweene Luther and his followers on the one partie, and the Zuinglians or Caluinists on the other is yet further testified not onely by the almost infinite ma∣ny writingsHereof see hereafter tract. 3. sect. 7. in the margent at this marke. *. of one against an other yet daiely encreasing, but also by the knowne mutuall pro∣scriptiō or banishmentConcerning the many examples hereof: see Apolog. modest. ad acta conuentus quindecem theologorum torgae nuper ha∣bit. pag. 3, 4. & 5. and Osiander in epitom. histor. eccles. centur. 16. part. altera pag. 803 ante med. & 860. initio. & 609. initio. & 735. initio. and Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church. pag. 697. post medium. And Conradus Schlustelburg. in catal. he∣reticorum. l. 13. & vlt. pag. 828. prope finem. & 847. circa med. ech of other from their se∣uerall territories or dominions: So farre were they from reputing one an other for members of one and the same Church: 11 As concerning Luthers life and maners, for so much as e is so strongly priuileged in the opinion of the present time, we wil in respecte thereof but briefy touch the same, & that also not without great and repectiue obseruation as forbearing purposely the credible testimonies in that behalfe of Cocleus, Lindanus, Staphilus and other our Catholicke wri∣ters, to whom his life & maners were well knowne, and choosing specially to speake therof from no o∣ther testimonie then of hi selfe and his owne dea∣rest schollers. As touching his life before his reuolt from our Catholicke Church, it is confessed that he as then liuedSee Simon Voyon vpon the catalog. of the Doctors &c. englished pag. 180. and Luther ad Galat. c. 1. ver. 14. fol 35. a. after the English translation. in his monasterie punishing his bodie with wathing, fasting and Praier.See Luthers owne wordes hereof in his Comē∣tarie vpon the epistle to the Galathians in english in c. 1. fol. 35. a. Honoured the Pope of mere cos ience:Luther. ibidem. fol. 35. b. kept Chastetie, Pou rtie, and Obedi∣ence: andLuther. ibid. fol. 35 a. whatsoeuer (saith he) I did, I did it with a single harte, of good zeale, and for the glorie of God, fearing greeuously the last day, and desirous to be saued from the bot∣tome
of my harte. Whereas afterwards vpon his defe∣ction from our Church, he was so farre from his for∣mer cource of chastitie, that he saith to the contrarieLuther tom. 7 in epist. ad Wolfangū &c. fol. 505. He that resolueth to be without a woman, let him lay aside from him the name of a man, making himselfe a plaine An∣gell or spirit. And againe.Luther tom. 5. Wite berg. serm. de matrimo. fol. 119. a. versus finem. quam non est in meis viribus vt vir non sm &c. As it is not in my power that I should be no man, so it is not in my power that I should be without a woman &c. It is not in our power that it shoul be either staied or omitted, but is as necessarie as that I should be a man, and more necessarie then to eate, drincke, purge, make cleane the nose &c. (And to omitLuther in colloquijs German. cis c. de matri∣monio, saith. vt nemo po¦testest cibo vel potu care∣fe, sic fieri nequit, vt ali∣quis a muliere abstineat. &c. causa haec est, quia in vtero mulierum concepti, eo aliti, inde nati lactati & edudati sumus ita vt caro nostra maiori ex parte mu lieribus caro sit, & sic pla∣né fieri nequit, vt ab ijs se∣paremur. his other like say∣ings) yet he further saith.Luther tom. 1. epi∣stolarum latinarum. fol. 334 ad Phillippum. I am burned with the great flame of my vntamed flesh, I who ought to be feruent in spir∣rite, am feruent in the flesh, in Lust, slothe &c. eight daies are now past, wherein I neither write, pray, nor studie, being vexed partely with the temptations of the fleshe, partly with other trouble. (But saith he) ItLuther vbi supra. pa. 345. sufficeth that we haue knowne the riches of the glorie of God, the Lambe which ta∣keth away the sinnes of the world, from him sinne cannot draw vs, although we should commit fornicacion or kill a thousand times in one day, And being in this case he laboureth not to preserue his former kept chastitie by his fore∣said punshing his bodie with Watching, Fasting, and Praier, before time continued by him in his monasterie when he was a Catholicke, which cource of resistance by praier, the blessed Apostle1 Cor. 12, 7 (being so assaulted) instantly vsed, and therby preuailed, but vnmindfull of his former vow, and forbearing as before praier sometimes euen for eight daies togither, at the last (in speedie accomplishnent of his desire)Melancthon in epist. ad Ioac. Camer. de D. Lutheri coniugio. It is ex∣tant in Melancthons Consi∣lia Euangelica part. 1. pag 37. He married vpon the sodaine Katherine Bore the Nunne, without any com¦munication before had therof with any of his frendes, but ha∣uing in the euening inuited to supper Pomerane, Luke the pain¦ter, and Appelles the lawier, he finished the espousalls. A thing then holden so scandalous bySleidan in his Comenraries in englishe l. 5. An. 25. fol. 65. b. paulo post med. saith In those daies Luther married a Nunne, wherby he gaue oc∣casion to his aduersaries to speake euell of him. An. M. Fulke in his answer to p. Frarines declamation pag 32. ante med. conesseth that many men misliked Lu∣thers marriage with a Nūne in so much as Luther him selfe. in colloquijs latinis tom. 2. de coniugio saieth hereof. Nisi ego clam cele∣brassem nuptias, omnes im∣pedissent, quia omnes amici∣ssimi clamabant, non illam, sed aliam. reporte of Sleidan and others that his dearest Melancthon did
therfore speciallyMelancthon his fore said epistle ad Ioc. Camer. extant vbi supra. write to a frend of his in ex∣cuse therof, wherin neuerthelesse he holdeth itMelancthon vbi su∣pra saith. Ac possit forta∣ssis aliquis mirari illū hoc infaelici tempore, bonis & honestis viris vbi{que} gra∣uiter laborantibus, non modo non affici simul do∣lore, sed videri propemo∣dum nihil penitus curare ea mala quae ante oculos versantur. marueilous, that Luther should be so regardlesse and litle tou∣ched with griefe at the calamitie then present, as to vnder∣take that marriage: onely he excuseth it withMelancthon vbi supra saith. At{que} ego rem hanc sic gestam esse arbitror, est vir iste ne∣quaquam ex ijs qui homines oderunt & congressus fugiunt, quotidianae autem vitae illius vsum non ignoras, vnde cogitare te cetera quam mescribere melius vt opinor fuerit. Luthers sociable condicion of life, andMelancthon vbi supra. What other good matters were these which Melancthō did thus forbeare to write, leauing them rather to his frends thought? other matters (therupon depending and not to be vttered,) which (saith he) are fitter for you to imagine then me to write. For (saith he)Melancthon ibid. pag. 38. initio. saith. Ego naturam Lutherum arbitror coegisse vt fieret maritus I am perswaded that Luther was a man en∣forced to marriage by nature. Hereunto we may ad, that Luther lying thus open, acknowledged hisIn Slei∣dans Comentaries in Englishe l. 3. An. 21. fol. 29. b. initio. pro∣fession not to be of life or manners, but of doctrine:Sleidan ibid fol. 22 a cir∣ca med. wish∣ing that he were remoued from the office of preaching, because his manners and life did not answere to his profession: wher∣in he was so censured of euen by Protestants them∣selues, that (as appeareth by their owne reportReported by the Protestant writer Benedict Morgenstern. in tract. de Ecclesia pa. 221. circa med who saith of the Caluinistes. Si quando volunt indulgere genio non verentur inter se dicere, hodie Lutheranicè viuemus. If at any time they would geue assent to the prouocation of na∣ture, they blush not to say among them s lues, to day we will liue Lutheranely. Hereunto we could further add like confessed testimonieConradus Schlusselburg. (a Lutherane Protestant of great note.) and is great an enemie to the Pope as either Caluine or Beza, in his the∣ologia Caluinistarum. l. 2. fol. 72. a. circa med. & post med. saith of Caluine. Deus manu sua potenti adeo hunc hereticum percussit, vt desperata salute, Demonibus inuocatis iurans, execrans, & blasphemans miserimé animam malignam exhalarit: obijt autem Caluinus morbo pediculari, vermibus circa pudenda, in apostemate seu vlcere faetentissimo, cen∣tibus, ita vt nullus assistentium faetorem amplius ferre posset. Haec publicis scriptis Caluino obijciuntur (in quibus etiam de ipsius ASELGIA, varijs flagitijs, & sodomiticis libidi∣nibus ob quas, stigma ferro cadenti dorso Caluini impressum fuerit a magistratu sub quorū vixit horenda narrntur.) ad quae non video solidā & luculentam aliquā refutationem. &c. Scio & lego Bezam aliter de vita moribus & obitu Caluini scribere, cum vero Beza eadem haeresi, & codem ferme peccato nobilitatus sit, vt historia de candida eius meretricula te∣statur, nemo ipsi in hac parte fidem habere potest. And see further there concerning Beza. l. 1 in proemio pag. 4. b. & ibid. pag. 92. a. post med. & b. & 93. a. initio. And Tilmannus Heshutius an other Protestant writer in his booke entituled verae & sanae confessionis &c. saith of Beza. Spurcissimis suis moribus dedecori fuit ipsis disciplinis honestis, qui{que} nefandos amores, illicitos concubitus, scortationes, faeda adulteria, sacrilego carmine decantauit or∣bi, non contentus eo, quod ipse more porci in caeno flagitiosarum libidinum sese volutaret, nisi etiam aures studiosae iuuentutis, sua illuuie contaminaret. in this kind euen against Caluine and Beza.
12 As concerning Luthers confessed instruction from the Deuill by sensible cōference had with him, we referre the same to his owne testimonie therofSee in the next secti∣on in the margent there at the letters c. d. hereafter more fitly alledged. 13 Lastly (to omitt much more that might be said) we will now onely alledge (which point in generall, ZuingliusZuinglius in respon∣sione ad confessionem Lu¦theri saith. Lutherus ob∣stinato & deuoto animo conceptum semel opinio∣nem persequi & obtinere conatur, nec multum cu∣rare solet, quodcun{que} tan∣dem de re quauis pronun∣ciet, etiamsi vel sibi ipsi vel diuini verbi oraculis contradicere deprehenda∣tur: these wordes of Zuingli∣us are also in Schlusselburg. in theologia Caluinistarū l. 2. fol. 122. a. fine. reproueth in Luther) certaine exam∣ples of his wilfull frowardnes or obstinacie against that which him selfe acknowledged for true. As where he saith of Communion vnder both kindesLuther de formula Missae. & vide Lutherum tom. 3. Germanic. fol. 274 And whereas Mr. Iewell answereth hereunto in his replie against Mr. Har∣ding pag. 107. post med. that Luther onely ment that Gods truth should not hang of the authoritie of man: doth this enable Lu∣ther to teach that in despite of the Councell we should vse either but one kinde or neither; which-last were directly against Christes institution. If the Councell should in any case decree this, least of all then would we vse both kindes, yea rather in despite of the Councell and that decree, we would vse either but one kinde onely or neither, and in no case both. Of like nature is it where he teachethLuther tom. 2. Germ. fol. 214. that if the Councell should graunt the Church-men libertie to marrie, he would thinke that man more in Gods grace, who during his life kept three whores then he who married ac∣cording to the Councells decree, and that he would commaund vnder paine of damnation, that no man should marrie by the permission of such a Councell, but should either liue chaste, or if that were impossi∣ble, then not to dispaire though he kept a whore. In like manner he saith touching Eleuation of the SacramentLuther in parua confessione saith. Eleuationem Sacramenti scieban esse idolatricam sed tamen eam retinebam in Templo Wittebergensi, vt aegré facerem diabolo Carolastadio And see Luther tom. 3. Germ. fol. 55. and in col∣loqu. mensal. germ. fol. 210. I did know the Eleuation of the Sacrament
to be idolatricall, (as making for sacrifice) yet neuerthe∣lesse I did reteine it in the Church at Wittenberg, to the end I might despite the Deuill Carolastadius, a saying & pra∣ctise so grosse, that Amadus Polanus professor at Basil speacially mentioneth, andAmandus Po¦lanus in Sillogethesium. theolog. p. 464. ante med. reproueth the same: saying further.Amandus Polanus ibid. saith. Sed nolo plu∣ra absurdè dicta Lutheri recensere quae multa sunt, quae tegenda potius quam exagitanda &c. I will not recite more of Luthers ab∣surd sayings, which are many: may this man then be said to beMr. Iewell in his A∣pologie of the Church of England part. 4. c. 4. S. 2. and in his defence of the Apolloie printed 1571. page 426. prope finem. a man sent of God to lighten the worldSee the actes & mo¦numēts pag. 416. a. uitio the Hleias, Conductor and chariote of Israell: to be reueren∣cedChristus habet pri∣mas, habeas tibi Paule se∣cundas, at loca postillos proxima Luther habet. And Ciriacus, Spangen∣bergius in his dutch booke against certaine Catholike writers of his time, in the parte therof against Stephanus Agricola, commendeth these verses for true and godlie, and such as the Papists must suffer, will they nill they. next after Christ and Paule:Andreas Musculus in prefat. in libellum Germ. de diabol. tyrannidé: And see Nicholaus Anisdorphius Conc. 8. de Luthero pag. 88. & vide Amsdor. in prefat in primum tomum Lutheri. and Alberus contra Carolastadianos l. 7. b. greater then whō liued not since the Apostles times:Conrad. Schlusselburg. catal. haeret. l. 13. & vlt. pag. 314. 316. & 489. the Angell and last trumpet of God: whose calling was& immediate andHereof see Aretius loc. comun. de ministerio. loc. 63. pag. 198. circa med. And Lambertus Daneus in Isagog. Xpian. part. 4. l. 2. pag. 36. initio. And Lascius in the booke entituled de Russorum, Muscouitarum, & Tartarorum religione. pag. 93. ante med. extraordinarie, and his coming speciallySee the booke entituled Antichristus siue pronostici sinis mundi pag. 12. fine. 13. fine. & 86. fine. And Mathias Hoe. in his tract. duo. part. 1. pag. 136. initio. And Conrad. Schlu∣ffelburg in catal. heret. l. 13. pag. 314. & 316. post med. And Michael Neander in libro orbis terrae partium explicatio l. 8. calleth him pi. os, Deus aliquis theologorum, quem Deus multo ante per D. Pauli & Hussi os Ecclesiae promisit. fore∣shewed in the scriptures, and sithence also foretouldHereof see the acts and monuments pag. 339. b. ininitio. and Mr. Foxe in Apocall. page 324. and Neander vt supra. by sundry prophecies (of latter times) which went vpon the time of Martine Luther. O sinne & most hatefull sinne of former Catholike times which (in Gods iust iudg¦ment) made the world (for the time) subiect to such grosse illusion. And thus much briefly to shew that our English Protestants may in no sorte challenge Luther to haue bene so much as but a member of their Church.
THAT ALSO DVRING THE 20 YEERES next before Luther (which are yet in memory of this pre∣sent age) no example, can be alledged of the Prote∣stants (but only of the Catholicke) Churches administratiō of the word, & Sacramēts. SECT. 11. BVT admitting now for the time that Luther had bene a member of the Protestants Church, we will as now yet further shew, that his example is for all that, of no force to proue a continuance of their Churches administration of the word and sa∣craments but so much as for that onely age in which he liued. Wherein (to make the equitie of this our Apologie as yet more perspicuous) we will discend from all those foresaide seuerall ages before spoken of, and will as now make examination but of one onely peculier time, and that most euident, as being yet within the memorie of this present age, namely the twentie yeares that were next before Luthers first writinge against the Pope, which happenned Anno Domini 1520.Act. mon. pag. 402.  the late and fresh occurrants whereof concerning the matter now in question can not be either mistaken or forgotten, at the least, not in all countries where Christian religion was pro∣fessed. And for so much as our aduersaries do col∣lect and graunt from the scriptures, thatMr. Fulke against Heskins, Sanders &c. pag 536. paulo post med. Pastors and Doctors must be in the Church till the end of the world, euenMr. Fulke vbi supra pag. 569. initio from Christes time to Luthers age. that they shallMr. Fulke in his an∣swere to a countefeit Ca∣tholicke page 11. initio. alwaies resist all false opinionsMr. Fulke ibid. page 92. ante med. with open re∣prehension. thatMr. Deering vpon the Hebrues in c. 2. vers. 12. lectur. 10. circa med. &c. 3. lectur 12. fine. the religion being of God no feare of man shall keepe them backe, that thereforeThe Puritans words alledged in the Bishops of London Suruey of the holy pretended discipline pa. 44 circa med. the ministrie of the word and sacraments are in absolute degree of necessitie to saluation. that,Mr. Willet in his si∣nopsis pag. 71. fine. it is no longer a true Church then it hath these markes: and thatMr. Willet vbi supra pag 69. fine. the onely absence of them
doth make a nulletie of the Church that alsoHiperius in method. theolog. siue loc comun. l. 3. pag. 548. ante med. & 552. prope finem these signes (must be) externall and visible that men may knowe where the true Church is and to which company they ought to adhere that lastlyMr. Whitgiftes de∣fence &c. pag. 465. post med. the Church of Christ is dispersed through the whole worlde, & cannot now be shut vp in one Kingdome. All which hath beneSee before tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. heretofore more specially and at large declared out of our aduersaries owne wri∣tings we do here as now insist, and as our aduersa∣riesThe Deuines of Heidel berg. in prefat. in Proto∣collum Frankentalēse, say to the Anabaptistes. Sivos Ecclesia Dei sitis, seque∣tur Deum sine sine populo & Ecclesia fuisse &c. nam si vel omnes historias perle∣gatis, nullum ab exordio mundi populum inuenie∣tis, qui confessionem fidei vestrae similem habuerit: quia verò ne{que} deus a prin¦cipio fine populo & Eccle¦sia, ne{que} sempiternus ille Rex Iesus Christus sine regno fuit, vestra autem Congregatio primū Anno. 1522. caepit, sequitur vos veram Dei Ecclesiam at{que} populum esse non posse. So plainely do our aduersaries vrge the Anabaptistes to proue the conti∣nuance of their Church. And Beza in epist. theologic. ep. 16. and (after the Geneua Print of Anno. 1573.) pag. 127. paulo ante med. vrgeth vpon the same ground saying. Si verum est eo∣rum dogma &c. vbi tandem fuerit vnquam Ecclesia ipsos ostendere iub camus, quum a pro pagato Euangelio facile fit demonstrare, nullum vnquam eiusmodi quicquam sensisse, quin perpetuò Ecclesiae consensu fuerit damnatus. did vpon this ground charge and prouoke the Anabaptistes, so we in like manner charge them, demanding what pastors & Doctors of their Church did accordingly impugne false doctrine, preach the word, and administer their sacraments, and in what seuerall nations were the same visible and externall, but during euen those foresaid xx. yeares next before Luther; where might any man as then haue perfor∣med Christs cōmandemēt ofMath. 18, 17. tell the Church: which Mr. Carthwright confesseth to beMr. Carthwrite in Mr. Whitgifts defence. pag. 635. fine. necessarie and perpetuall. or whereas then might a man haue found so much as any one of thoseFoxe in Apocall. c. 12. page 349. post med. saith. Scio ac fateor non adeo omnes terrae angulos sua seductione imposterem Demonem corripuisse, quin Ecclesia semper habeat aliquot milia. (&c. quae nunquam incuruauerunt genua ad Baal:) & vide Whitaker de Ecclesia contra Bellarminum. page 161. fine & con∣tra Dureum l. 3. pag. 259. fine. thousandes: or of thatBullenger in Apocall. serm. 62. initio. & fol. 200. a. fine. & b. initio saith. By the description of the Romish tyrrannie and reigne of Antichrist it should seeme that the Church and preaching of the ghospell had bene vtterly lst &c. He declareth therfore by a most excellent vision, how Christ shall notwithstanding &c. haue his Church cottinu∣ally and that right famouse. Church (not obscure, but) right famouse: which (as Mr. Foxe, Mr. Whittaker, & Bullenger do collect from the scriptures) were euermore to cōtinue euen during the greatest persecution and seducing by
Antichrist: Luther him selfe imediatly before his first preaching against the Pope, was not a profes∣sed mēber of any Churh of Protestants thē known to be in being, but was a knowne Catholicke, euenSimon de Voyon in his discource vpon the Catallog. &c. pag. 180. an Augustine Friar: and as him selfe protestethLuther saieth hereof, Casu non volūtate in illas turbas incidi, Deū ipsum testor. Witnesse hereof his owne schollers Timotheus Kirchmeru in his thesau∣rus &c. in epist. nuncupa∣toria versus finem. and Ia∣cebus Andreas in confut. disput. Ioan. Iacob. Gri∣naei. &c. pag. 312. He fell into the troubles or (as he tearmeth it)Luther in loc. com∣mun. Clasi. 4. pag. 58. paulo ante med. saith. In∣itio Euangelij, cum Deus in hanc (vt sic votem,) fa¦ctionem, preter meam vo¦luntatem per mirabiles oc¦casiones me inuolueret. faction of controuersies concerning religion but casually and against his will not knowing of any other thenLuther in loc. com∣mun. Class. 4. c. 30. pag. 51. fine saith. Tantā cau∣sam in me vnum recipio∣bam, & mihi vnisustinen∣dam auxilio diuino iudi∣cabam. And see further hereof hereafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 11. e. f. g. h. to ioine with him therein, and not so much asAct. mon. pag. 404. 2. initio. and Simon de Voyon in his discourse vp∣on the Catalog. &c. pa. 182 drea∣ming or suspecting any chāge that might happen: for as Slei∣dan (Luthers owne scholler) reporteth the storieSleidan in English l. 13. fol. 177. a. prope linē. the cause and originall of this busines was by occasion of Iohn Tecel a dominicke Friar, who carried about pardons to sellSleidan. l. 16. fol. 232. b. fine. Against which Luther beganne to preach. (not vpon iudgmet, but) as him slfe confesseth when he knew not what the matter ment:Luthers wordes in Sleidan. l. 13. fol. 177. b. paulo post med. for (saith he) I scarcely vnder∣stood then what the name of indulgences ment: In so much as afterwardes Luther did much dislike of his owne vndertaken cource in that behalfe, often times (saith he)Luther in colloqu. mental. fol. 158. b. wishing that I had neuer begune that busines. And Mr. Foxe doth accordingly testifie how that after the said busines so begunneact. mon. pag. 404. b. initio. Luther was determined not to stire vp any new debates, but rather coueted a common quiet: whereunto he semed so enclining as he douted not to insinnate with the Pope making euen hisSleidan. l. 1. fol. 10. a. prope initium. appeale to him, andSleidan. l. 1. fol. 10. a. fur. professing (saieth Sleidan) his affection to the Church of Rome and that he will attempte no∣thing against it: acknowledging alsoLuther in Sleidan. vbi supra. the power there∣of to be so greate, that Christ onely excepted there is nothing in this world more excellent: In which cource he was so forward, that (saith Mr Foxe)Act. mon. pag. 404. a. fine. And Osiander in e∣pitom. &c. centur. 16. pag. 61. fine. & 62. initio saith accordingly: quod Lutherus in Pon∣tificem quaedam durius scripserit aut dixerit, id condonari sibi petit, promittens posthac maiorem modestiam, indulgentiarum{que} posthac nullam se facturum mentionem, modo ad∣uersarijs etiam suis silenti∣um imponatur. And see further there page 68. pau∣lo post itutium. where he offered like condition to the Pope. it is apparente that
Luther promised Cardinall Caietane to keepe silence (with this annexed condition of pride) prouidid also that his aduersaries would do the like: And Mr. Cowper late Bishope of Winchester, reporteth further, thatMr. Cowper in his Chronicle. fol. 278. a. paulo post initium. Luther by his letter submitted him selfe to the Pope (with this other like condition so that he might not be compel∣led to recant: so plainely was pride, euen hisConcerning Luthers cō¦fessed Pride many Protestāt writers geue testimonie. So Conradus Regius. libro Germanico contra Ioan∣nem Hossum de caena Do∣mini. saith. Deus propter peocatū superbiae qua sese Lutherus extulit (quem∣admodum plera{que} ipsius scripta testificantur) verum illi spiritum abstulit. And Zuinglius in responsione ad confessi∣nem Lutheri, chargeth Luther with magna Arrogantia, & cum Arroganti verborum fastu, minis quo{que} plus quam turgidis. And Oecolampadius in responsione ad confessionē Lutheri: saith that Luther was, Arrogantiae & superbiae affectu inflatus. Also the Tigurine Deuines in their answere to Luthers booke against Zuinglius: say. Prophetae & Apostoli, Dei glo∣riae, non priuato honori, non suae pertinaciae & superbiae studebant, Lutherus autem sua quaerit, pertinax est, insolentia nimia effertur &c. And Simon Lithus in resposione Altera ad Alteram Iacobi Gretzeri apologiam pag. 333. paulo ante med. saith. Lutherus plus quam debebat, tribuit gloriolae partae, cuius particulam communicari cum alijs indignissi∣mè ferebat. And Thomas Naogeorgus (a learned Caluinist) alledged by Schlusselburg. in theolog. Calumistarū. l. 2. fol. 131. a. post med. saith of Luther. Plurima scripsit per iram, carnalem, & per emulationem, ne succumbere cerneretur vlli: doctorum veterum orbitam reliquit, indulgens stomacho suo ac honori. And Iohn Caluine alledged ibidem fol. 126. a. post med. saith. Lutherus vt pollet eximijs virturibus, ita magnis vitijs laborat: Hanc in∣emperiem qua vbi{que} ebullit, vtinam magis frenare studuisset &c. vtinam recognescendis vitijs plus operae dedisset. &c. And Conradus Gesnerus in vniuersali Bibliotheca saith. Illud non est dissimulandum Lutherum virum esse vehementis ingenij, impatientem, & qui nisi per omnia sibi consentientes ferre nesct. &c. Dominus faxit, ne quid contentione & im∣pudentia oris obsit Ecclesiae, cuius olim crepundia tā faeliciter promouit: In so much as Lu∣ther him selfe (in Lutheri loc. comun. class. 4. fol. 35. b.) acknowledgeth the worlds opinion herein had of him. saying there. Video ab omnibus in me peti modestiam. and againe there he further saith. Omnes fere, in me damnant mordacitatem &c. con∣fessed intollerable pride, the onely true cause of his further reuolt and apostasie. And it is accordingly yet further testified by Sleidan how thatSleidan. l. 1. fol. 10 paulo post initium. for so much as Luther offred (as before) most reasonable cōdicions, he thought to haue found some fauour in the humanitie of the Bishope of Rome: andSleidan l. 13. fol. 177. b. fine. that the Bishope would assoile himLuther apud Sleidan. ibidem. But lo: (saith Luther.) whilest I looke for a ioiefull sentence from Rome, I am stricken with the thunder boult (of excomuincatiō, (& cōdemned for the most wicked man aliue:Sleidan l. 13. fol. 178. a. initio. then (saith he.) I beganne to defend my doinges
setting forth many bookes &c. and seeing it is so, let them im¦pute the faulte to them selues, that haue so excessiuely han∣led the matter: In this sort (as Sleidan testifieth) Mar∣tine Luther, his foresaideSleidan l. 1. fol. 10 a. paulo post initium. appellation to the Pope being cōdemned, his offers dispised, looking for no more helpe nor health at the Popes handes, was through extreeme neces∣sitie brought to appeale from the Bishope of Rome: and so vp∣on occasion of these his foresaide procedings (which whether they were from heauē or not, we will with out all further inferēce refer to your MAIESTIES grauest iudgment) he fell into the open nd ouer vio∣lēt current of his further ensuing Apostase: notwith¦standing which, he did yet still for a space after∣wardes, continew his accustomed saying of Masse, vntill that amongManlius Luthers schol¦ler testifieth this in loc com∣mun. pag. 42. fine. And see also the Alphabeticall table of that booke where it is set downe Luthero sa∣pius spectra apparuerunt. seuerall apparitions hapned to him: (nor ofLuther in (Lutheri loc. comun. class. 4. page 39. prope fine saith. nullas apparitiones Angelorum habeo. And ibid. pag. 40 ante med. he further saith: Pactum feci cum Domino Deo meo, ne vel visiones vel somnia, vel etiam An∣gelos mihi mittat. & vide ibid. post med. Ang ll for therein he disclaimeth but of wicked sprits wherewith he was infested or haūted) whereof one was so terrible thatManlius in loc: com∣mun. pag. 42. fine. & 43 initio. He was almost cast into a sound: in preuention whereof, oyle was distil∣led into his eare, and his feete rubbed with hotte clothes. It chanced thatLuther tom. 7 Wit∣teberg. Anno. 1588. in li∣bro de Missa priuata, & Vnctione Sacerdotum fol 443. & tom. 6. Germ. Ge¦nensi. fol. 28. in libro de Missa angulari. Also Lu∣thers wordes hereof are acknowledged and sett downe in the Treatise a∣gainst the defence of the cen∣sure. pag. 234. 235. 236. vpon a certaine time (as him selfe re∣porteth the matter) hee was sodainly awaked about midnigh: then (saith he) Sathan beganne this disputation with me saying harken right learned D. Luther thou hast said priuat Masse by the space of 15. yeares &c. and so the Di∣uell with arguments which Luther him selfe there setteth downe, (whereat Protestants are greatly a∣shamed and striue though in vaineMr. Charke and others to auoide that their doctrine a∣gainst the Masse should thus proceed or beginne from the Deuill, answere, that by this dis∣putation which Luther as thus reporteth to haue bene betweene the Deuill and him, was onely ment a spirituall temptation of mind, and not any sensible conference had with the Deuill. But the contrarie is to manifest. 1 First by Sathans foresaid preface to him calling him according to the humour of his Pride, right learned Doctor Luther. 2 Secondly in that he saith therof in the same place, planè persuasus sum Empserum & Oecolampadium &c. his ictibus horribilibus subitò extinctos fuisse: which argueth more then a spirituall temptatiō 3 Thirdly by Luthers there describing the sound of Sathans voice: whereof he there saith. Hic certe sudor mihi erupit, habet Diabolus grauem, & fortem vocem, at{que} ego tum bene expertus sum, quomodo mane homines in lecto mortui inueniuntur. Which last wordes are purposely o∣mitted by the Lutherans in their latter edition of Witeberg. but are yet still extant in the more auncient edition of Luthers workes. tom. 6. Gen. Germ. fol. 28. b. 4 Fourthly by reporte of like other terrible apparitions hapned to Luther testified as here by Manlius a Lutherane. 5 Fiuethly by Luthers owne report els where of the Deuill of ten walking with him in his bed Chamber affirmed by Luther in colloquijs mensalibus Germanice editis. fol. 275. 6 Sixthy by our aduersaries the Tigurine Deuines, who therefore obiect against Luther his disputation had with the Deuill. Tigurini in confessione Germanica impress. Tigurini. 1544. vide fol. 25. 26. & 127. 7 Lastly this eusion of a spirituall temptation to be here∣by onely ment is so weake, that Mr. Sutliffe l. de vera Catholic Christi Ecclesia. page 298. 299. saith, that Luther hereby setteth downe but onely his dreame, but that also is most clear¦ly against Luthers wordes, which are that he was first, sodainely awaked, and then after Sa∣tn begunne disputation with him. to auoide the same.
And it is this kind of perswasion or appaition re∣ported by Protestants them selues as hapning like∣wise to Suinglius,It appeareth by Zuinglius his wordes set downe by him in libro de subsid. Eu∣char. and also in the treatise against the defence of the censure. page 249. & 230. that Zuin¦glius hauing laboured the abolishing of the Masse at Zurich against a certaine Scribe that had opposed him selfe (in argument) against Zuinglius: Zuinglius was in that disputation prouo∣ked to bring forth examples which were ioyned With no parable: therefore we beganne (saith he) to thinke of all that we could, but yet n other example came to mind. &c. But when the 13. day of Aprill drew neere (I tell the truth) and &c. my Conscience compelleth me to vtter what the Lord be∣stowed vpon me: (my th ught as I was a sleepe) that I was againe disputing with the Scribe, and my mouth so stopped that I was not able to speake &c. and sodainely ther seemed an admonisher to be pre¦sent with me. ater fuerit an albus nihil memini whether he wre blacke or white I remember not &c. which said, why dost thou not answere him, that which is written Exodus. 12. (for it is the Paschall which is the Passeouer of the Lord &c. wherupon (saith he) I (afterwardes) considered the place, and thereof befre the whole Congregation preached, which sermon when it was heard, draue away all mist. Thus were Zuinglius his foresaid proceedings against the Masse furthe∣red with nightlie instruction in his dreame, by an admonisher whether blacke or white he re∣membreth not: whereof though he made seriouse and great accompt affirming it to be no light matter which (saith he) I learned by this dreame, thankes be to God &c. Yet is the same de∣rided as a meare illusion by his other brethren, as namely by Iacobus Andreas in confut. disput. Ioan. Iacobi Grinaei pag. 120. 254. fine. & 304. and by Schlusteli urg. (in theolog Caluinistarum l. 1. in Proem. fol. 3. a. b.) and by Gerhardus Gresekenius de veritate Cor∣poris Christi in S. Caena. pag. 64.) By Benedict Morgenstern. in tract. de Ecclesia pag. 68. and by Iacobus Heilbrunerus in Schwenckldio Caluinismo &c. in prefat. ante med. Carolastadus,In the booke entituled Conspiracie for pretended reformation page 83. initio. It is said, among others, Carolastaius a Preacher professing the Ghospell. &c. attributed much to Cabinet teacher in priuate conuenticles, and vnto vsions, and pretended conferences with God. OecolāpadiusLuther alledged vbi supra. saith, concerning these apparitions: Plane persuasus sum, Empserm & Oecolampadium &c. his ctibus horribilibus subito extinctos fuisse: so plainely was he perswaded that Oecolampadius was in one of these apparitions slaine by the Deuill.
and Mr. FoxeIn like maner doth Mr. Foxe in Apocalipsin. pag. 364. fine & 365. ini∣tio. and in his acts & mo∣numentes Printed 1596. pag. 90. b. circa med. See also heretofore pag. 80. in the margēt at the letter y. report the very like preten¦ded wonderfull reuelatiō happened to him (as did to Zuinglius) whereby he was instructed that by the 24. monethes mentioned in the Apocalips was vnder∣stoode the 294. yeares of the primatiue Churches first persecution, and yet is this vnderstandinge of them sithence reiected, & in steed thereof is thereby vnderstood the last 1260. yeares before Luther by Mr. Napeir vpon the re∣uelations. Proposition 15 pa. 22. 23. 24. By Mr. Brocard vpon the reuiatiō fol. 110. a. and by Master Gifford vpon the reuelat. pag. 890. post med. was the first that diswaded Lu∣ther from further saying of Masse. If now then that Luther him selfe was at first a Catholicke, and our aduersaries in steed of plaine instance or example to be giuen of their Churches impugning of errors, of her Pastors Doctors, admi∣nistratiō of the word and sacraments during but the foresaide 20. yeeres next before Luther: do answere vs that they were as then persecuted? we replie to them from them selues, aswel that no persecution of man can frustrate the foresaid ordināce of god made to his Church in this behalfe, as also that persecutiōSee heretofore tract 2. c. 2 sect. 8. at o. p. maketh her most knowne and therfore we aske as before, who these were that were as then so per∣secuted? if they say that for feare of persecution they durst not professe theire faith, and so escaped vn∣knowne, we againe tell them from themselues, thatSee heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 11. 1. l. p. q. r therfore they were not as then the true Church. And we vrge yet further that the feare of persecutiō could be no such let to them, after that sundry com∣mon wealthes and Magistrates had vndertaken the publique profession, & defence of Luthers doctrine, but that as then at the least if any such had bene in being, they might safelie haue shewed them selues and ioyned in comunion with Luther: If lastly they say that their Pastors, and Doctors, administration of the word and sacraments were as then visible and knowne, and that now since, all testimonie thereof is suppressed to omit what hath beneSee heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 9. already sufficiently said against this, and to admit also that all our Catholicke writers should so strangely haue passed them onely ouer in silence, remembring all others as the Annabaptistes Swenefeldians &c. why yet should Luther, Zuinglius, and the other Prote∣stant writers forbeare to mention them? the cause we take to be euident, and onely, for that during the foresaide 20. yeares before Luther, they were not
knowne to be so much as but in being, in any one nation of the world, which thing is in our opinion not obscurelye graunted, rather then signified by our learned aduersaries them selues. To this end our learned aduersaries, Ioannes Regius acknowledg∣eth that the Church was euen thēIoannes Regius be∣ing vrged in this kind. doth (in his liber apologeticus &c. pag. 176. circa & post med.) answere therto say∣ing. Negas Lutherum suae fidei caetum inuenisse &c. dico fuisse ante Lutherum verae religionis & qui cum Luthero per omni con∣sentiret caetum ecclesisti∣cum. But coming to answere where this Congregation ws to be then found, he hath no other refuge but saith there, that it was, a ontificijs non agnitus, nec propter tyrannidē pontificiam vi∣sibiliter fortassis ostendi non potuerit: iuco{que} quā∣do vrgent Iesuitae, vt Lu∣therus verae religionis asse clam Ecclesiam ostendat. &c. volunt vt Lutherus oppositum in adiecto de∣monstret, & inuisibile, vi∣sibile probet &c. interim tamen absurdum est ita argumentari, haec res ab alijs non agnoscitur, nec potest etiam vi∣deri aut demonstrari, ideo{que} non est in rerum ntura &c. So plainely doth he (being vrged to particulers) acknowledge his pretended Congregation at Luthers coming to haue bene then inui∣sible, and not able to be shewed inuisibl and could not be shewed: and Mr. Iewell affirmeth accordingly, thatMr. Iewell in his Aplogie of the Church of England part. 4. c. 4. diuision 2. and in his defence of the Apologie printed Anno 1571. pag. 426 prope finem. the truth was vnknowne at that time & vnheard of, when Martine Luther and Hulderih Zuinglius first came vnto the knowledge and preaching of the Gospell: Mr. Par∣kines sith in like manner,Mr. Parkins in his exposition vpon the Creed. pag. 400. And Caluin in his booke of Epistles. printed Hannouiae 1597. ep. 141. pag. 273. paulo post med. saith accordingly. Adurdum est, postquam discessionem a toto mundo facere coacti sumus, in∣ter ipsa principia alios ab alijs dissilire. And Daniel Chamierus in his epist. Iesuitic. part. altera. printed Geneuae. 1601. pag. 49. saith hereof. Arianorū venenū non portiunculā quādā fed pené totum orbem contaminauerat &c. In ea nos tempora deuinimus quae etiam ex∣cedent Ariani furoris cofusionem: non portiunculam vnam aut alteram error occupauit, sed totum orpus Apostasia auertit a Christo. we say that before the daies of Luther, for the space of many hundreth yeares an vni∣uersall apostasie ouerspread the wholle face of the earth and that our Church was not then visible to the world: in so much as Bucer doth therfore call Luther,Primum Aposiolum purioris Euangelij. Bucer in epist. Anno. 36. ad Episcopum Hereford. & vide Conradum Schlusselburg. in theolog. Caluinistarum l. 2 fol. 17. a. initio. the first Apostle of the reformed doctrine. whose vocation (said our aduer∣saries) was by reason of the then generall defection of al protestant Pastors)See before tract. 2. c. 2. sect 10. fine at q. r. immediate and extraordi∣narie the cource ofBez ep. 5. Almnno. paulo post initium. Ordinarie vocation being then no where extant. And the Lutheranes do affirme itConrad. Schlustelburg. ibid. l. 2. fol. 130. b. versus finem. impudencie to say, that many learned mn in Germanie before Luther did huld the Dctrine of the Gospell. And an other of them further saith: Si antecessores Lutherus in
officio habuisset orthodoxos &c.Georgius Milius in Augustan. confess. expli∣cat. art. 7. de Ecclesia pag. 137. If there had bene right beleuers that went bfore Luher in his office &c. there had then bene no nede of a Lutheraine reformation,Georgius Miluis ibid pag. 138. thre∣fore (saith he) we say that Luther was raised vp (diuinitus & extra ordinem) by Gods speciall appointment, and extra∣ordinarily. And an other Lutherane writer affirmeth, itBenedict. Morgen∣stern. tract. de Ecclesia pag. 145. ridiculouse (to thinke) that in the time bfore Luhr any had the puritie of Doctrine, and that Luther should re∣ceiue it from them, and not they from Luther, considerig (saith he) it is manifest to the whole Christian worlde, that before Luthers time, all Churches were ouerwhelmed with more then Cymeriane darkenes. And that Luther was diuine∣ly raised vp to discouer the same, and to restore the light of true Doctrine. So plainely do our aduersaries them selues, in steed of instance or example to be geuen, acknowledge (to the contrary) the vtter defection and want of their Churches Pastors and Doctors, of administration of the Word and Sacraments for and during the age next before Luther: wherevnto we further add, that the Protestants Doctrine of Iustification by onely faith, (which them selues af∣firme to beMr. Charke in the Tower disputation the fourth daies conference Arg. 1. dnii the Sol of the Church,Mr. Foxe act. mon. pag. 402. a. circa medium the onely prin∣cipall gine of saluation. andThe Confession of Bohemia in the Harmony of Confessions pag. 253. ante medium. of all hr pints of Do∣ctrine the chiefest and weightiest,) was so vnknowne in the age before Luther, that the contrary Doctrine of Iustification by Mrrit and Workes (which Protestants termeMr. Penrie in the booke entituled Mr. Some laid open in his colours page 29, 30. the very hart life and soule of Poperie) was de∣fended not onely by theSee this heretofore for the Waldenses, at pag. 90. i. l. and for Wicliffe at pag. 97. f. & for Husse at pag. 101. g. Waldenses, Wyclffe, and Husse, but also by all other nearer Luthers time in so much that Mr. Foxe hauing spoken of the tmes next before Luter, and of the learned writers then liuing, concludeth onely of Luther, thatAct. mon. pag. 402 a. circa med. and the De∣uines of the Confession of Augusta alledged by Luc. Osiander in epitom. hist. ecclesiast. centur. 16. pag. 157. paulo ante med. con∣fesse the same likewise say¦ing. Cum igitur doctrina de fide quam oportet in Ecclesia praecipuam esse, tam di ta∣cuerit ignota, quemadmodū fateri omnes necesse est &c. he gaue the strak and pluckte downe the fundation (of our Ca¦tholicke faith, and all by opening one vaine lng hid before which is our free Iustification by our faith onely in Christ. so plainely also by Mr. Foxe his confession, was this chiefe article of the Protestants faith, vnknowne
and vnheard of during the age next before Luther. And thus much briefely to shewe that whereas it is euident and confessed from the Scriptures, that the true Churches pastors, her administration of the Word and Sacraments must euermore continew yet our aduersaries Church, religion, administration of of the Word and Sacaments, are not knowne so much as but to haue beene in being, during the xx. yeares next before Luther. Whereupon we are to resist and say to them as did the ancientTertulian in libro de praescript: saith. Qui est is vos? vnde est quando ve∣nistis? vbi tā diu latuistis? and Augustine l. 3. de Bap¦tismo contr. Don. c. 2. saith Vnde ergo donatus appa∣ruit? de qua terra germi∣nauit? ex quo mari emer∣sit, de quo coelo cecidit? And Aug. de Vtilit. Cred. c. 14. saith to the Manichees vos autem & tam pauci, & tam turbulēti, & tam no∣vi, nemini dubiū est, quoniam nihil dignum auctoritate proferetis: & Optatus, l. 2. contra Parmenianum saith Vestrae Cathedrae originem ostendite, qui vobis vultis sanctam Ecclesi∣am vendicare: and Hillarie, l. 6. de Trinitate ante med saith, tardè mihi hos Pijssimos do∣ctores aetas nunc huius seculi protulit, &c. and Hierom, contra Luciferianos in fine saith: ex hoc ipso quod posterius instituti sunt, eos se esse indicāt quos futuros apostolus praenūciauit. Fathers in like manner to the Heretickes of their times: and as didLuther. (in Lutheri Loc. Comun. class. 5 c. 15. pag. 50. ante med. saith of the Sacramē∣taries, Sine nobis & ante nos nihil erant, ne hiscere quidem audebant, nunc nostra victoria inflati, in nos vertunt impetum. Luther him selfe vpon this like ground to our aduersaries the Sacramentaries. A FVRTHER DEMONSTRATION Otherwise of the Protestant Churches defection. SECT. 12. BVT forbearing as now, further to prosecute the foresaid euident defection of the Protestantes Church her administration of the Word and Sacra∣ments, by reason of the heretofore alledged dispare∣tie (or rather contrarietie) in doctrine betweene our now Protestants, and the foresaid examples of Wal∣do, Wicliffe, Husse, Luther &c. & all those other, whom our aduersaries haue (as hath beneSee heretofore for Wal∣do. tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3 for Wicliffe sect. 4. for Husse sect. 5. for. Luther sect. 10. and for others, see sect. 7. heretofore per¦ticulerly proued) iniustlie pretended to be of their Church: we will as yet in further proofe otherwise of their Churches no lesse vnanswerable defection, but briefelie put youre MAIESTIE in minde, of
one onely other point, (worthye of a much more laboured discource) the which being hereby but signified, rather then at large entreated of, we do ne∣uerthelesse (n full confidence of the manifest and vnanswerable clearenes therof) presume humblie to offer vnto your HIGHNES more retired and se∣riouse consideration. We haue heretofore shewed how that supposing Waldo had bin a Protestāt yet was he before his first preaching against the Pope, originally a knowne and professed member of our Catholicke Church: and the like we haue discouered in Berengarius, Peter Bruis, Wycliffe, Husse, Luther &c. all whose followers, as namely the Berengarians, Waldenses, Wyleuistes, Hus∣sis, Lutheranes. &. are in their forenamed seue all Sectmasters from whome they are knowne to haue discended, most plainely reducd to a knowne Ca∣tholicke begin ng. As were in like manner the A∣rans, Donaist s, Nstrians. &. knowne to haue had their like first begining in Catholickes, as in Aius, Dnatus, Ntorius. &. who all together with Beren∣garius, Waldo, Wy liffe, Husse, Luther. &c. were profes∣sed members of our Catholicke Church, before such time as they1. Ioh. 2, 19. went forth from vs the peculier marke or stiga. wherewith the1. Ioh. , 19. It is said of heretickes: they went out from vs. And Act. 15, 24. it is likewise said of them. Certaine that went forth frō vs: And Act. 20, 30. Out of your owne selues shall arise men speaking perverse things in so muh as our Sauiour forwarneth vs against this departure or going out say¦ing: If therefore they shall say vnto you, behold he is in the desert, goe you not forth: Mat. 24, 26. See S. Austen vpon these words hereto∣fore, tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. in the margēt at the figure 2. Scriptures,Optatus, lib. 1. saith herevpon against the Do∣natistes vidēdum est quis in radice cum toto orbe manserit, quis foras exte∣rit, quis cathedram sederit alteram quae ante non fue∣rat &c. And S. Augustine, tom. 8. in Psalm. 106. saith quid est ergo seduxit eos? dimisit eos in inuo & non in via, quomodo enim in via, homines qui partem tenent totum relinqunt? quomodo in via? quae est ergo via? Aut vbi agnoscitur via? Deus (inquit) msereatur nostri (&) vt agnscamus in terra vtam tuam: in qua terra? in omnibus genti∣bus salutare tuum: vti{que} tles vt minantur, vt pauci fint, hinc exeunt: A multitudine vnitatis omnes exierūt, siut Pulo ante cōmemoraui dictū de illis, ex nobis exierunt (&c.) And Aug. tr. 3. in ep. Io saith omnes Haeretici, omnes Schismat. ex nobis exierūt, id est ex ecl. exeūt. Fathers, andSee M. Alsn in hs confutaciō of Browse: pag. 1. initio. Protestants doe (not without euident reason) note the sectemasters of their times. For seeing that truth is auncient to heresie, (the which is but a deniall of some part of the truth then in being and professed) and that the summe of our Christian religiō was accordingly at first established and continued in and by the ApostlesSee M. Bsons words alledged heretofore, tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 6. at z. a. and their
Successors; There neuerThis is evidently seene in the examples of Arius, Novatus, Donatus, &c. And all other Arch heretikes or sect-masters of every age, neither can our adversaries give any one example to the contrarie. was therefore, nor possi∣blie could bee, any Arch Hereticke or sectmaister, who dd not by his the secōdary Innovatiō in deni∣al of some truth deuide himselfe from the Catholike Churches the visible societie: whervpon as it follow∣eth (by necessary sequele) that it sufficeth not our ad¦versaries to affirme with such needy begging of the thing in questiō, & no lesse peremptory & assuming iudgemēt (vnder pretēce of that forbiddē2. Peter. 1. private interpretation whchHereof see heretofore, tract. 2. cap. 1. initio. in the margent at the letter p. q. themselues do frame vpon the Scriptures that we haue departed frm God, vnlesse withall they can shewe from what other knowne companie of Christian to vs then elder & in being we did devide our selves, betaking v so thereby into an other singuler societie, as did in their several times Wl, Wilie, Husse, Luther, Calvin &c. in their depar∣ting from our Catholike church, the like whereof to haue hapned by any such departure made by our Church f om any other knowne ompay of Chri∣st ans to it then ancient and in being in any age or nation since the Apostles times, our learned adversa∣ries areWheras the proof here∣of lieth on our adversaries part, their most materiall ob∣iections in this behalfe are examined & answered here∣tofore. tract. 1. sect. 7. & the contrarie by vs proved. tract. 1. sect. 8. not able to shew, a thing (in regard of the reason befoe alleaged) worthy of all speciall & due observation. So likewise, (which is no lesse worthie also to be observed) although it be manifest & groū∣ded that the true Church must vndoubtedly ever∣moreHereof see hereafter tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 13. ini∣tio in the margēt at the let∣ter r. continue withHereof see heretofore. tract. 2. ca. 2. sect. 1. lit. t. x. y. Z. b. c. administration of the Word and Sacrament. Yet to avoide the example of the Primitiue Church, being as made by our ad∣versaries vnworthily questionable, & by vs hereto∣fore even from themselues sufficientlyConcerning testimo∣nies of our nw Catholike do∣ctrine to have beene taught in the Primitive Church. see heretofore. tract. 1. sect. 2. & 3. & tra. 2. c. 1. sect. 3. cleared, and withall to restrane thē to an other no lesse large, certaine, & knowne time) they are not able to name frō Anno Dom. 700. for other 700. yeeres then next after following, (a time long & larg enough) so much as but any oneThe Waldenses, Wicle∣stes, Hssites, & Lutherans. admitting they were all Pro∣testants (the contrarie wher∣of is heretofore prooved) are yet in their forenamed seve∣rall sect-masters, (as are also the Calvinistes in Calvine) reduced to a Catholike begin∣ning: And as for other ex∣amples our adversaries cāno giue instance, so much as of a∣ny one other man, whom they can pretend to haue been ori∣ginally a Protestant and not a Catholike: And if they flee to the examples of such other, as themselues cannot but ac∣knowledge for confessed here∣tikes, it is ridiculously imper¦tinent, and sheweth their full conviction herein. other persō living during any part of althat time, in any one nation of the earth, whom
they can but with any coulor pretend, to haue beene at first no Catholike but originally a Protestant: As we haue before said, Waldo, Wicliue, Husse. Luther, Caluin &c. (from whom haue sprong, the Waldenses, Wicle∣vistes, Hussites, Lutherans, Caluinistes, &c.) were each of them originally Catholickes, as likwise were for for∣mer times Arius, Nouatus, Pelagius, Nestorius &c. Let now our aduersaries peruse (though most carefully) the seuerall writings of their own most painful wri∣ters in this behalf, as nmely M. Fox his Acts & mo∣numents, Il iricus his Catalogus testium veritatis, Si∣mon de voyon, his Discourse vpon the Catalgue of the Do∣ctors of Gods Church, & also the century writers of Mag∣deburge, and they shall not in all or any of them, or in any other find instance or example of any one o∣ther man named to the contrarie of that which wee now vrge, if then our learned adversaries be not able to giue vs neither instance of any departure made by our Church frō any other knowne cōpany of Chri∣stians to it then ancient and in being, yet neither also example (as it is before required during the time be∣fore limited so much as but of any one man liuing in any part of the world, who was at first no Catholike but originally a Protestant: If these things be plaine evident & not to be excepted against by our learned adversaries, what then can be more cleere to proove a manifest interruption and discontinuance of their Churches Pastors, adminstration of the Word & Sa∣craments, & that as our Religion is vndoudtedly thatMath. 13, 24. Good seede which Christ the good husband-man first Sowed in his field. So also their aduerse doctrines are those forewarnedMath. 13, 25. tares which the enemie (af∣terwards came and swed among the Wheate & went his way: And thus much concerning the Protestants ap∣parent defection of their Churches Pastors, admini∣stration of the Word and Sacraments.
THAT THEREFORE PROTESTANTES for preseruation of Christs Church in being doe acknow∣ledge th Catholick Church to haue bin the tru Church and the Religion thereof for sufficient to Salvation. SECT. 13. WHICH saile defection or wante of their Churches Pastors administratiō of the Word and Sacramentes, carrieth with it such an evident scandall or rather scroople, by reason of the con∣fessed doctrine to the contrarie of all men coner∣ning the true Churc (which according toM. Whitaker against M. Raynoldes: in his an∣swere to the preface pag. 33. saith Wee beleeue to the comforte of our soules, that Christs Church hath continu∣ed and neuer shall faile, so long as the world endureth: & we accompt it a prophane heresie to teach otherwise. And the same is yet fur∣ther affirmed by D. Fulke in the tower disput. with Edm. Camp the 2. daies cō¦frence. And lso by the confessions of Belgia, in the Harmonie of confes∣sions pg. 321. and by the confssion of Hluetia, ibi∣dem pag. 306. And by the confssion of Saxonie, ibi∣dem pag. 324. and 325. & 473. in so much as the Divines of Witenberge in Colloquio Badensi apud Osi∣andrum in epitom (&c.) cē∣tur. 16. pag. 1064. ante med. say Ecclesiam inde ab ascē∣sione, vs{que} ad hac tempora nunquā interruptam sed per∣petua sucessione in terris per mansisse firmiter credimus: And ibidem pag. 1065. pst med. It is said Contra omnes furores Satanae. Eccle∣sia vera in terris vs{que} ad ad∣ventum Christi ad extremum iudicium est mansura. all opinions must evermore continue, without faling or ceassing to be, not so much as for any one moment of time) that the more sobe and learned Protestants, whom headstrong and inconsiderate zeale hath not altogether binded do therefore in preventiō there∣of, and for preservation of themselues, make in these straits, our Catholike Church as it were theirNumeri 35, 11. Cit∣tie of refuge: acknowledging to that end, that the true Church imediately before Luthers time, had it being in our Catholicke Church; & that accordingly, like as Luther himselfe before his preaching against the Pope, was anSedan. lib. 1. initio. Augustine Frer: and (as himselfe saith)Luther in his Commentarie vpon the Epistle to the Galathians Englished, fol. 35. b. circa mdim. kepte chastitie pouertie and obedince: was onely giuen to fasting, watching, praying, saying of Masse, and such like, andLuther ibidem fol. 35. a. circa medium. hooed the Pope of meere cōsciēce, &c. & was so therby most vndoubtedly, a professed mēber of our Catho∣like (or as they te me it popish Church.) So likewise vpon his pretended reformatin or preaching after∣wards against the Pope, he did not (say they) therebyM. D. Couel in his defence of M. Hooker, Art. 11. pag. 73. post med. sayeth As it is strange for any man to deny them of Rome to be of the Church. S. I cānot but wōder, that they (of Rome) will aske where our Church was before Lu∣ther, as if any were of opiniō, that Luther did erect a nwe Church, &c. And see the like saying in M Hooker, in his Ecclesiasticall olicie, lib. 3. pag. 129. post. med. erect a new Church thē befoe not in being, (for that
were most directly against themselues) and therefore d nt depat from the Church he wa of beore, but con∣tinued still a membe thereof, whi h th ng both in Hk and M. D Cou (speaking theeof doe verye plainelyM. Hooker lib. 3. pag. 130. and M. D. Couel in his defence of M. Hooker pag. 68. say Wee gladly acknow∣ledge them of Rome to bee of the familie of Iesus Christ, therefore we hope that to re∣forme our selues is not to se∣ver our selves fō he Church we were before; n the Chur h wee were and are so still, as also vvee say that they of Rome (notwthstāding their manifo d def ct) are to bee helde a parte of the house of God, a lymme of the visible Church of Christ. acknowledge to the great dislike of theIn the Christian let∣tr of certain English Po¦tstnts vnto that revēd man M R Hooker pag. 1. & 19. they doe reproue at large M. Hook for this opiniō of not severing thēselues fō the Church they were of bfore. Puritins: As also M. Bunm prosecuteth the same more at large affirming thereforeM Bnny in his treatie tending to Pacification pag. 0. Paulo post Medium. That of departing f in the Church there ought to be o qustion at all amonest vsIbidem pag. 113. post mdium. wee are saith he no severall Church from them nor they fo vs & therf re there is no departing at all out of the Church f r ay to depar from them to vs, nor from vs o them, all the difference betweene vs is concerning the truer members, whe∣ther we or thy may b fund more wrhie of that accompt, as f r th other we allw no su h question, in so much as hee doubteth nt to sayIbidem pg. 109. circa medium. It wa evill done of them who frst vged uch a eparati cōfessng further our g eatIbidem pag. 92 circa medium, he saithe of his seperation, our aduersaries see themselues to h advantage if they can winne vs to acknowledge (it) ad∣vantag giuen thereby, whih our advantage he af∣terw rds very planel to this purpose expresseth to beIbidem pag. 96. crca mdium. for that saith he) it is great prbabilitie wih thē, that  we make ou s les a swerable or to find out a distinct and s uerall Churh from them, which continued from he A∣po l s g t this pen, lso that ele we must acknowledge that our Church is strg vpon late, or since theirs: And hēce it commeth, that M. Hler and M. D. Couel doM. Hooker in his Ecclesiasticall Policie. l. 3. sect. 1. pg. 130. ante medium & l. 5. pag. 188. initi. and M. D. Couel in his defence of M. Hooker, pag. 68. ac∣knowlg, the Church of Rome t be of the samiie o Isus Chst, a pate f the huse of God, a Lymme of h vibl Church of Christ: that M. D. Bar sithIn his ormer sermons ad two questions, &c. serm. 3. pag. 448. fine. the learnedder writrs acknowlege the Chuch of Rome to bee th Church of God: that M. D Sme saithM. D. Some in his defence against M. Penrie (&c) cap. 23. fine pag. 182. initio. in the iudgement o all lear∣ned
men, & all reformed Church s there is in Popery a Chuch: that another late Englishe Protestant wryter saythSee the discourse v∣pō the meanes of wl go¦verning (&c.) against Ni∣cholas Matchiuell Printed at London 1602. pag. 80. post med the Catholicke and r formed make not two but one same r ligion,Ibidē pag. 83 Paulo post med & 85. prope finem. agreeing in all principall points f relgion eces∣sarie for our saluatio that also George Casslr (though dislikingCassder in libro de of∣fico Pij viri &c. pag. 14. ante medium & 15. initio. the Pope) and a knowledged forDauid Pareus in his booke de Symbolis Sacra∣mentatibus &c. in praefat ante medium, saith C ssader rditius scriptor. &c. a learned writer saithCassander ibidem pag. 14. post medium. and in de∣fence of his opinion he alledgeth Luther ibid. pag. 14. fine & pag. 21 &. 22. the Chrh of Rome is to bee reueren∣ced as beig the true Church and Templ of God; and that a late d sguised French Protestant writer, affirmethExamen Pacifique de la doctrine de Hguenotes, &c. imprimee a Caen. 1590. en argum du liure pag. 2. Cahl ke and H gs to be of one saith and rl g n: with whom agreeth another l ke rite termng thē in like mannerApologie Catholique &c. part. 2. pag. 26. & 203 & 204. Domstikes f o fah, and braunchs of one and the same Vine. And hen e lastly it commeth, that the lea ned Protestants (as wee beforeHeretofoe tract. 1. sct. 6. haue sheed doe afford to our Ctho ike professors, the ho efull promises of Salvation, afirming this to beeM. D. Some vbi supra pag. 176. prope finem. the iudgment of al a n Pretan. & dM. Bnny in his trea∣tie tending to Pacifiati∣on pag. 93. circa medium. are by the whl course of all heir writ gs: in so uch a hey doubt not to chage such of their other head-strong brethren as affirme the contrarie even withMr. D. Couell in his defence of M. Hooker, pag. 68. Paulo post medium. Igno∣rant zeale. A briefe repetition of he premisses of this second Chapter. SECT 14. SINCE therefore (most Gratiouse Souerigne) it appeareth by the second chapter of this second trat grounded vpon the Scriptures, and that con∣fessed sense therof which our aduersaries themselues acknoledge 1 First that the Chuches Pastors and Dotos, teir impugning of errors, administration of the Word and Sacrament must euermoreSee heretoore tra. 2. c. 2. sect 1. b. c. d. & ibid. n o. u. & ibidem, x. y. z. con∣tinue in being 2 Secondly that where these are wan∣ting there the true Church isSee heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. sect. 1 y. z. not. 3 Thirdly that the examples ofSee heretofore tra. 2. cp. . sect. 7. Bertram, theSee heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3. Wale s s,See heretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 4. Wiliffe,
See heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. sect. 5. Huss, ndSee heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. and 11. Luther, vpon which our adversaies doe most insist and all otherSee heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. Sect 7. examples of former times are altogether impetinent to enable (but so much a respecti ely for those times:) a continuan e of their Churches administraton of the Word & Sa∣craments: in so much as themselues are vrged to cō∣fesse that the same haue continued latent andSee hretofore tra. 2 c. 1. sect. 4. p. q. r. s. t. u. x. y. z. in∣visible to the world (at the least) for these 1000. years l st past. 4 Fourthly whi h pont onely wod suf∣fice to convince our adversaries) tat not so much as an one eample thereof can bee found, bt during evē the last xxSee heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11. yeares before Luthers first preaching aginst the Pope, which are yet within the memoie of tis present age. 5 Fifthly tht in regard thereof, our adversarie a e (for preservation of themselues) vrged to fleeHeretofore tract. 2. cp. 2. sect. 13 y. & ibidem z. b c. d. e. f. g. h. i. to our Cathoike Church whose Pastors administration of the Word & Sacraments, haue accordng to their former confession) continu∣edSee heretofore tra. 1. sect. 2. & tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 4. q. r. s. t y. knwne and visible or 1300. yeares last ast, & so to acknowledge it for a trueSee heretofore tra. 1. sect. 6. e. f. & ibidem g. h. l. & tract. 2. ca. 2. sect. 13 b. c. Church, wher∣of Luher at and after his sd fist pre cing was andHeretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 13. y. continued (ccording to their enorced conessi∣on) a knowne and profssed member. We do most humb e now hereupon appeale to your MAIESTIE concerning the eqitie of this our preent Apologie, and whether h t we haue not her by greate cause, to stand (a we do) aganst our aduersaries in defence of our Catholike Church, and whe her also that they, are not in all sene and rason fonde of all others most vnreasonable, n thei seeking further to afict & persecute the same.
THE THIRD TRACT FIRST CHAPTER, SECT. 1. CONCERNING THE CONFESSED AN∣tiquitie of Catholicke Priest-hood Confe sion Absolution Masse &c. and of the penall lawes made against them. ALBEIT most gracious Soue∣raign that in regard of these so pline and onfessed premisses already alledged in bealfe of our Catholike faith, the same can appeare (even to our ene∣mies) no lesse then worthie of all reuerend & due estim tion, such yet neverthels hath bin the calamity of our for¦mer ties, th t even for this faith, though ths bew∣tfull with all this outward o naet of cōfssed pro∣babilitie, (which being indeed but as it were th mo∣ther peare conteineth vnder it such further speciall proofe frm Scriptures Fathers, nd Protestant wri∣tes s is much more orient nd richly demonstrate, the particules whereof we hmblie pray but by this discourse mde onely in generall dae not presume) to offer to your Maiestie: we hue for many yeares past susteined the mpositiō of sundry pnall lawes, the CatholikeS. Chrysostom writ a peciall booke of this Priest-hood. Priest hood of our spiritua l Pa∣stors, who (as St. Austine saith) are now not properlie butAug. de civ. Dei l. 20. c. 10. post medium saith non vti{que} de solis Episcopis & Presbteris dctum est, qui ā prope vocātur in Ecclesia Sacerdotes. propelie called priests in th Church: and to wom thereore the words Presbiter, and Sard s are nd ffe∣rentlyAgust vt supra & the Greek word Hiereus which signifieth Sacerdos is v∣sed and referred to Christian Priests by Dionisius Areopagita de eccles. Hierarch. c. 5. & Epist. 8. ad demophilum monachū: And Ignatius in his vndoubted Epistle ad Smyrnenses nowe extante (wherof divers sentences are verbatim alledged vnder the name of Ignatius, and title of this Epistle by Hierom. lib. de viris illustribus and by Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 32. as is more at large vrged and proued by the L. Archbishop of Canturburie in his defence &c. pag. 408. circa medium: & he not so much as therin gaine-said by Carthwright affirmeth the Bishop to be as the high Priest, & Chrsts Image in respect that he sacrificeth: affirming further, that in the Church nothing is greater then the Bishop, who sacrificeth to God for the safetie of the wole world and Nazianz in Epist. 8. ad Simplicium Heret. affirmeth the Priest to be the mediator betweene God and man and sacrificing togither with Christ: this point is so evident and common in the Greeke and La∣tine Fathers, that M. Whitaker lib. 9. contra Dam, pag. 813 initio, acknowledgeth the same and answereth onely that the said Fathers vsed the words Hreus and Sacerdos: (non proprie sed catacresticos, not properly) (directly against S. Austines foresaid testimonie) But by abuse of speech: and yet as the L. Archbishop of Canturburie in his said defence &c. pag. 411. ver∣sus finem, confesseth and saith this name Priest is vsually applied to the Minister of he Gospell in all Histories, Fathers and writer of Antiquitie. referred in respect of the blessed Sacramēt,
which is by them offed to GodAug. de civ. Dei lib. 17. cap. 17. circa medium. vnder Christ the (High) Priest, &Ambros. in 1. Tim. c. 4 vers. 14. in his steed orCiprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3. post medium. place, as the churches eternll and acceptable oblation, & acknowledgedFor these last 1000. yeares M. Beacon in his works set forth 1560. the 3. part in his treatise enti∣tuled the reliques of Rome fol. 344. a post. med. saith, the Masse was fully finished by Pope Gregorie the first, about Anno Do∣mini 600. &c. And from Charles the Great vnto Charles the first, the Masse reigned as a most migh∣tie Queene in all the Churches of the West part of the world. and Melancthon lib. 4. Chronic. in Henric. 4. fol. 186. 187. saith of Gregorie. he allowed by publique auctority the sacrifice of Christs body and blood not onely for the liuing, but also for the deade: And the like is affirmed of Gregorie by Carion. in Chronic. pag. 567. Paulo ante med. Also Musculus Loc. Comun. de caena dom. pag. 339 fie saith of Pelagius Predecessor to Gregorie, Pelagius commemorationē mortuo∣rum in secreta canonis mistatic retulit (&c.) vt mortuis virtus & efficacia Missae communi∣caetur: Also Simachus was Bishop of Rome (Anno 501) of whom the centurie writers cen∣tur. 6. cap. 10. col. 664. line 30, say, notas Antichristi & hic habuit, missam enim in formam redegit: Before him was S Leo (Anno 440.) of whom M. Bale in his Pageant of Popes fol. 27. saith, Leo the first allowed the sacrifice of the Masse nt without great blasphemie to God: Be∣fore Leo was Ambrose (Anno 370) whom the centurie writers cent. 4. cap. 4. col. 295. line 3. reprove and chrge with not writing well de transubstantiatione & applicatione pro mor∣tuis: and ibidem line 23. they further sy, Ambrosius locutionibus vtitur quibus ante eum ex patribus nemo vsus est: vt missm facere, offerre sacrificium &c. Before him againe ws Gre∣gorie Nssene of the Greeke Church: (Anno 340.) of whom Andreas Chrastouius in his booke (against Bellarmine) de opificio missae lib. 1. sect. 164. initio & pag. 81. saith An ignorat opi∣nionem Nissem per se absurdam esse (&c.) ait ille (Nissenus) cum ita{que} dedit (Christus) dis∣cipulis suis corpus suum ad comedendum (&c.) am latentèr (&c.) in effabilitèr & inuisi∣bilitèr corpus immolatum erat (&c.) And see further hereof M. Whitaker cōtra Duraeum l. 4. pag. 320. fine: Also Cyrrill of Hierusalem another Father of the Greeke Church florished (Anno 320.) whom Hospinianus in historia Sacramentaria pag. 167. initio chargeth and reproveth saying, quod ad Cirrillum Hierosolomitanum attinet, dicit ille quidē pro uiam temporis recepta consutudine, sacraficium altaris, maximum iuvamen este animarum: and Cavin in libro de vera Ecclesia reformatione saith of the Fathers of this age solēne est ne∣bulonibus istis (meaning vs Catholikes) quicquid vitiosum in Patribus legitur coriadere (&c.) cum ergo obijciunt locum Malachiae de missae sacrificio ab Ireneo exponi, oblatio∣nem Melchisedech sic tractari, ab Athanasio, Ambrosio, Augustino, Arnobio, brevitè. ponsū sit, eosdem illos scriptores alibi quo{que} panem interpretari Corpus Christi, sedita ridicuè, vt distentire nos cogatatio & veritas (&c.) And in his booke of the institutions printed Ar∣gentorat. 1539. pag. 350. ante medium. And after the ther edition lib. 4. institut. cap. 18. sect. 11. he further saith veteres quo{que} illos video hanc memoriam alio detorsisse quam in∣stitutioni domini cōveniebat, quod nescio quam repetitiae aut saltem renovatae inoltionis faciem, orum caena prae se frebat (&c.) Imitati sunt enim propius Iudaicum sacrificandi morem quam aut ordinauerat Christus, aut Evangelij ratio ferebat and see heretofore pag. 13. Before these times liued S. Ciprian (Anno 240.) whom the Centurie writers cent. 3. cap. 4. col. 83. line 34. reproue saying, Sacerdorem inquit (Ciprianus) vic Christi fugi, & Deo Patrisacrificium offerri. And M. Fulke against Heskines, Sanders &c pag. 100. circa med. saith It is granted that Ciprian thought the bread and wine brought forth by Melchisadch to bee a figure of the Sacrament, and that herein also Melchisadech resembled the Priesthood of Christ. Also Ter∣tullian liued (Anno 220) him doth Luc Osiander centur. 3. lib. 1. cap. 5. pag. 10. circa med. re∣proue saying, Tertullianus approbauit oblationes pro defuciis, orationes Annuas pro nata∣litijs: In like sort is he reproued by the Centurie writers cent. 3. cap. 5. col. 338. line 56. and no lesse plainely by M Fulke in his confutation of Purgatorie pag. 265. circa & post med. Before Tertullian liued Ireneus (Anno 170.) him Caluine reporteth as before, and the Cen∣turie writers cent. 2. cap. 4. col. 63. line 20. charge, saying de oblatione porro Ireneus l. 4. c. 32. (&c.) satis videtur loqu in con odè, cum ait noui Testamenti novam docuit (Chri∣stus) oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in vniverso mundo offert Deo. Be∣fore him liued Ignatius the Apostles vndoubted scholler, (Anno 90) of whom the Centu∣rie writers in cent. 2. cap. 4. col. 62. line 9. say, quaedam ambigua & incomode dicta in qui∣busdam occurrunt, vt in Epistola Igntij ad Smyrnenses, non licet inquit Ignatius sine Epis∣copo ne{que} offerre, ne{que} sacrificium immolare, and cent. 2. c. 10. col. 167. line 17. the Cen∣turie writers affirme these words of Ignatius to be periculosa & qusi errorum semina: Last∣lie M. Beacon in his foresaid treatise fol. 344. a. post med. saith, the Masse was begotten, concea∣ved & borne anone after the Apostles times, if all be true that historiographers write. And Hospinia∣nus in historia sacramētaria l. 1. c. 6 pag. 20 fine. saith, Iam tum primo illo seculo viuentibus adhuc Apostolis, magis huic sacrmento quem Baptisme insidiari ausus sit (demon) & ho∣mines a prima illa forma sensim abduxerit (&c.) And Sebastianus Francus in Epistola de ab∣rogandis in vniuersum omnibus statutis ecclesiasticis (saith most plainely) statim post A∣postolos omnia inuersa sunt (&c.) caena dom. in sacrificium transformata est. by learned protestants to haue beene for such ac∣cod ngly offred not only fo these thousand yeares last past, but also for so many other precedent ages,
as being (in our opinion) not any new redemptiō but rather a continuall commemoration and application of the force and benefit of that one sacrifice, whichHaebr. 9, 28. was offred once for all: is against all example of for∣mer times made treason in our Priests: our releeving
of them is death to vs, the remission or forgiuenes of our sinnes, (which Protestants terme reconciliation) defēded by auncientAmbros. l. 1. de poeni∣tentia c. 2. saith of the No∣vatians, sed aunt se domi∣no deferre reverentiam cui soli remittendorū cri∣minum potestatem reser∣vent. Immo nulli maiorē iniuriam faciunt, quam qui eius volunt mandata rescindere. nam cum ipse in Evangelio suo dixerit dominus, accipite spiritum sanctum quorū remisseritis peccata remittuntur eis (&c.) quis est ergo qui magis honorat, vtrum qui mandatis obtemperat an qui resistit. And cap. 7. he further saith to them, cur Baptizatis si peccata per hominem dimitri nō licet: In Baptismo vti{que} remissio peccatorum omnium est, quid interest vtium per paenitentiam, an per laua∣crum hoc ius sibi datum Sacerdotes vindicentur vnum in vtro{que} ministerium est. Also Pa∣cianus in epist. 1. ad Smponianum nouatianum saith, numquam Deus non poenitenti com∣minartur nisi ignosce poenitenti: solus hoc (inquies) Deus poterit, verum est: sed & quod per Sacerdotes suos facit ipsius potestas est, nam quid est illud quod Apostolis dicit: quae li∣gaueritis in tertis (&c.) In like manner Socrates in hist. tripart. lib. 2 cap. 13. fine. reproueth A∣cesius the Nouatian: for that hee taught concerning such as fell in persecution (inuitandus quidem ad poenitentian, spem verò remissionis non à sacerdotibus, sed à Deo solummodo sustinere, qui potestatem hbet peccata remittere: Haec cum dixisset Acesius, imperator ait, ô Acesi po∣ne scalam & si potes ascende solus in coelum; so strange and singuler in those times was this opi∣nion deemed: & vide hist. tripart. l. 8. c. 9. prope initium. Fathers against the Novati∣ans, & by other ProtestantLobechius Doctor and professor in the Vniversitie of Rosticke in his disput. theolog. pag. 301 answereth our adversaries common obie∣ction saying; est quidē solius Deà peccatis absoluere, sed ita vt (hoc facat alias immediate, (&c.) alias mediatè per suos ministros condonando nobis culpam (&c.) errant ergo Cal∣umm, qui (&c.) absolutioni ministri verbi, illam efficaciam detrahant, (&c.) contendentes minium absoluere tantum vt internuntium &c. In like plaine manner is our adversaries obie∣ction of God onely forgiuing sinne: and their denial therevpon of that power to Ecclesiasticall Mini∣sers, no lesse plainely further answered and refelled by sundrie Protestants, as namely by Andrea Athamerus in conciliat. locorum Scripturae pugnantium &c. loc. 194. fol. 218. a. b. And by Iacobus Helbranerus in Schwenckfeldio Caluinism. pa. 55. In so much as Absolution (is affirmed to be) properly a Sacrament, by Melancthon in Apolog. Confest. August. Art. 13. de numero & vsu Sacramentorum fol. 161. b. initio. by Spangeberg in (hu) Margarita Theologica. pag. 116. & 117. by Andraeas Acthamerus in conciliat. loorum Scripturae Pugnan. (&c.) loc. 191. fol. 211. b initio. & loc. 195. fol. 219. b. And by Sarcerius in loc. comun. tom. 1. de potest. Eccle∣siae fol. 305 b. post med. writers against their brethren our adversaies, which our said Priests (ac¦cording to their commission most plainly set downe in theIoh. 20, 21, 22, 23. Scriptures) vndertake to impart to vs, vpō perticuler confession had of our sinnes, (which saide confession bothTo omitte the plentifull testimonies of the Fathers S. Leodsribeth the vsage of the Latine Church in epist 91. ad Theodorū foro iu∣lij Episcopum saying, Christus hanc Ecclesiae praepositis tradidit potestatem, vt & confiten∣tinus actionem poenitentiae darent, & cosdem salubri satisfactione purgatos, ad communio∣nem Sacramentorum per Ianuam reconciltionis admitterent: And epist. 80. ad Episcopos Campaniae. He further saith, cum reatus conscientiarum sufficiat solis Sacerdotibus iudicari confessione secreta. And it is saide in the ancient tripartite historie. lib. 9. cap. 35. Ad hanc cau∣sam presbiterum bonae conuersationis, seruantem{que} secretū ac sapientem virum statuerunt, ad quem accedentes hi qui delinquebant delicta propria fatbantur: At ille secundum vnius∣cuius{que} culpam indicebat & mulctam: quod etiam hactenus diligenter in occidētalibus ser∣vatur ecclesijs, & maxime apud Romam, vbi etiam locus est certus poenitentium. And S. Ba∣sile (signifieth the like doctrine of the Greeke Church) in quaestionibus brevioribus interrogat. 288. saying, necessariò peccata ijs apariri debent, quibus credita est dispensatio mysteriorum Dei: siquidem rationem hanc in poenitētia etiam veteres illos cernimus sequutos fuisse: &c. And the Centurie writers Centur. 3. cap. 6. col. 127. line 29. 30. 31. &c. Describe the life doctrine and vsage of the Church of Aphricke out of the writings of Ciprian, and Tertullian. And see further hereof heretofore pag. 53. num. 7. And in the margent there at the letter t &c. Fathers and Protestants
Sacerius in loc. co∣mun. de confessione fol. 289. b. saith it is an error adserere confessionē quae coram Deo fit sufficere, ita vt contemnas claves & absolutionem per fratrē: Hic error prorsus tollit v∣sum clavium & absolutio∣nis (&c.) falsum ergo est confessionem, quae corā Deo fit tollere confessio∣nem privatam: &c. In like plaine maner is private con∣fession defended most earnest∣ly against our adversaries. by sundrie of their owne o∣ther brethren, as namelie by Lobechius in disput. theol pag. 295. sect. 4. By Conra∣dus Schluselburg. in theol. Caluinistarum, fol. 147. a. By Melancthon l. 1. episto∣larum pag. 234. ante medium. By the confessions of Saxonie, and Boheme in the Harmony of Cō∣fessions. pag. 231. circa medium. and pag. 357. and 358. initio. and by many others. doe likewise acknowledge) is (to our greatest greefe) condemned for Lasa maiestas, as being a disloi∣all abnegation of our allegeance. To the clearing whereof, we doe (as in the presence of God and your Maiestie) protest vpon our soules, that no such mat∣ter, is therein or thereby expressed implied or ment: our recusancie or refraining to be present at Prote∣stants service: (notwithstanding that the like deniall or recusancie of Protestants to be present at our Ca∣tholike service, is prescribed and taught by sundrie of their owne most learnedM. Willet in his Synopsis printed Anno 1600. pag. 612. 613. 614. teacheth this recusancie, and alledgeth in proofe of his opinion sundrie testimonies from the most famous Protestants, as Ridley, Latimer, Philpot, Bradford &c. In like manner is it further taught by Ridley in the Actes & Monuments pag. 1285. b. paulo ante medium. By Haukes Act. Mon. pag. 1150. b. initio. and 1151. a. circa medium. By Melancthon in concilijs theologicis pag. 628. By Peter Martyr in his discourse here∣of recited in Melancthons foresaid treatise of Consil. theolog. pag. 634. 635. By Martine Bucer al∣ledged ibidem pag. 632. and 633. and 634. By Iohn Caluine alledged ibidem pag. 635. fine and 636. and by the Divines of Germanie alledged by Sleydane in his Comentaries Englished. lib. 7. fol. 87. a. circa medium. writers) is neverthe∣lesse iudged in vs a kind of froward and superfluous remorse, and accordingly taxed with a confiscation or waist of our goods and yearely revenue: wherevn∣to might be added our sundry other losses, contume∣lies, imprisonments and publike disgraces hereto∣fore susteined whereat though we doe all mourning plaine, yet complaine we will not,
THE PROTESTANTS OBIECTION OF Catholickes disloyaltie retorted vpon themselues. SECT. 2. AND for somuch as sundry of our vncharitable aduersaries who are nothing moued with our foresaid calamities, do out of their inueterate and implacable hatred, daily seeke to auert from vs your HIGHNES most gratious and Princely dispositiō, inclined otherwise to commiserat all such as are af∣flicted, and do therefore to make vs more odious often inculcate the doctrine wherewith certaine our writers are charged concerning the Popes vnderta∣king in some cases to despose Princes, pretending with all what greate danger may at last hence ensue when by reason of your Maiesties mercie in the meane time to vs extēded, our estats shall be bettered & number increased: Vouchsafeth your HIGHNES (before we enter into petition for our selues) graci∣ously to weigh with equall consideration that which herevnto wee shall alledge, aswell cōcerning our ad∣versaries, who thus charge vs, as in answere for our selues that are so charged. First then concerning our aduersaries, wee say that they in their thus vrging or but remembring of this point against vs, doe of all others shewe themselues most indiscreetely malicious, for: quis tulerit grachum de seditione loquentem &c. or how can it be decorum in a∣ny, to charge others with imputation of that, wherin themselues are further chargeable? And although we for our partes doe altogether dislike all acerbitie and gall of in vectiue writing; being yet thus provo∣ked to such iust and necessarie recrimination as our owne defence and safetie requireth; we say from thē∣selues as followeth 1 First concerning the Luthe∣ranes doth not Sleydane Luthers owne Scholler make full reporte of the seditious doctrine of the Di∣vines of Magdenburge maintaining and publiquelie
In Sleydane in Eng∣lish hist. l. 22. fol. 345. a cir¦ca medium the Divines of Magdenburg thus teach thereof: If it so fortune that the Magistrate passe the boundes of his authority and commaund any thing that is wicked &c. If hee attempte any force he should be ressted &c. and seeing the case stan∣deth tus, there can no rebel∣lion of right be obiected vn∣to vs. And ibidē fol. 345. b. initio It is further said, The Minsters of the Church set forth a writing wherein they recite the confession of their Doctrine, and declare how it is lawfull for the in∣ferior Magistrate to defend himselfe against the the su∣perior compelling him to for∣sake the truth. teaching in defence of their rebellion, that in case of religion it was lawful for subiects even with force to resist the Prine: doth not Chitraeus a learned Lu∣theraineChitraeus in Chronic. Anno 1593. & 1594. pag. 74. fine and 75. saith hereof tandem rex flecti se sibi{que} persuadere passus est, vt assentiretur se religionem & cultum Dei, in verbo Dei & Augustana confessione comprehensum &c. solam in regno conseruare ac tueri, nec templa in vrbibus vlla alteri, quam Augustinae confessionis reliio∣ni destinare velle, nec aditum in senatum regni, vel ad vlla rgni officia publica, alijs quam Augustinae confessionis doctrinam retinentibus concedi debere: regem veo ipum ad suae religionis Pontificiae exercitium, sacellis arrium in quibus habitabit contentum fore. &c. repo t how the King of Suethland be∣ing a Catholike was by hi subiects the Lutheraines vrged to assēt to the deree that no Catholike should beare any ofice in that kingdome and that the King should content himselfe with his Catholike service to be Celebrated only in his own private Chappell? was not the force attempted by the GermainesOf the Germaines insurrection against their Emperour, see further hereafter in this tract in the margent at the figure 4. a∣gainst thei Emperour in defence of their Lutherane religion so publiquel mde knowne to the world with lamentable effuson of much Christian blood throughout Germany, as that the same is muh more wortie o pittie ten remebran e? Seodl concerning te Caliniste, doth not Cal∣uine him selfe teach hereof, thatCalvine in Dan. c. b. vers. 22.25. saith, abdicat se potestate terreni Principes dum insurgunt contra Deum, immo indigni sunt quicenscantur in homi∣nū numero, potius ergo conspuere oportet in illorū capita, quā illis parere &c. earhly Prines doe beeaue hm selue o authritie when they erect thems lues against God, yea that they are vnworthie to b accompted in the number of men, and therefore we must rather spitt vpon their faces, then obeie them &c. doth not Singlius like∣wise say,Suin∣glius lib. 4. epistolarum Suinglij & oecolampad. epist. Cunhardo Somio & Symperto &c. pag. 868. post medium & pag. 869. saith, Promittendum est Caesari officium debitum si mo∣do fidem nobis permittat illibatam &c. Romanum Imperium, imò quod{que} Imperium vbi religionem sinceram opprimere ceperit, & nos illud negligentes patimur, iam negatae aut contemptae religionis non minus rei erimus quam illi ipsi oppressores: exemplum est apud Hieremiam 15. vbi exterminium cominatur Deus Israeli quod Manastem permisissent im∣punè esse pessimum. due lialie is to be promised to Cesr, i so that he p rnt to vs our rel gio in violabl &. if the romaine Empire or what her, souerai n seuer, should opresse the sin∣cere religion, and we ngligently further the same, we shalbe
charged with contempte, no less then the oppressors thereof them slues. whereo (aith he, abusing therein he Scriptures most goely) we haue an example in the 15. of Ieremie, wher the distruction of the Pepl is prophsied for that they suffred their Kings Mass s eg vngodly to be vnpunished. And doth he not aduise to haue this Doctrine priuately & with respect(Ibidem pag. 869. post medium.) Prudenter igitur ac paulatim agēda sunt huiusmodi, at{que} cum paucis quibus credere pos¦sis quae ardua sunt. Comunicated vnto certeine chiefe pesons of credit, did not also the Caluinists of Emb∣den (as a brother of ter oneGerhardus Giesekenius lib. de veritate Corporis Christi in Sacra caena. pag. 256. paulo post medi∣um saith, Embdenss illu∣strem dominū suum, mo∣ta seditione & advocato peregrino milite, fere non solum civitte, sed tota di∣tione pepulissent: pacti e∣tim sunt ne potstatē ha∣beat dictus illustris comes vllius religionis nisi Cl∣vinistae exercitium subdi∣tis in Civitate Embdna cōcedere, & tamen liceat (quod magnae est gratiae) facere in aula cōcionato∣rem, qui sit Augustinae cō∣fessionis. H sunt fructus fidei vestrae &c. reporteth) by force expell the Civill Magistrate, being a Luherane and inforce that the eercise of the Calvinistes religion should be publique and he other but priuate; to the Magistrate in his one house. Is there not also like further epot or mention made by the Protestant writer rituus of theCrispinus in his booke of the Churches State pag. 509. initio. Sdition at Basile betwixte the Bu ges and certeine of the Senators for the cause of religio? and that the Burgsses haung taken armes, cast downe the Imag in the Templs, and caued the Senae to agree to what they demaunded: and that herevpon twelue Senators fa∣vurig Papstrie were deiected out of the Senate. and that in this sort, the Masse was then abolished through all that Sig∣norie: Wherevnto might be added the knowne con∣fessed example of likeOsiander in epitom-hist. Eccl. centur. 16. pag. 801. post med. &. 803. an∣te medium. impatient furie at Antwerpe, and certaine other placs of Holland, Zelland &c. as also ofTestified by Crispin vbi supra pag. 627. fin, and by Osiander centur. 16. pag. 959. And Sarauia in defens. tract. de diversis gradibus ministrorum &c. cap 2. pag. 74 ante & circa medium. saith, quid his verbis D. Beza sinificare velit quando pios expectare non aquum censet donec lupi publica au∣ctoritte expellantur, quidam dubitant: & videre privata auctoritate lupos illos posse ex∣pelli sicut in Belgio & alijs los factum est, vbi templa & monasteria cum Monachis & E∣piscopis, vniurso{que} clero paistico spolita & diruta sunt populari tum vltu & militari li∣centia, invitis summis magistratibu, & contra fidem datam. Petrus Datenus, and others chiefe of the Congregation in Gaunt, who Anno 1578. stirred vp the Cittizens there to thrust out all th Msse Priestes and Monckes out o the Cittie, and put their goods into their treasurie &c. doth not Mr. Doctor Suclyffe accordinglie confesse thatM. Sutclyffe in his aun∣swere to a certaine Lybell Sapplicatorie &c. pag. 75. paulo post medium. Bezain his booke de iure magistratum in sbditos
doth arme the subiectes against the Prince in these causes, & that thisM. Sutclyffe vbi su∣pra pag. 192. post medium booke ouerthroweth in effect all the auctority of Christian Kinges and Magistrates. Doth he not likewise further affirmeM. Sutclyffe vbi su∣pra pag. 75. post medium. that the author of the booke which is intituled, vindiciae contra tyrannos, whom (saith he) many affirme to be Beza or Hottoman doth giue power to the subiectes not onely to resist but also to deose and kill the Pri ce if he impugne Gods relgion, did not Iohn Knoxe alledge in proofe of his owne seditious opinionHereof see the historie of the Church of Scotland printed by Vautrouilier pag. 213. and M. Sutclyffe vbi supra pag. 192. ante med. Caluine, and certaine other ministers then residing at Geneua, teaching that it is lawfull for subiectes to reforme religion whē Princes will not, yea rather then faile euen by force of armes, do not our aduersaries themselues acknowledge according∣ly that the ProtestantsHereof see Bodinus de republica pag. 353. and Calvine to Sadolet. pa. 172. and M. Sutclyffe vbi supra pag. 194. initio, and the L. Bishop of London in his Sur∣vey of the pretēded holy dis∣ciplin. pa. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. of Geneua did depose their Leige Lord and Prince from his temporall right there, from which yet to this day they keepe him by force ex∣cluded. In so much as the Lord Bishope of Lon∣don, and Mr. D. Sutcliffe proesse without any co∣uerture of wordes, plainely to dislikeSee the foresaide Sr∣vey &c. pag. 14. circa med. and M. Sutclyffe in his said answere pag. 194. initio. the diuinitie which was pretended in defence thereof by the Ministers of Geneua.Conerning the Lowe Countries, see Osiander in epitom. hist. eccles. centur. 16. pag. 941. fine, where he saith Belgici publico scripto Domino & regi suo Philippo omnem obediētiam & subiectionem renunciant. And see there further pag. 801. post medium, and 803. ante medium, and 805. prope finem. Thirdly to forbeare aswell the confessed example of IoannesSee Osiander in his E∣pitom. centur. 16. pag. 802. fine. Functius a prime Prote∣stant, publiquely executed for his offence of this kinde, as also (for some respect) what is or may bee further saide concening the Protestant Subiectes ofFor Fraunce see Peter Mrtir in his epistles annex∣ed to his comō places in Eng∣lish pag. 157. b. and Osian∣der in epitom. hist. Eccles. centur. 16. pag. 697. initio & 708. circa medium. and 804. post. mediū. and 809. initio. And see Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church pag. 614. post medium, and 615. and 616. fine, and 619. post medium, and 611. fine, and 613. fine, and 625. post medium. And see the Historie of the civill Warres of Fraunce (gathered from Anno 1585. till 1591. Printed at London Anno 1591.) of the Kinges royall auctoritie ioyned with the Leaguers, pag. 91. initio, and 168. fine, and of resistance after made thereto by them of the reformed religion pag. 48. and 49. fine, and 51. circa medium, and 104. and 135. post medium, and 143. circa med. and 144. ante med. and 165. paulo post medium, and 169. post medium, and 172. &c. Fraunce, and the LoweConcerning the Lowe Countries, see Osiander in epitom. hist. eccles. centur. 16. pag. 941. fine, where he saith Belgici publico scripto Domino & regi suo Philippo omnem obediētiam & subiectionem renunciant. And see there further pag. 801. post medium, and 803. ante medium, and 805. prope finem. Countries, & many otherSee these other examples in Osiander centur. 16. pag. 115. circa med. and 735. initio & circa med. & 599. paulo ante med. and 692. fine, and 802. fine, and 942. and 125. ante med. and 523. initio, and 350. ante med. and 1120. fine, and in Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church pag. 636. circa medium, and 682. ante medium. And see the Protestant writer Dresserus in parte se∣cunda millinarij sexti, where he acknowledgeth and reporteth concrning Grmanie, pag. 656. ante medium, saying, scripto publico Saxonem & Lautgrauium proscribit Cesar tanquam perfi∣dos rebelles &c. Protestantes cognita tanta severitate Bellum & ipsi denunciant Caesari (and pag. 658. fine) Mauritius Sax. elector & Augustus frater, non quiescendum sibi arbi∣trabantur, priusquam in tuto religionis Lutheranae professionem collocassent, inde expedi∣tionem Mauritius in ipsum Caesarem suscepit▪ (and pag. 661. ante medium, hee acknowledgeth that) dissidium & bellum omne ex mutatione religionis Pontificiae in Lutheranam in Ger∣maniae quibusdam ducatibus, comitatibus, & civitatibus ortum est: and pag. 464. ante med. he saith, Mauritius ita{que} cum rege Galliae foedus fecit & in obtinendum id, tādem ratus quod aequitate non poterat, milites presidiarios in Pacificatione Magdeburgica dimissos tacitè rursum conduxit, & contra Caesarem ipsum adduxit: &c. like forraine examples confessed and reported
even by Protestant writers, & to come neerer home, was not our Coūtrieman Mr. Goodman so farre ca∣ried away with this rage of sedition that he doubted not to publish, that in case of religionSee Goodmans booke, pag. 4. 43. 59. 63. 87. 72. 99. 180. 184. 185. 196. it was lawfull to resist the Superior Powers, and for subiects to withstand their Prince. Doth hee not herevpon affirme thatCap. 14. pag. 204. ad 212. Wiat did but his dutie, and that it was the dutie of all others that professed the Gospell to haue risen with him: is it not evident and confessed that thisM. Sutclyffe in his an∣swere &c. pag. 192. fine. book was printed at Gene∣ua in Queene Maries time,See Whittinghams E∣pistle before Goodmans book. cōmanded by M. Wihitting∣ham, andWhittingham vbi su∣pra, and M. Sutclyffe in his said answere, &c. pag. 193. initio. approued to be good & godly by the cheefest men of learning that were then in that Cittie: did not the auctor of the booke of obedience writē in Queene Ma∣ries time, affirme therein thatObed. pag. 99. and 113. and se M. Sutclyffe in his foresaid answere pa. 193. ante med. and see the booke intituled dangerous Positiōs &c. pag. 36. circa medium. Queene Marie ought to be put to death, as being a tyrant, a moster, & a cruell beast: did not one William Thomas and others accordnglie conspire toHollinsheades greate Chronicle the last editiō vo∣lume 3. pag. 1104. a. initio. murther the said Queene, and was not yet the said WilliamMaster Cowper in his Chronicle fol. 365. b. ante medium. Thomas being for that ffnce hanged, drawne, and quartered nothing abasht to iustifie and sayM. Stowe in his An∣nalls or Chronicle Printed Anno 1592. pag. 1058. paulo ante medium. at his death that he died for his Countrie: &c. As conerning our Englishe Puritanes of latter times who yet at this present (to exasperate the state against vs) do so tediously and tragically riot in their pulpitts with so much want of matter and wastfull prodigalitie of time, we will requite their malice with all sobrietie and patience forbearing purpose∣lie
at this present to mention in perticuler, what may be, and by their owne brethren already isIn M. Sutclyffes an∣swere to a lybell Supplicatory and in the treatise intitu∣led dangerous Positions and Proceedings published and practised within this Iland of Britainy vnder pretence of reformation, whereof M. Bancrofte is saide to be the Auctor. And in the booke intituled conspiracie for pretēded reformatiō, &c. printed 1592. pag. 28. 29. 30. 32. 33 35. colle∣cted in this kind against them out of their owne wri∣tinges as also wee willinglye passe ouer the like fur∣ther examles to well knowne to your Maiestie of, Knoxe, Buchanan, Andrew Melum, & those other vn∣quiet spirrits of scotland, whose Seditiouse doctrine & designeents complotted against your Maiestie, are to the world more odiouse and doubtfull, in that besides other respects, they did perpetrate the same against your Highnes, a Prince zealouse in their owne religion onely we will premonishe in generall, that the iurisdiction (more then papall) which they vnder the vaile of paretie, woud induce into euery of their seuerall parishes, is, (as her late Maiestie obserued out of her owne Princely experience)In her Maiesties O∣ration in Stowes abridg∣ment. pag. 1196. prope ini∣tium. dangerous to a Kingy rul: and to the state so much the more doubtfull and to be suspected, by how much it is euident, that manyM. Hooker in his preface to his booke of Ecclesiasticall policy, pag. 34. post. medium, saith to the Puritanes you admit so many Supremacies, as there are seuerall parishes &c. domesticke Popes a∣mong whom is no subordination, are to be reputed for more turbulent, and enabled with oportunitie to attempte the hurt by them intended, then any one forraine Pope can be: a thing so evident that certaine of the rowne brethren dubte not to affirme & say of them, thatM. D. Sutclyffe in his foresaid answere &c. pag. 192. prope initium & pag. 198. ante medium. they doe deliuer doctrine as dangerous to Princes, as Rss, Sanders, Allen, and other Papistes. A REPETITION OF CONFESSED examples prouig the Loialty of English Catholikes. SECT. 3. BVT certaine of our adversaries wil perhaps here∣to answere (which is all they can well answere) that sundrie of them doe dislike of the foresaid sediti∣ous doctrine and practises wherewith their foresaide brethren are (as before charged) and that therefore
we should greatly wrong them, if for the example of those, we should hould all of them in like sort charg∣able. Truely we acknowledge no lesse, and doe per∣swade our selues that many graue & learned amongst them, would professe and teach Loyalty to their So∣veraigne, any diversitie of religion notwithstanding. If now thē they could but afford vs the like chari∣table and indifferent censure, concerning that other foresaid doctrine wherewith they charge certaine of our writers, they should so discerne matter no lesse evident & sufficient for our excuse. To alledge ther∣fore even from themselues, that which blinded malice w ll not as now suffer certaine of thē to confesse: (& by themselues published) and first concerning our owne countrie: To omitte the knowne doctrine ofIn the epistle of Iohn Harte to the Reader, sette before the beginning of the Conferēce between Do∣ctor Raynoldes & him pub∣lished by auctoritie. Mr. Harte andIn M. Bishops booke entituled A cortuyse Confe∣ren e &c. writen by Iohn Bi∣shop a recusant Papist Prin∣ted at Londō for Robert Dex¦ter in Paules Church-yard at the signe of the Brazen Ser∣pent. Mr. Bishoppe do not the Eng∣lish Chronicles testifie concerning Salisburie, & those other (who were sinisterly seduced, to designe with Babington to the effusion of innocent & sacred blood) that sundrie of them, as namelyHllinsheades Chro∣nicle of England the last edition vol. 3. pag. 1574. b. line 8. Salisburie, andIbidem pag. 1574. b. linea. 14. 15. Dunne, did at the time of their death, (when their conscience, and religion was not to bee dissembled) publiquely and most grievously repent them of their error, diswading all Cathol ckes from attempting to restore rl gn b vilence. Did not Ioanes very earnestly as thē & to the omiseratiō of the behouldersIbidem linea. 60. pr∣test, that althgh he was a Catholicke yet he so deepely weigh∣eh libertie f his countrie as that he would be and euer was reay to sed his life in withstanding any force Italishe, Spash, or whatouer? Doth not the said Chronicle re∣port n like sort concerning he conspiracie where∣wth ar was chared, that when he came to con∣fere with the Sminarie Priestes beyond the Seas,See Hollinsheads fore∣said Chronicle volume 3. pag. 1385. b. linea 41. 42. Mr. Wats a l arned Pries plainely pronounced that it was vtterly nlawfull, with whm may Englsh Priese did agre: And that ari in his letter to our late Sove∣raigne did confsse thatIbidem pag. 1387. A. linea. 36. most of the gl s Di∣vines
did vtterly mislike & odemne it: And also that Willi∣am Chreichton the Scottish Iesuite in his private resolu∣tion thereof to ParrieIbidem pag. 1387. b. linea vult. Beyond the seas, did at sundry times answere himIbidem pag. 1388. a. linea 24. quod omnino non liceret, that it was altogether vnlawfull, and withall alledged vnto him sundry graueIbidē linea 32. &c. reasons to withdraw him frō that reported enterprise. In like maner the book entituled the execution of Iustice in England &c. penned (as some thinke by a late deceased worthyThe late Lord Trea¦surer. Magistrate of very honorable memory published by auctoritie, and now sinceIt is inserted into Hol¦linsheades foresaid Cho∣nicle volum. 3. Anno Eliz. 26. pa. 1358. & 1359. &c. inserted into the foresaid Chronicle is it not plētifull in testimonies of this kind? doth it not affirme and say, thatIbidē pag. 1360. b. linea 26. there be many subiectes knowne in the Realme, that doe not forbeare to profsse their religion & yet doe also professe Loyalty and obedience to her Maiestie, and offer readly to her Maistie defence to impugne and resist any forraine force though it should come from the Pope: In respect whereof they receued favour, & thatIbidem linea 35. of these sorts there haue beene and are a umber of persons not of base and vulgar note. A for exampleIbidem linea 40. the first and chiefe by of∣fice (saith the booke) was Doctor Hath Archbishoppe of Yorke, a faithfull and quiet sbiect▪ AlsoIbid. lin. 53. 54. &c. Doctor Poole Bishp of Peterborrow a very quiet subiect: Doctor Tunstall Bishop of Durham a person of grea reputatio; Doctor White, and Doctor Oglethorp the one of Winchester, the other of Car∣lile Bishops and he of Carlile so ined to dutifulnesse to the Queene, Maiestie as hee did the office  the Conseration and Coronation of her Maiesty. To these also are there addedIbidem linea 65. Doctor Thurlbey, and Dctr Watson the one of Eli, the other of Lincolne Bishops. Besides someIbidem linea 69. & pag. 1361. a. linea 2. Abbottes and Deans there mentioned, andIbidē pag. 1361. A. linea 61. a great number of Lay∣men of good possessions and credit in thir countrie. In like manner ourM. D. Bilson Bishop of Winchester in his true differēce betweene Chri∣stian subiectiō & vnchri∣stian rebellion part. 3. pag. 243. 244. aduersaries themselues do take no∣tice and affirme that the Comns of this Land in the reigne of King Richard the secōd did in open Parliamēt acknowledge in regard of spirituall Iurisdiction theThese words of the Comons are in the Sta∣tutes of King Richard the 2. Anno 16. C. 5. Bishoppe of Rome (to be) their most holy father and yet withall did at
the very same time expresly deny that theIn the saide Statutes vbi supra and in D. Bilson vbi supra pag. 244. ante me∣dium. Crowne of England wh ch was immediatly subiect to God and to no o∣ther in all things touching the regalitie of the saide Crowne, should be submitted to the Bishp of Rome: wherfre (say they) we will be with our said soveraigne Lord the King and his said Crowne and his regalitie in the cases aforesaid and in all other cases attempted against him his Crowne and rgalitie in all pointes to liue and die. Is it not also testified concerning controversie moved in this kind in the time of King Edward the first, that to vse Hollinsheades words hereofHollinshead in his se∣cond volume of the last e∣dition pag. 309. b. line 66. All the Lords temporall of the Land assembl d in Parlia∣ment at Lincolne in name of all the Estates there gathred did aswere (concerning) the Popes rght to beinge &c. that they would not consent that their King should doe anie thing that might tend to the disinheriting of the rght of the Crown of England: (And that)Hollinshead ibid. pag. 310. a. line 2. it was never known that the Kigs of this land had answered or ought to answere for their rights in the same Ralme fre any Iudge Ecclesiasticall or Seculer. Did not they in their letter hereof specially written to Pope Bonifac & by Hollinshead at large recited, ac∣knowledge and call Pope Boniface to whom they did so writeIbidem pag. 310. a. line 11 Boniface by Gods providence high Bishoppe of the holie Romane and vniuersall Church & themselues, hisIbidem pag. 310. a. line 14. devoute Sonnes: and did they not also (all that not∣withstāding) yet further affirme, thatIbidem. pag. 311. a. line 2. the Kings of England ought not to aunswere for their rightes in the saide Relme or for any their temporalties before any Iudge Eccle∣siasticall or Seculer by reason of the free preheminence of the estate of his Royall dgnitie and custome kept without breach at all times And thatIbidem pag. 311. a. line 9. after full treatie and deliberation it was their common agreement and consent with one minde & should be without faile in time to come that their foresaid Lord the King ought by no meanes to aunswere in iudgement nor ought to send any Proctos to the Popes presence especially see∣ing that the premises tended manifestly to the disenheriting of the Crowne of England, and alo to the hurt of the liberties & lawes of their Fathers, and the dutie of their oath made, which
(say they) we wil maintain with all our power & defēd with all our strength & will not suffer our foresaid Lord the King to doe or attempte the premisse being so vnaccustomed and before not heard of? Hitherto concerning onely those testi∣monies which our very adversaries afford vs from the Catholickes of our owne nation, wherevnto wee adde this one further observatiō cōcerning our own countrie, that whereas at the first comming to the Crowne of our late Soveraigne Queene Elizabeth, so many Bishopes as are before mētioned, and so ma∣ny other of the Clergie and Cōmons of this Realme, were all of them Catholicke, and at that time had al∣so the publique state and government setled in that course, and so thereby were of force (no doubte) suf∣ficient to haue impugned and withstood the alterati∣on then evidētly foreseene to ensue, they did yet her Maiesties knowne professed diuersitie of religiō not∣withstanding) generally and without resistance re∣ceiue her withallFor the Lord Arch∣bishop and Chancellor of England being a Catho∣licke made a publique O∣ratiō to persuade the peo∣ple to acknowledge her Maiestie for their Queen. Hllinshead vbi supra pa. 1170. a. lin. 35 36. &c. and the Lords and Bishoppes with al speed repaired in∣to London to proclayme her: Hollinsheade vbi supra pag. 1170 b. linea 15. Loyall and dutifull respect, whereas yet againe in cleare example to the contra∣rie, it is evident that Queene Marie came to the Crowne not without open resistance, & endured af∣terwards moe knowneCōcerning open re¦bellions in the fielde in Queene Maries time, M. Stowe in his Annalls prin∣ted 1592. mentioneth the rebellion thē made by the Duke of Northumberlād, & his cōplices pag. 1039. and pag. 1045. circa med. he mentioneth howe that Cranmer Archbishoppe of Canterbury was condem∣ned for high treason. Also pa. 1046. post med. & 1047 &c. He mentioneth the re¦behō made by Wat & his confederates, & pag. 1070 he mētioneth the rebelli∣on made by Tho. Stafforde & others, and their taking of Scarborowe Castle. rebellions in opē field within the Realme during but those fiue yeares of her short government, then were after in the fiue and fortie succeeding of her late Maiesties reigne: wher∣to might be likewise added the severall notable and violent mibehaviours of those times, done (to omitte other) even to the publique preacherM. Stowe vbi supra, mentioneth pa. 1039. ini∣tio, how at one time a dag¦ger was throwne at the prea∣cher at Paules Crosse & pag. 1058. paulo post med that at another time a Gunne was shotte at the Preacher there, the pellet whereof went verie neere him. at Paules Crosse, the like whereof to haue beene committed by Catholickes would haue appeared verie strange du∣ring the Reigne of Queene Elizabeth.
A LIKE REPETITION OF CON∣fessed examples proving the Loialtie of forreyne Catholickes. SECT. 4. Novv concerning forraine examples do not our adversaries affirme and confesse that the Frēch King,M.D. Bilson vbi supra part. 3. pag. 223. paulo ante medium. Phillippe the faie resolutely withstood the Pope with all his interdictions and depositions: that likewise con∣cerning the EmperourM.D. Bilson vbi supra part. 3. pag. 215. fine and 216. initio & Naucler Ge∣ner. 43. Anno 1344. Lodowick the fourth, the Prin¦ces and Bishoppes of Germanie signified their generall determi∣nation to him in these wordes. Most gracious Lord, the Princes electors, and other faithfull of your Empire pervsing the arti∣cles of your submisison, which the Pope requireth, and resteth on, with one consent haue decreede them to bee conceiued to the sbuersion and overthrow of the Empire, so that neither you nor they by reason of the oath you haue taken to the Empire can yeeld to the, & they intēd to send Orators to the Pope, & to the Colledge of Cardinals to request him to cease frō this course, if they reuse, your Princes are resolved to meete at Rhens vpon Rhene there to deliberate with you for the further resisting of these practises doth not D. Bilson further confesse & af∣firme thatibidem part. 3. pag. 212. circa medium in the margent there. all the Prelats & Princes of Germany tooke with Lodowicke against the Pope, & that vpōIbidē pag. 212. post med. & Naucler gener. 45. anno 1338. groūds (of the Popes) owne Canon, as namely these the Prince hath his dominion not from the Pope but onely from God? And do not our aduersaries in like sorte affirme and acknowledge asmuch touching the Emperours Fre∣derickeConcerning Frede∣ricke the second, see M.D. Bilson vbi supra part. 3. pa. 187. fine & Vsperg. in anno 1227. And hereof see fur∣ther M. Bilson part. 3. pag. 206. initio, and pag. 207. ante & circa medium, 173. ante medium & fine. the second and HenryConcerning Henrie the fourth, Osiander in epi∣tom hist Eccles. cent. 11. pag. 193. fine and pag. 223. cir∣ca med. testifieth his publi∣que defence made by Wezilo Bishop of Mentz and Sige∣bert the Moncke, notwith∣stāding the Popes former ex∣communication. the forth? doe the not in like manner take further notice and say, thatD. Blson vbi supra part. 1. pag. 130. circa medium, and part. 3. pag. 233. ante medium, & Chronicon Masse in Anno 1510. And see further hereof Crispinus in his book of the state of the Church pag. 495 circa med. and Crispinus vbi supra, addeth further, howe that it was by the same Councell agreede that the Pragmaticke Sanction should be kepte throughout Fraūce, notwith∣standing the Popes excommunication. Lewes the twelueth in a councell at Towers had the
resolution of all the French Bishoppes, that he might contemne the Popes iniust censures: that alsoSee the Historie of the civill warres of Fraūce from Anno 1585. till 1591. printed 1591. pag 58. circa medium. the Senate of Paris hauing considered vpon the Popes excomunication, did Anno 1585, reproue the Pope for vsurping vpon the liberties of the Crowne of Frane, and condemned the excomunication: that likewise (as Mr. Bilson affirmethAffirmed by Doctor Bilson vbi supra, pag. 4. fine. Thomas Aquinas had this moderatiō, that Princes should no lose their dominiō for heresie, wherwith even Cardinal Bellarmine himselfe (who is most cha ged he ein by our aduersaries) see∣meth yet so farre to assēt, as that he maketh the King subiect to censure, but conditionllyBellarmine tom. 1. lib. 5 de Romano Pontf. cap. 7. if he goe about to drawe by frce his subiectes to heresie and infideliti: affir∣ming also thatBellarmine ibidem. if Princes doe not endevour this, but permit liberty of cōscience to their subiects, thē (saith he) Non existimo posse eos priuari Dominio suo. I thinke they may nt be depriued of their dominion for he acknowledg∣eth the PopeBellarmine ibidē cap. 4. the title of that chapter being, Papam nō habere vl∣lam temporalem Iurisdictio∣nem directe. to haue (in this case) no temporall iuris∣diction directly but onlyBellarmine ibidē cap. 7. ante medium. quando alter non potest bonū spirituale tueri: when he cannot otherwise preserue the spiri∣tuall good: in so much as hee doubteth not to affirme thatBellarm. lib. 2. de Ro∣mano Pontifice. cap. 29. ve∣sus finem. it is lawful to resist the Pope invading the bodie, or troubling the common wealth: it is lawfull I say (saith he) to resist him by no doing that which he commauneth, and by letting or hindring him that hee execute not his will: where∣vnto might be added as well the lateSee this at large in the civill warres of France in English, collected by Anthony Collnet. from An. 1585. till 1591. printed at London 1591. lib. 7. & 8. examples yet fresh in memorie of the Catholickes of Fraunce who not onely acknowledged but also assisted, and ayded this their present King notwithstanding his then knowne diversit of religion or any former ex∣communication hd frō the Popes As also the King of Spaines no lesse knone detayning (even to this day) of Naples against the Pope notwithstāding the Popes yearely clayming of it n the right of his See. And thus much briefely cōcerning such forraine ex∣amples as are alledged and acknowledged by our owne adversaries Onely wee thnke this one point further worthie of observation. That whereas it is
manifest and confessed that sundrie Catholike Prin∣ces haue beene by their Protestant subiects actuallie deposed as your Highnes late Mother frō her king∣dme of Scotland; (which we referre to your Maie∣stes owne more feelingHowe they vsed that poore Ladie my mother is not vnknowne, and with griefe I may remember it: who desi∣red onely a private Chappell wherin to serue God after her manner with some fewe sele∣cted persons, but could not obteine it at their hands: in the summe of the Confe∣rence before his Maiestie betweene the Bishops & other of his Clergie prin∣ted 1584. pag 81. fine, & 82 initio. testimonie) the tempo∣rall Lord of Geneua from his territories there, & to forbeare the examples of the Lowe Countries) the KingHereof see hereto∣fore, tract. 3. sect. 2. in the margent at the letter c. of Suethland restrained as before to his private Catholike service n his owne Chappell, we finde not yet on the other parte, that so much as any one Protestāt Prince, was t any tme deposed by his Catholike subiects so different re the spirits of Ca∣tholikes and Protesants: & yet is it evdēt that Pro∣testnts hue received their cefest beginning, in∣crease and strength, by the onely favou & tolleati∣on of their Catolike Princes. A PROTESTATION OF THE now English Catholickes. SECT. 5. AS concerning our selues we hould that the au∣thoritie giuen by God to Kings, is imediate, ab∣soute, and ndependant and wee doe acknowledge from the Scripures, that asRom. 13, 1. there is no power but from God, so likewise that vntoWisdom. 6, 3. King rule is giuen by the Lord, and powr by h most High, thatProv. 8, 15. by him Kings doe reigne, as beingRom. 13, 4, 6. his minister: and thatRom. 13, 2. who∣sovr rsisteh them, d h withall resist he ordinance of God: Hen e it is that we are commaunded toMath. 22, 21. & Rom. 13, 7. rēder vn∣to Caesar the tribute of or obedience: to be1. Pet. 2, 13. subiect to the king as hauing preeminence toProv. 24, 21. eare, &1. Pet. 21, 17. ho∣nor himExod. 22, 28. Act. 13, 5. not to speake evl of him, no not so much as in ourEccles. 10, 20. thought, to imagine his hurte; but to beeRom. 13, 5. subiect of ne essiti and even for conscence sake. Least that by our disobedience weeRom. 13, 2. purchase to our
selues domnation. In so much as we doubte not further to affirme with our brethren the Rhemistes, thatSee the Rhemish Te∣stament and the Annot. therein. Rom. cap. 13. vers. 2. after M. Fulkes edition, fol. 259. a paulo post med. Christians are bound in conscience to obey (even) their heathen Emperours: Herevpon it is that wee differ n doctrine from our adversaries.See Bellarmin. lib. 3. de Laiis cap 10. & 11. maintaining a∣gainst them & their contraieLuther de Seculari potestate, in tom. 6. Ger∣manico saith, among Chri∣stians no man can or ought to be Magistrate but each one is to other equally subiect &c. among Cristian men none is superiour saue one and onelie Christ: And in serm. de oe perdita, & also in his ser∣mons Englished by Wlli∣am Gage. pag. 97. fine. Lu∣ther further saith, therefore is Christ our Lorde that hee may make vs such as himself is, & as he cānot suffer him∣selfe to be tde and bound y Lawes &c so also ought not the consie c of a Christian to suffer them. And in hi said sermons pag. 261. cir∣ca med. he doth adon s that we obey the Cvll Ma∣gistrate, fr (saith he) there commeth no losse of Christan libertie or faith thereby: for forsomuch as they do not contend that those things are necessarie to salvaton which they ordaine &c. howbeit, if any should contende that those commandem nts of the Civill Magsrate be necessarie to salvation (as doubtlesse they be in regard that they binde vs in onsince, and to breake them were sinne) then as it is saide of the tradtons of the Papsts, the otrari rather were to be done. And M. Whitaker doubteth not to maintaine this doctino. Luther, teaching vs obedience of policie rather then conscience. For whereas Luther is h d to say absurdly. Christiani liberi sunt a statutis hominum M. Wtaker explneth and deendth the samesaying liberi Christiani snt non vt nllis legiu ob∣temperent,  {que} sempr vn, s  vd conscientia: mentes{que} sua, legum humanrum religone libera∣t se nllgant. W ita r ss. ad atines Campiant rat. 8. pag. 154. circa medium. And se this lk octrine in Danau, in prima partes atera arte cotra Bel armnm pag. 1127 assertion t at the Civill Magistrates Lawes made of things lawfull or indifferent doe binde vs even in consence And frō this sured ground-worke proceedeth likewise that reverend and religious respect of loue and duetie, wherewith we doe admire your royall Maiestie, and hence lastlie it is that we do as now in most humble remonstrance and testmonie of our Loyaltie ac∣knowledge and recognize, even with vnspeakeable ioy to our selues and all due thankefunes therefore to od, that your HIGHNES is our true vndoubted lawfull Soveraigne Lord & King, in whom is fulfil∣led the succefull and blessed event of a most graue and prdentIn regard d oeight of this which ow is h pely conne to passe K. Henrie 7. eowsed his eldest ugh to Iams King of Sola, Anno 1502. foresight, and we thereby enrich∣ed with the most happie vnion of our long devided continent, by whom only also and no other, our dea∣rest countie may enioy her established and sweetest eace, avoiding so, that dreadfull confusion and tur∣bulencie of state, which otherwise our former feares haue of long imagined: and vnto whom only there∣fore immediately and next vnder God, we are by all
lawes divine and humane obliged in the highest de∣gree of all earthly alleageāce: To the inviolable ob∣serving whereof, against the ambitious claime or cō∣petencie of all pretenders whatsoever forraine or domesticall, we do hereby (as in the presence of God and his Angels) most seriously, and sincerely protest vpon our soules: most humbly this one for ever: im∣ploring of your Maiestie, that whereas the auncient enemie of our Catholike faith (obseruing the weake∣nes of such as are most apte to bee seduced) will (in dscredite of our religion) still busie himselfe withMath. 13, 24. Sowing of tares amongest the whate. If therefore (as God forbid) and we strongly hope the contrarie, any one or other vnquiet spirit should arise and1. Ioh. 2, 19. & Act. 15, 24. goe forth from vs (as amongest theIohn. 6, 70. chosen twelue one was a divell) whose least error or indiscretion our poli∣ticke adversaries (over greedy of our discredit) would drawe on and agravate against vs with all tragicall & immoderate amplification, your HIGHNES would yet in your Princely and rightfull Iudgment, distin∣guish the fault from the religiō, retorning (which we wish most severely, the offence and punishmēt ther∣of vpon the offender himselfe according to the lawes in that behalfe p ovided without imputation thereof to vs, or further scandall to our profession. THAT THE ARGVMENT DRAWNE frm the Confession of the Adversaries is stronge, with a bref repetitiō of the principall points throughout al thse severall tractes, all of them proved by the testimony & confession f larned Protestants, with an hūbe Pettio for private tolleration SECT. 6. FO so much as our lened aduersaries do afrme, h tAcademiae Nmansis respons. ad professorum ur∣noniorum Societatis Iesu as∣sertionis &c pag. 84. saith, magnae profct nustriae st ex ipsius aversar erbis ad∣versarium convincere. it s grate eee of wo k to couince the ad∣ueae from himsee: And M. D. Whitaker saith c∣cordingly,
M. Whitaker de Ec∣clesia Controu. 2. quaest 5. cap. 14. initio pa. 366. saith Decimam tertiam notam statuit Bellarminus adver∣sariorum cōfessionem, fir∣mum certè sit necesse est argumentum illad, quod hinc sumitur: &c. efficax enim erit adversariorū ip∣sorum contra ipsos testi∣monium &c. et quidem fa∣teor veritatē etiam & suis inimicis testimonium ex∣torquere &c. the argument must needes be strong which is taken frō the confession of the aduersaries, for the confession of the adversaries against themselues is effectuall, and true∣ly (saith he) I do acknowledge that the truth enforceth testi∣monie from her enemies. And since also most gratious Soueraigne) that we haue in this dscourse (forbea∣ring or other plentifull helpes) restrained our selues to this inequality or precisenes of Method, & rig∣ing so forth as the Prohet saithEsay. 19, 2. the Aeiptians against the Ag ptians, haue to the more euident set∣ting forth of the equitie of this ou most humble sup∣plication accordingly shewed euen by the frequent and manifest onfession of our learned aduersaies. First, that we English men were aboue a thousandHeretofore tract. 1. sect. 1. initio. yeares since conuerted by Gregorie and Austin to our now professed Catholicke faith, 2 Secondly that the same faith was as yet much more ancient and longTract. 1. sect. 2. pag. 5. initio. before that time vniuersally professed 3 Thirdly that it carrieth with it greatTract. 1. sect. 2. ante & post medium & sect. 3. probabli∣ties to haue begun euen in the Apostles time, & is so thereby cleared from that note of noueltie, which yourFor my part I know not how to answere the obiectiōs of the Papists whē they charg vs with novelties, but truelie to tell them that their abuses are new: in the Summe of the Conferēce before the Kings Maiestie, pag. 73. ante medium. Maiesty most religiouly seemeth to dislike in what profession soeuer. 4 Fourthly that the argu∣ment of true miracles isTract. 1. sect. 5. paulo post initium. strong and certaine, and that our faith is confessed to haue beene accordinglyTract. 1. sect. 5. pag. 35 and in the margent at the make * confirmed with such 5 Fiftly, that the hopefull promises ofTract. 1. sect. 6. pa. 40. 41. 42. 43. & 44. saluation do appertaine to it 6 Six∣ly that the Romane Church being conuerted in te Apostles time did neuerHeretofore tract. 1 sect. 7. & sect. 8. since make change of her religion: Since also we haue by like testimonie of our adversaries further shewed in the 2. tract of this discourse. 1 First that the Prophets do foretell how that Christs true Church mst after her first inceaseTract. 2. c. 1 sect. 1. pag. 74. & 75 at a. b. c. d. contnue Cathol cke and niversall & mst like∣wise wth gret and prosperos successe convertHeretofore tract. 2. ca 1. sct. 1. pag. 74. & pag. 75. at q. many nations nd Kngs of te Gentiles fom paganisme to the faith of Chist. 2 Secondly that d∣ring
the first 300. yeares after Christ these predictiōs wereHeretofore tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 2. initio. pag. 76. not performed by reaon of the persecuti∣ons that as then raged 3 Thirdly that the performāce of them was begunne butTra. 2. c. 1. sect. 2. cir∣ca & post med. pa. 76. et 77. not accomplished du∣ring the second 300. yeares after Christ, and howso∣ever it were as then either begunne or accomplished, yet was it done by ourTract. 2. c. 1. sect. 3. pa. 77. 78. 79. 80. Catholike, and not their Protestant Church (4) Fourhly that after the saide second 00. yeares euen till Luthers time, the pro∣testants Church was so farre from performing the saide predictions, that during all that time and long before, it is confessed to haue remainedHeretofore tra. 2. c. 1 sect 4. pag 81. 82. 83. inuisible our Church neuerthelesse during all the saide time conuerting theTract. 2. c. 1. sect. 4. pa. 81. in the margent at the marke *. and pag 83. at q. r. and 82. at n. o. p. Kings, and nations of the Gen∣tes 5 ify that the manifest and confessed defect of the protestants Church in not performing of the saide predictions, aduātageth theTra. 2. c. 1. sect. 5. ante medium pag 85. Iewes against them, in so much as it made their learnedTra. 2. c. 1. sect. 5. pau∣lo post med. pag. 86. at d. e. Casta∣li to stagger in his faith, and DavidTra. 2. c. 1. sect. 5. pro∣pe finem pag. 86. at f. George to re∣volte frm them to plaine apostasie: Since also in the same seond tract we haue likewise further shewed from the like testimonie of our learned advesaries. 1 First that Christs true Church can neverHeretofore tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. initio pag. 91. at z. a. b. c. d. want Pastors and Doctors that these shalltract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. cir∣ca med. pag. 92 at p. q. r. alwaies resist f l e dctrine with open reprehension: that also the true Church can never be withoutTra. 2. c. 2. sect. 1 paulo p st medium pag. 92. at y. the administration of the Word and sacraments thatIidem pag. 92. at z. the onely absence of them dth make a nll tie of the Church. and thatIbidem prope finem pa. 93. at c. thse notes are needefull to distigish the true Church from the false, that men careful of heir salvatio may know where the true Church is a d t which companie they o ght to ahere: 2 Secondly that th comon ins anes or examples ofTract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 3. pag. 98. WaldoTract. 2. cap. 2. sct. 4. pag. 105. ic iffe,Tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 5. pag. 109. Huse,Tact. 2. cap. 2 sect. 10. pag. 126. 127. &c. at s ct. 11. Luther & teir followers alledgd al y romance hereof are foūd in∣sufcient to pro a continuance of these prem sses, but so much as for those times in which they first be∣gunne or lued, and that noHeretofore tra. 2. c. 2 sect. 7. pag. 115. 116. 17. 118. 119. & 120. sufficient example
thereof during those times and sundry other ages be∣fore can be giuen 3 Thirdly that in steed of example in this kin to be alledged, it is confessed to the con∣trarie that the Protestants Church hath during all those ages, & many other before remainedHeretofore tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 4. ante & circa med. pag. 83. at t.u. & pag. 82. at o. La∣tent and invisible, and that our Church hath neverthe∣lesse during all the same time continuedTract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 4. pag. 83. at r.s. visible, reigning vniversally &c. 4 Furt ly (whch only point is sufficiēt to cōvince our adversaries that no known example can bee funde hereof but during the lastTract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11. twentie yeare next before Luther, whch are yet in the memorie of this presentage, our adversaries ac∣knowleeging to the contrarie, thatHeretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11. pag. e. the truth was at that time vnknowne and vnheard of; and that as thenVide ibidem. an vniuersal apostasie over spread the whole face of the earthIbidem. all Churches being as the overwhelmed with more then Cimeriā darkne. 5 Fifthly that therfore for the pre∣servation of Christs true Church (which is confessedHeretofore tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 13. initio and in the margent there at the let∣ter r. never to faile so much as for any one moment of time:) sundrie of our learned adversaries doe acknowledge that Luther thogh being before his first preaching against the Pope a confessed earnest Catholike, did yet neverthelesse after his saide preaching against the Pope notHeretofore tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 13. y. & also in the margent there at the let∣ter y. & ibidē in the mar∣gent at the letter z. erect any new Church, or become mem∣ber of any other Church thē before not in being but remained stil a member of he same Catholike or Po∣pish Church withoutHeretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 13. b. c. departing from it, & so with∣all, that the Popsh Church,Tra. 2. cap. 2. sect 13. versus finem & tra. 1. sct. 6. post medium pag 40 e. f. is the Church of God, and the religion th reof sufficient toTract. 1. sect 6. versus finem pag. 40. at m.n. Salvation: All whih premisses hae beene heretofore proved frō the fequēt fesson of our learned adversaries. Since al we for our arts do hereby most seriously and as n the presence of God, professe (according to your Highnes gra e and meorableBasilicon doron. in prae∣fat. pruision to content our selues sobly and quely with our owne opini∣ons, not resisting athority, but to psessur sles in peace &c. and are accordingly in good hope that there
will appeare to your Maieistie iust cause to moue your highnes (in your Princely wisedome) so much the rather to obserue towards vs, this worthie and kingly sayingIbidem. that it can no waies become to pronoūce so gh be sentence in so olde a controversie: By how much it is by so many confessed premises made evidēt, that our doctrin is vndoubtedly more olde then was any question of that other doctrine) or in comparison ra∣ther innovation) whereto your Maiestie vochsafed this gracious favour. Since Lastlie the obiection of dis∣loalty vrged against vs by our adversaries, is retor∣tedHeretofore tract. 3. sect. 2. fully vpon themseles, & we foundHeretofore tract. 3. sect. 3. & 4. & 5. to deserue at the least) as wel as they, some part of that princely favour, which they (without our repyning thereat) in reater measure doe enioy, therefore all postrat before your royal Maiestie, we do most hū∣blie pray, even by our holy communiō of faith with her whose soule is now blessed in heauen, & her me∣morie vpon the earth to your Maiestie most deare and to vs reverend, and by the most humble in∣tercessin of our allegeance, and ever resolved loyal∣tie, that your Highnes would of your princely cle∣mencie graunt vs so much favour, as the vndoubted example of all former and present times, and the cō∣fessed Doctrine both of Fathers and Protestantes,Hereof M. Covell in his examination &c. pag. 199. post med. saith, Con∣cerning the Iewes, a Prince may lawfully permitte them to dwell in his kingdome &c. the lawes of the Emperours haue permitted the like, and some of the fathers, but spe∣ciall S. Austine was so fa∣vourable to them, that he al∣ledgeth severall reasons for the doing of it &c. And Pe∣ter Martyr in his Comon places in Engli, part. 2. pag. 329. b. fine, affirmeth likewise that they may be tollerated among Christians, & haue also Sinagoges &c. But it is not lawful to grant vnto Turkes religous assem∣blies. affordeth evē to the misbeleeuing Iewes, vouch∣safeing so, (for our humble thoughts presume no higher) but that we might adoreAct. 3, 13. the God of our Faers, with our private freedome and libertie of cō∣science The integritie of our anciēt Cathoike faith, and confessed current of so many former ages, spent in profession thereof from the time of our Countries fist cnveron, with all honour to your Maiesties most noble auncestors, can in our opinion no lesse then claime it. The distressed and miserable conditi∣on of so many your Catholike and Loyall subiectes altogether needeth it: our long contnued hopes of
your princely clemencie, with cheerefull expectation of milder times to ensue vnder your Highne happie Reigne, presume with all hmble respect, to de∣maund it. The many yet standing monuments of sa∣cred Churche & Colledges, erected by our Catho∣like auncestors for the oney profession of our fa th, & now since impropriated to our adversaries, make (in their kinde most religious and mournefull inter∣cession for it. The doctrine of so many learned Pro∣testants, who) teachM. Hayward in his answere to R. Dolman de∣dicated to your Maiestie cap. 9. paulo post medium sith, all the chefe writers of our age are nowe reduced to the former opinion affir∣ming with Tertullin, La∣ctantiu, Cassiodorus, Ios∣phus, Bernard, & others that religion must bee perswaded not enforced: Tindall in the Acts & Monuments pag. 1338. a. initio, saith, the new Testament of Christ wil not suffer any law of cōpulsiō but onely of councell and ex∣hortation. And ibidem pa. 1337. b. post mediū. And ibidem pag. 1152. b. fine. Haukes saith to Bisop Bo∣ner, where proue you that Christ or his Apostles did kill any man for his faith: Alo Iacobus Acontius stratage∣matu satanae libri octo, iscourcing at large of this point saith, consequens ergo est manere quidem suo in vigore vetem legem aut certè renouarsi ilem poss, n{que} tmen ermitti haereticorum supplicia quia videlicet ali sit apostatae, lia haertici cs (pag. 158. initio.) And further, Dominus profecto definitè decluit magistratus non esse idonos dogmatum Iudices, interdixit{que} illis talis Iurisdictionis vsu mni (pag. 160. circ med.) and pag. 161. circa med. hee farther saith hereof, haec quidem Iudiciorum genr d magistratum non per∣tinent, sed ad solum Dei filium, qui in nouissio die per angeos sos seperatus sitt itico zzan, with much more against all punishment fr Chrstian religion. And Vrbanus Regius i loc. theolog fol. 117. c. ath hereof, Christianorum Spiritus combuit tantum igne chrittis &. Deus non docet comburre eants ouiculas, sed Ezechil, 34. sanare infirmas, mailts pascere &c. And Luther in assrtionibus art. 33. de non comburendis haereticis, maeth a speciall dsours in proofe thereof. And Castalio in his Preface vpon the Bible to K. Edward the sixe affirmeth the same doctrin; & so ikwise dth Coelius Secundus Curio in libo de amplitudine reg∣ni Dei lib. 2. pag. 216. And rancisus Gomaus in speculo vrae Ecclsiae pg. 227. & 229. And M. Marbecke in his Comon places pag. 483. & 484. that no man ought to bee compelled or suffer for his faith, prescribeth it: The graver Iudgment of our forenamed learned adversa∣ries who acknowledge our Catholike Church to bee a trueSee heretofore pa 4. e. f h. Church, and or religion for sfficentHre∣tofore pag. 40 at m.n. to salvation maketh ost clearely fr it. The poi∣cy of the time and succesfu l event, vpon like exam∣plesSee in Luc. siander eptom hist. eccl. centu. 16. sundrie ea∣ples of tolloration as namely in Fraunce, pa. 1135. fine. & 1136. initio. & pag. 816. & 713 & 750. & 735 fine. & 718. And in Liuona pg 950. initio, and in Gem ie pag. 629. & 630. & pag. 598. An of Gmanie see farther the Protstant wrter Dresserus in pate secūda Millenrij texti, were he saith, (pag. 659 initio.) Anno 52. pax profitentibus Augustanm Confessionem perptua concss st &c. And (pag. 661. ante medium) he further sai, it was agreede v, ea quidem lege & conditione vt Pontificij qui ante in sectati religionē Evangelicam er, insctari desisterent, & contra, Evanglici qui religonem Pontificiam abroarant des à tali abrogatione abstinerent, caueret{que} vtra{que} pars ne in suis dominijs quenquam ad iuae religionis professionem cogat, aut à religione quam proftetur contra ipsius conscientim ∣voct ut depllat, And pag. 666. ante med. he saith (in allowance thereof) ne hic metuo eo∣rume hensionem qui putant non nisi vnam religionē esse ferandā &c. And M. D. lke lib. dsccessione Ecclesiastica &c. pag. 285. & 286. giueth very many examples of tolleration guen by Catholike Magistrates to Protestants: in so much as hee doubteth not to say futher: Hi∣pnirum Rex vnicus est inter omnes Europae reges tam alienus à nobis, vt nec foueat, nec plm coire ecclesias permittat in suis ditionibus ibid. pag. 285. fine. And see further Chtraeus in his Chron. An 93.94. & 95. pag. 74. & 75. & 76. cōcerning tolleratiō in the kingdome of Sue∣cia, and concerning like tolleration in Fraunce, see l. edit du roy sur la Pacification des trobles deroy me. Anno 1576. And see likewise the Kings edict published in Paris, 25. Februarie 1599. gid and printed Anno 1599. And see the like example of tolleration in Heluetia in the booke entituled, Centuri Epistolum theologicarum Epist. 39. Martini Buceri pag. 123. and 1.4. wherevnto might be added the knowne example of like tolleration in Poland. had of tolleration in other countries strōg∣ly perswadeth it And (aboue all the generall care of Chrstian pofession, and long desired peace of so many Christiā kingdome, disturbed (to the Turkes
great advancemētconcerning coūtries which the Turke hath gotten by our discention, for former times read the oration of the Frēch Em∣bassador in M. Sleydanes Comentaries in English, lib. 14. fol. 187. a. b. And M. D. Humfrey in Iesuitis∣mi part. 2. rat. 3. pag. 286. And for latter times see Chitraeus his Chronicon. Ann 1593. & 1594. And see the treatize entituled (ad Principes populum{que} Christianum de Bello adver∣sus Turcas gerendo &c. Gui∣lielmi Brusij cōcilium Lip∣siae. 1595. & hinderanceM. Foxe in his Actes and Monuments Printed. 1576 in his Alphabetical table at the word discorde sheweth (with particuler references thereof to his booke) that discord brought the Turke in∣to Hūgary 727. 695. And giueth him st ē tha ast Christēdome, 712. 998. spoileth Germanie 317. & Christendome, 314. of Chri∣stians) with intestiue division, for the appeasing and reconcileing whereof (to the full enabling of a most holie and needefullConcerning the important necessitie hereof reade the ora∣tion mde by Dressus a learned Protestnt entituled de bello Turcico oratio mathae Dressers in Accademia sica printed 1598. And se the treatize intituled the Ottoman of Lazaro Soranzo published in english by M. Abr. Hartwell An. 1603. in his epist. dedicat. to the L. Archbish. of Cntrbury irca md m. & see in the treatize part. 3. c. 33. fol. 106. b. 107. a. vndertaken warre against that hatefull monster to od & man, whose procee∣dings Luther and some other Protestantes haue over indisretely (if not favoured yethereof see heretofore tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. initio, pag 127. furthered, your Maiestie being in happy league with thē all, is there∣fore and otherwie the most orthie honorable and able instrumēt, most instantly vrgeth & requireth it. CONCERNING THE EVIDENT INCER∣tainety & disagreement of Protestants in their faith and the reason & particuler examples thereof with a like humble Petition therevpon for disputation. SECT. 7. AND now lastly, for so much as our learned ad∣versaries do hould. 1 First that cōcerning mat∣ter
of faith, theyM. W llet in his Sy∣nopsis pag. 38. initio saith, the Scripture is not one of the meanes, but the sole, whole, & only means to work faith. are to beleeue nothing for cer∣taine but the holy Scriptures onely 2 Secondly thatM. D. Raynolds in his Conference with Harte. pag 68. ante medium. it is not the shewe but the sence of the wordes (of Scrip∣ture) that must decide controversies: and that herein the Scripture doth notM. Hooker in his Ec∣clesiasticall Policie lib. 2. pag. 116. paulo ante medium saith the Scripture could not teach vs the thinges that are of God, vnlesse we did credit mē who haue taught vs, that the word of Scripture do sig¦nifie those thinges. instruct them of it selfe, but only by certaineM.D. Whitaker de Sa∣cra Scriptura. pag. 521. cir∣ca medium. saith, nam quā∣do Scriptura nō habet vi∣vam vocem quam audia∣mus, vtenuum est quibus∣dam medijs, quibus in ve∣stigamus quid sit  nsus, quae mens Scripturarum And in his book de Ecclesi cōtra Bellarminum cōtrou. 2. quaest. 4. pag. 221. ante med. demaunding of vs if we affirme the Church to interpret the Scripture without meanes saith Si sine medijs dixerunt est & Anabaptisticum. meanes on their behalfe to be ob∣served. 3 Thirdly that these means are affirmed to be theirM. D. Raynolds in his conference pag. 83. 84. 92. 98. 99. and M. Whitaker de Sacra Scriptura. pag. 521. 522. 523. reeding thereof, their confrences of places, their weying of the circumstāces of the text, their skill in the tongues, their dilignce, prayer: and such like, in which if they erre, they do also thereby erre in the r vnderstanding of the Scriptures. 4 Fourthly that these being actiōs on their behale are but humane indeavours & such wherein every man (wthout extraordinarie privi∣ledge from God) is subiect toLubbertus de Principijs Christian. dog. pag. 563. initio saith of the lerd interpreters, Hos omnes vt interpretando errare poste ostendimus, ita etiam in iudicando errare posse asserimus. And Hierome Zanchius de Sacra Scriptura pag. 411. fine & 412. initio saith of thē, cum Iudicio eos audiamus prsu si eos esse homines, & potuss ac poste errare. error oversight & mans infirmitie (all his prayer and possible diligence notwithstanding.) 5 Fifthly that in full demonstra∣tion hereof, aswell MartineM. Bridge in his defence o the Government &c. pag. 559. & M. Perkines in his foure treatizes tract. How to applie Gods word &c. sct. 10. initi. Luther, (whom them∣selues acknowledge to beApolog. Angl. part. 4. c 4.2. a man sent of God to ligh∣ten the worldFx in his Actes & Monuments pag. 416. a. initio. the Hlias condctor and chariot of Israell whose calling they thinkeAretius Loc. Comun. loc. 63. pag. 198. circa medium. And Danaeus in Isagog. Christian. part. 4. lib. 2. pag. 36. initio. extraordinarie and spe∣cialyThe booke entituled Anticrstus, sive Prognsti. finis mundi pag. 12. 13. & 86. fine. And Schluse burg. in Cai Haeret. lib. 13 & vit. pag. 314 and 316 fine. foreshewed the Scriptures: & since foretold in like manner, byAct. Mn. pag. 399. b. initio. and  in Apca. pag. 324. sndry Prophecie, that went of him himselfe being furthermore affirmed to beleydane in Engli. 101. 222. b. paulo post medium. and see the margent there. a Pro∣phet,
and most assured andLuther adversus falso nominatum Ecclesiasticū statum saith, scire vos vo∣lo quod in posterum non amplius vos hoc honore dignabor, vt sinam vel vos vel ipsos angelos de coelo, de mea doctrina iudicare &c. nec volo meā doctri∣nam à quoquam iudicari, at{que} adeò ne ab angelis quidem: cum enim certus deea sim, per eam quo{que} & vester & angelorum iu∣dex esse volo. certaine of this doctrine, and likewiseM. Whitguift in his defence of the answere to the admonition pag. 201 circa med. And M. Sparke in his answere to M. Iohn d' Al∣bines pag. 107. initio. Calvine,M. D. Sutclyffe and D. Sarauia haue writē whole treatizes hereof against Be∣za. Beza,In M. Whitguifts defence &c. pag. 522. initio M. Cartwright saith: Bucer though otherwise very lear∣ned hath grosse absurdities. Bucer &c. and sundrie of theM.D. Fulke in his an∣swere to a coūterfeite Catho∣like pag. 35. & 87. & Go∣marus in speculo verae Ec∣clesiae Christi. pa. 93. &. 94 auncient Fathers: and GenerallM. Fulke ibidem pag. 89. & 90. and M. Willet in his Synopsis pag. 92. Councels are accordingly affirmed to haue erred notwithstanding all their prayer and possible dili∣gence in conferring the Scriptures: As also it is fur∣ther taught that evenM. Fulke vbi supra pag. 86. fine. the whole Church millitant may erre altogether as every part thereof. These being the con∣fessed grounds and principles of our adversaries do∣ctrine, they do appeare to be no other, but as it were) lincked chaines or naked convections of vnavoida∣ble incertainetie, and being such, can therefore afford to our adversaries not assured knowledge or certain∣ty of faithM. Whitaker de Ec∣clesia contra Bellarminum controu. 2. quaest. 4. pag. 221. paulo post. med. saith hereof, qualia illa media sunt, talem ipsam interpretationē este ne∣cesse est, at media interpretandi loca obscura sunt incerta, dubia, & ambigua, ergo fieri non potest quin & ipsa etiam interpretatio incerta sit, si incerta, tunc esse potest falsa: &c. But according to the nature of theseues a necessarie doubtfulnes and incertaintie of opinion: for al∣beit that the Scriptures be in themselues certane in∣fallible, and free from eror, yet what can this pretēce thereof availe to free our adversaries frō incertaintie, seing it is euident & by them cōfessed that the Scrip∣tures instruct them not otherwise, thē by the foresaid meanes on their behalfe to be obserued, & that their obseruation of those meanes is but humaine & subiect to error, and that accordingly Luther & many other (notwithstanding all their diligent and careful obser∣vation of the saide meanes) haue grievousely erred e∣ven in those points wherof they thought themselues so cleerely certaine, that sundrie of them haue not doubted to testifie the same with their blood, and yet indeed were therein (as our adversaries confesse) but incertaine and deceiued as also of others who haue thought themselues no lesse certaine, some haue ne∣verthelesse afterwards altered their opinions, as did Melancthon, and Bucer, concerning the reall presence, and others who as yet continue in their sundrie opi∣niōs
certainly perswaded, are notwithstanding daily in many things contradicted by the manyTo omitte the over many bookes of this kind published by English Pro∣testants one against ano∣ther: Iodocus Coccius in his Thesaurus &c. printed 1569 tom. 1. pag. 1068. 1069. 1070. 1077. 1078. 1089. & 1090. numbreth vp al∣most two hundreth seve∣rall bookes written and published by forraine Pro¦testants one against ano∣ther, recyting withall in particuler, the special name or title of every of the said bookes their severall volume and yeare of printe. And cōcerning further testimonie of the Protestants many books written one against another: see Castalio alledged hereafter in this tract & sect p. and Osiander in epitom. &c. centur. 16. pa. 822. 823. 824. vs{que} pag. 829. & vide ibidem pag. 863 & 712. & 713 volumes & publique writtings of their owne learned brethrē, who in many cheefe points are as certainely & fully resolved in their iudgmēt to the cōtrary: the over ma∣ny & knowne particulerFirst, as Concerning the reall presence of Christs body in the Sacrament to the bodily mouth, it is affirmed by Luther and the Lutherans: and contradicted for Posh by Calvine and his followers. 2 Secondly, the reall presence not onely of the efficacie of Christs body but also of the body it selfe after a wonderfull and incomprehensible manner to the mouth of faith, is affirmed by Caluin. Insti∣tut. lib. 4. cap. 17. sect. 7. & 10. & 32. By M. Ryder in his friendly Caveat &c. the third leafe a. circa med. By M.D. Whitaker contra Duraeum pag. 169. the confession of Belgia in the English Harmonie pag. 431. and by M. Hooker in his Ecclesiasticall Policie lib. 5. sect. 67. pa. 174. cir∣ca medium and pag. 177. post medium & vide apolog. modest. ad acta conventus quindecim theo∣logorum torgae nuper habit. &c. pag. 19. & pag. 13. initio. & 23. & 47. And Contradicted as in∣clining to Poperie (to omitte Oecolampadius and Suinglius) by Peter Martyr in his epistle an∣nexed to his Comon places in English pag. 170. b. epist. 25. & ibid. pag. 98. a. & pag. 108. a. By Aretius sermon. 3. de caena, and by our English Puritaines in their Christian letter to M. R. Hooker pag. 35. paulo post med, & by Lodouicus Alemanus Italus in positionibus apud Lug∣dunenses editis Anno 1566. who saide hereof, ne{que} etiam per fidem sen incomprehensibili modo vt vo∣cant, quia hoc totum imaginarium & repugnat apertissime Dei verbo, of whose opinion see further Beza epist. 5. 3 Thirdlie, that Sacraments doe not onely signifie but also conferre, grace is affirmed by Osiander in Enchirid. controuersiarum quas Augustinae Confess. theol. habeat cum Caluia∣nu. pag. 272. post. med. By Iacobus Andraeas in epitom. colloquij Montis belgar pag. 58. prope initiū & pag. 42. initio By M.D. Bilson in his true difference betweene &c. part 4. pag. 539. ante med. & 592. post medium. & 368. post med. By M. Hooker in his Ecclesisticall Policie lib. 5. sect. 57. pag. 127. & 128. And by M.D. Whitaker conta Duraeum lib. 8. pag. 662. paulo ante med. & 664. post med. And Contradicted for Popish by M. Wllet in his Synopsis pag. 415. ante med. and by M. Fulke against Purgatorie pag. 35. and many others: 4 Fourthly, the sufficiencie of Christs corporall death vpon the Crosse, without his suffering of further paines in soule &c. is affir∣med by M. Bson in his treatize intituled the full redemption of mankind by the blood and death of Christ, in his Preface to the Christian Reader. post med. and by many others. And Contradicted for Popish by Calvine Iustitut. lib. 2. cap. 16. sect. 10. And by M. Willet in his Sy∣nopsis printed 1600. pag. 985. ante med. and pag. 987. initio and many others. 5 Fifthly, that Christ after his corporall death did descend in soule into Hell is affirmed by M.D. Hill in his speciall treatize of that title printed 1592. and by Aretius Apinus, M. Nowell, and Melancthon alledged by D. Hill vbi supra fol. 33. & 44. and Contradicted for Popish by M. Carelile in his booke that Christ descended not into Hell: By Beza in act. 2. By Bucer in Matth. 26. and ma∣ny others. 6 Sixtlie, that the Church must continue visible is affirmed by Melancthon & sun∣drie others alledged heretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 1. pag. 93. at d. and pag. 94. at e. f. g. in the margent there at the letters d. e. f. and Contradicted for Popish by M.D. Fulke in the Tower disput. with Edm. Camp. the second daies conference, by M. Willet in his Synopsis, pag. 48. circa med. and many others. 7 Seventhly, as concerning the necessitie of good workes to salvation it is affirmed by M. Willet in his Tetrastilon Papismi pag. 90. fine, by M. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament in 2. Petr. 2. sect. 3. fol. 444. a post med. and by M. Whitaker against M. Reynolds pag. 350 post. med. and Contradicted for new Papistrie as pornitious as the olde, by Il∣liricus in praefat. ad Rom. & many others: wherof see Colloquiū Altenburgense fol. 210. a. & 231. b. & 324. a. & 382. b. fine, & acta colloquij Aldeburgensis pag. 5. & 7. & 151. initio. 8 Eightlie cōcerning Evangelicall councells viz. that a man may do more then he is commanded, is af∣firmed for most cleere by M. Hooker in his Ecclesiasticall policie lib. 3. sect. 8. pag. 140. post med. and lib. 2. pag. 103. & 122. post med. by D. Covell in his defence of M. Hooker Art. 8 pag. 49. 50. 51. 52. by Luther in assertionibus art. 30. and others: and Contradicted for Popish by M. Willet in his meditations vpon the 122. Psalme pag. 91 post. med. by M. Parkins in his Reformed Catholike pag. 241. and many others. 9 Ninthlie, As concerning the doctrine of vniver∣salitie of grace, and that Christ died for all, it is affirmed by Suinglius in libro Epistolarum Oeco∣lampadij & Suinglij lib. 1. pag. 274. circa med. by Hemingius Enchirid. clas. 3. pag. 220. 221. & lib. de vniuersaligrā. by Hiperius in method. theolog. lib. 2. pag. 431. 435. 436. By Suecanus in Me∣thod. descript. pag. 430. by M. Hooker in his Ecclesiasticall Pollicie, lib. 5. pag. 104. By Bullinger vpon the Apocalipes in English fol. 79. b. initio. By M. Gibbeus in his questions vpon Gene∣sis pag. 108. circa med. By M. Smyth in his treatize of Praier in generall for all mankinde &c. & (besides the Lutherans) by very many other learned Calvinists alledged by Huberus in his Theses. &c. pag. 159. and 163. and 164. and 166. and 167. and 168. and Contradicted for Po∣pish by M. Willet in his Synopsis of Anno 1600. pag. 789. circa med. and 808. post initium. and by Beza, Caluine, Knoxe, &c. in whole treatises. 10 Tenthlie, that God doth permitte or suf∣fer sinne, and not will & decree the same is affirmed by Iacobus Andraeas in epitom. colliqu. Mon∣tisbelgar pag. 47. 49. and 53. by Hemingius lib. de vniversali grā. and all the Lutheranes, and (of the Calvinists) by Amandus Polanus in Partition. theolog. lib. 1. pag. 75. 76. and 10. 11. and 12. By Snecaenus in Methodic. descript pag. 621. 622. &c. 645. 650. By Bullinger in his Decades Englished pag. 492. 493. 494. By Castalio in lib. ad Caluinum de predestinat. By Melancthon in loc. comun. de causa peccati & contingent. & in libro de concil. theolog. part. 2. pag. 111. and 112. By M. Gibbens in his questions vpon Genesis pag. 108. circa med. And Contradicted for Popish by Calvine. Institut. lib. 2. cap. 4. sect. 3. & 4. & 5. & lib. 1. cap. 18. sect. 1. and lib. 3. cap. 23. sect. 8. By D. Baro in his treatize of Gods providence cap. 4. paulo ante med. By Aretius Loc. Comun. loc. 40. de induratione pag. 129 By M. Wllet in his Synopsis pag. 562. fine 563. ante medum. & many others. 11 Eleaventhly, that men are not certaine of their election, and that he who is once in state of grace may finally fall, is affirmed by their publique confessions cyted in the Harmonie &c. pag. 224. post medium. & 80. paulo ante med. & 230. post. med. and 233. fine. By Chemnitius examen part. 2. pag. 193. a post med. & part. 1. pag. 190. b. initio. By Musculus loc. comun pag. 29. circa med. By Lobechius in disput. theolog. pag. 317. 318. By Haffenrefferus in loc. theolog. &c. pag. 184. 188. and 331. By Rungius in disput. &c. ex epist. ad Corinth. part. 1. thest. 5. By Cef∣nerus in disput. pro libro concord. pag. 150. 156. 157. 650. By Iacobus Andraeas in epitom colloqu. Montisbelgar pag. 47. 61. and Contradicted for Popish by M. Parkins in his Reformed Catho∣licke pag. 39. and 55. By Calvine, Beza &c. 12 Tweluethly, that in case of divorce vpon a∣dultery the Innocēt partie may not many againe, was some few yeares since preached opē∣ly at Paules Crosse by D. Doue, & since defended publikely in the Vniversity by M.D. Howson in tertia Thesi printed Anno 1602. & is the cōstant doctrine of many others. And is yet Cōtra∣dicted for popish by M. Fulke against the Rhemish testamēt fol. 38. a circa med. & many others. 13 Thirteenthly, that to children of the faithfull dying vnbaptized salvation is not promised affirmed by Vrbanus Rhegius in 1. part. operum in Catechismo minore fol. 105. By Hoffman in Com∣mentar. de poenitentia lib. 3. c. 4. fol. 229. a.b By Sarcerius in loc. comun. fol. 238. 239. 240. By the confession of Auspurg. in the Harmonie pag. 403. fine. and by M. Bilson (now Bishop of Win∣chester) in his true difference &c. part. 4. pag. 368. ante med. and 369. ante med. And Contra∣dicted for popi vulgarly by Beza, Calvine &c. 14 Fourteenthly, freewill is affirmed by sun∣drie Protestants mentioned in M. Foxe his Actes and Monuments pag. 1533. b. paulo post med. and pag. 1605. b. fine. also by Snecanus and Hemingius, witnes hereof M. Willet in his Synopsis printed anno 1600. pag. 808. post initiū and 810. post initium, and by sundrie others: and is Con∣tradicted for popish by Calvine, Beza &c. 15 Fifteenthlie, that in regard of Christs Passion and promise, our good workes proceeding from faith, are mentorious or deserving, affirmed by their publique confessions in the Harmonie &c. pag. 495. ante medium. & pag. 273. circa med. By Spangeburg. in Margarit. theol. pag. 48. and 50. post med. By Melancthon loc. comun. &c. de bonus operibus circa med. and see M. Hooker lib. 5. Eccles. policie sect. 72. pag. 208. fine. Contradi∣cted for popish by Calvine Beza &c. 16 Sixteenthly, temporall punishment reserved by God in Iustice for sinne remitted, is affirmed by Iohn Knoxe in his answere against the adversaries of Gods Predestination, pag. 215. 216. 217. By Gasper Oleuianus in Sabolum pag. 8. ante med. and by the publike confessions of Protestants in the Harmonie &c. pag. 229. paulo ante med. and pag. 235. circa & post medium. and 508. initio. Contradicted as inclining to Purgatorie by M. Willet in his Synopsis pag. 514. By Calvine, Beza &c. 17 Seaventeenthly, (were this place ca∣pable thereof) wee could alledge the other pointes of our Catholike faith defended in like manner from the Scriptures by sundrie of our learned adversaries: as namely Vowed Chastitie (By Augustine Marloret in 1. Tim. cap. 5. vers. 11. pag. 375. a fine. By M. R. Alison in his confuta∣tion of Brownisme pag. 71. whereof see heretofore tract. 1. sect. 4. example 9. pag. 30. in the margent at 14. Intercession of Saintes, by Latimer act. mon. pag. 1312. a. initio. Art. 6. & pag. 1315. a. paulo ante medium, and by Oecolampadius ad orationem 1. Chrisostomi de Inuentio & maxime Martiribus. Lymbus Patrum (By Iohn Lascicius in the booke entituled de russorum muscouitarum & tartarorum religione pag. 122. and. 123. and by Oecolampadius in libro episiolarum Suinglij, & Oecolampadij lib. 1. pag. 19. and by Suinglius ibidem lib. 3. pag. 560. and 561.) Prayer for the deade by Luther and Vrbanus Rhegius, teste Vrbano Rhegio in prima parte operum in formula cante loquen∣di cap. de sanctorum culta: & vide Vrbanum Rhegium in loc comun. cap. 19. and 18. and by Wlliam Thorpe act. mon. pag. 149. a. paulo post initium. Purgatorie: (By Luther tom. 1. Wtteberg. an. 1545. in resolut de indulgentijs conclus. 15. fol. 112. a. prope finem, And in disputatione Lipsica cum Echt. and by Latimer act. mon. Pag. 1313. a paulo ante med. and b. ante med. and pag. 1315. b. paulo ante med. The sacrifice of the new Testament according to the order of Melchisadech. (By Andraeas Christouius in libro de opificio missae lib. 1. pag. 28. paulo post medium, and 119. paulo ante medium, and 51. post med. and 58. paulo post med. and 102. ante med. and 171. and see M. Iewell in his replie pag. 7. ini∣tio) Seaven Sacraments (By the Protestant Diuines assembled in the Conference of Lipsia, te∣ste Illirico in adhortatione ad constantiam in agnita Christi religione &c. paulo post initium. And by the Protestant Divines assembled in the Conference at Ratisbone anno 1541. whereof Bucer in actis colloquij Ratisb. saith, Protestantes non grauatim admiserunt septem sacramnta: And so like∣wise throughout (almost) all other Controuersies: whervnto we could likewise adde aswell thother knowne different opinions in perticuler betweene Protestants and Puritaines: and the testimonie at large of Schluss-lburg. a prime Protestante, who in his theologia Caluinistarum (in his Catalog. praecipuorum doctrinae capitum &c. placed there before in the beginning of his booke) reciteth in particuler three and thirtie severall pointes of doctrine in question betweene the Lutheraines whom he defendeth, and the Calvinists against whom hee there writeth at large in every of the saide questions As also Luke Osiander a learned Protestant who of late writte a speciall treatrize hereof entituled, Enchiridion contro versiarum, quas Augustinae Con∣fessionis theolog habent cum Caluinianis &c. printed Tubingae Anno 1603. And all this defended of either part vpon pretended certainety from the Scriptures. examples whereof even in the sundrie Articles of our Catholike faith defen∣ded (and that most earnestly) against our learned ad∣versaries by sundrie of their owne no lesse learned brethren, and all this by either party vpon pretended certainety frō the Scriptures as so evident & cōfessed that Nicolaus Gallus superintendent at Ratisbone com∣plaineth
thereat sayingNicholaus Gallus in thesibus hipothsebus &c. & vide ibidem fol. vlt. non sunt leues &c. the dissen∣tions that are amongt vs are not light nor of light matters, but of the cheefe articles of Christiane Doctrine, of the lawe and the Gospell, of iustification, and good workes, of the Sacramēts, and the vse of ceremonies &c. as also Seluecerus signifieth his like greefe sayingSeluecerus in 3. part. Comentar in Psalmos in Psa. 131. concerning the publique discord in the Church, their is no neede to aske &c. amongst vs who glory to haue the true doctrine of the Gospell, disagrements are moued, concerning thinges indifferent, good workes, our iustice bfore God, freewill, the presence and participation of Christes body in the spper, the humanitie of Christ, the proprietie of his humaine nature, his ascention and sitting vpon the right hand of God, the vbiquitie and other matters. These things be∣ing thus, how now cā our aduersaries auoid (in these straits) the dangerouse sequell of theire incertaintie, and ignorance, in faith and religion: for whereas the learned Protestants hould thatM. Bilson in his per∣petuall government &c. pag. 372. initio. to haue no Iudge for the ening of (their) ecclesiasticall contentions were the vt∣ter subuersion of all peace affirming thereuponM. Bilson ibidē pag. 370. post medium. Synodes to be an externall iudiciall meanes to discerne error andM Bilson ibidē pag. 374. circa medium. the surest meanes to decide doubtes, and thatM. D Couel in his mo¦dest examination &c. pag. 110. ante medium. if Synodes want, the Church neithe at any time was, nor indeede can safely be without tempestes themselues are yet (vpon vn∣answerable and iustConradus Schlussel∣burg. in catall. haereticorum lib. 13. & vlt. pag. 864. post medium saith, Hoc nobis po∣tissimum considerandum vi∣detur, num hoc tempore inter exterarum ecclesiarum theo∣logos & nostros vlla sinodus indici & cogi possit: quis o∣nim nostrum sibi arrogabit vt locum constituat, diem di∣cat, variarum nationū theo∣logos evocet &c. Iā vero in ip¦sa synodo quis praesidebit &c. porro quis iudex erit inter li∣egantes? &c. And see the Protestant auctor of the booke entituled, Laconici Antisturmij Sp∣gia adversus Lambertum Danaeum pag. 44. fiue where it is saide, magna est stultitia provocare ad v∣niversalem sinodum quae institui non potest, sicut ex supradictis manifestum est. And whereas Master Whitaker lib. e concilijs pag. 56. circa medium, truely teacheth that without auctoritie no Coun∣cell can be assembled: who now shall haue this auctorttie to compell so many Christian Pro∣testant Princes so variablie different in religion and amongst whom is no subordination to cause the divines of their severall nations to assemble themselues to a councell? reasons by them signified) in vtter dispaire to haue any councell assembled by the
deuines of their seuerall Churches and nations. ther∣fore theire foresaid ignorance or incertainty (all ima∣ginary helpe to the contrarie by councells notwith∣standing) it is still to them so euident and vnauoida∣ble, that their CastalioSee heretofore tract. 2. c. 1. sec. 5. at this marke * a verie learned Caluinist saith concerning their reformed Church: Profecto si verum fatere volumus, &c.Sebastian Castalio in pretat. Bibl. truely if we will confesse the truth, this our age is as yet drowned in extreame darkenes and igno∣rance, a most assured proofe whereof are these so grieuous, so ob∣stinate and so pernitious dissentions &c so great a number of bookes every day set out, so farre differing one frō another &c. if the day of the most cleere truth shined vnto vs, we would ne∣ver lighten so many darkesome and obscure candles of bookes & writings, and therefore (saith he)Castalio ibidem. Crassa Crassa (in∣quam seculum tenet ignorantia. And for so much as there is no certaine way in his opiniō to find out the truth, he concludeth sayingCastalio vbi supra. expectemus iusti iudicis senten∣tiam &c. Let vs attend the sentence of the iust Iudge and suffer the Cockle vntill the time of Harvest &c. Least perhappes wee plucke vp the good corne. As also our other adversaries doe (in regard of this confessed incertainety) reduce all grounds and Ivdgments whatsoever of faith, vnto privateHereof see hereto∣fore tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 1. & in the margent at the let∣ters p. q. examination, alledgedLubbertus de principijs Christian. dog. pag. 562. & 563. And M. Bilson in his true difference part. 2. pag. 353. And see Assertiones theologic. de Sacram. Caenae dom. &c. printed Argento∣rati. Anno 1564. pag. 1. in defence thereof that we are,1. Ioh. 4, 1. to trie the Spirites if they bee of God: and to1. Thessall. 5, 21. proue all thinges and hould that which is good: Whereat we now take hould, and charging our adversaries with their owne rule, do therevpon pro∣voke them to open and equall triall of disputation, the which we for our parts could wish to be procee∣ding, with observation of such indifferent & reasona∣ble conditions, as are by Mr. Hooker in his discourse
hereof against the Puritanes speciallyHereof see M. Hookers preface sette before his bookes of the lawes of ec∣clesiasticall policie, sect. 5. and pag. 25. post medium. & 26. ante medium. prescri∣bed, or as wereHereof see acta collo∣quij Ratisbonensis, printed Monachij, 1602. pa. 4. And see colloquiū Ratisbonae ha∣bitum, printed Louingae, 1602. pag. 9. 10. 11. agreed vpon, in the late confe∣rene at Ratisbone: for the obteining whereof wee presume hereby to become most humble and earnest petitioners to your Maiestie. The foresaide evident and necessarie incertainety of our adversaries Iudge∣ments in doctrine, may well seeme to neede it: The weight and consequence of the cause being no lesse then matter of faith and religion) deserveth it: our adversaries former rule of reducing all things to exa∣mination and triall appointeth it: our earnest desire of their conversion thirsteth greatly after it: Their full perswasion of our pretended erring, and like charita∣ble care of our reformation, should in all reason be no lesse willing of it. The seuerall examples of the sme course hereto∣fore obserued and practised in soundry nations and by our very aduersariesHereof see Mathias Hoe in his Tractat. duo quo∣rum prior de disputationibus theologicis &c. in praefat. prescribed do as it weare lead to it. The venerable and confessed antiquity of our Catholicke faith, established but neuer hitherto condemned in generall councell, (and therefore vn∣worthey to be as now reiected without some indiffe∣rencie of triall) presumeth very confidently to ob∣taine it. And lastly your Highnes mature and lear∣ned iudgmēt, able to moderate and censure the same, maketh vs so much the rather to become most hum∣blie desirous and earnest for it. The Almightie God who hath so powrablie pre∣served your Maiesties most royall person frō so ma∣ny dangers past, and no lesse graciouslie reserved it to accomplish the blessings of our happie times and na∣tion, conserue it ever accordingly with all worldlie felicitie in this life and heavenly in the nexte. GOD SAVE THE KING.
