4024 99842563 7228
AN ANSWERE TO TEN friuolous and foolish reasons, set downe by the Rhemish Iesuits and Papists in their Preface before the new Testament by them lately translated in∣to English, which haue mooued them to forsake the originall fountaine of the Greeke, wherein the Spirit of God did indite the Gospell, and the holie A∣postles did write it, to follow the streame of the Latin translation, transla∣ted we know not when nor by whom. With a discouerie of many great Corrup∣tions and faults in the said English Translation set out at Rhemes. By E. B. 1. Thess. 5. Prooue all things, hold that which is good, abstaine from all apparance of euill. Hieronimus lib. 1. aduersus Pelagianos. Quaeso vt patienter audias, non enim de aduersario victo∣riam, sed contra mendacium quaerimus veritatem. that is, I pray thee patiently to heare: for we seeke not victorie of an aduersarie, but truth against a lie. LONDINI, Impensis Georg. Bishop. 1588
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir FRANCIS WALSINGAM Knight, Cheefe Secretarie to hir Maiestie, and Chancellor of the Dutchie of Lankaster, grace, mercie and peace from God our Father, and from Iesus Christ our Sauior. THe word of God being the immortall seed wherby we be conceiued and borne againe to be the children of Gods mercie,1. Pet. 1.23. and heires of his glorie:1. Pet. 2.2. the pure milke that doth nourish vs being infants:Matth. 4.4. the bread that doth feed vs being growen greater in Christ Iesus:Psal. 119.105. the light and lanterne that leadeth vs to walke in Gods waies:Ephes. 6.17. Heb. 4.12. Matth. 4.4. Hierem. 23.29. 2. Cor. 10.5. the sword of Gods spirit to defend vs against the assaults of Satan: And finallie, the hammer which beateth downe euerie high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God: it is no maruell (Right Ho∣norable) if Satan the enimie of our saluation haue in all times dili∣gentlie indeuored to suppresse it, and to depriue vs as much as he might of the great benefit, and sweet comfort which we are to re∣ceiue by it. Hereupon it hath come to passe, that in all ages, as the true and syncere worship of God hath beene corrupted and decaied, and idolatrie and wicked worshippings haue increased: so the Law of God, which teacheth and mainteineth the one, condemneth & ouer∣throweth the other, hath been suppressed, and the cleere light therof smothered. When the Israelits in the wildernes fell to Idolatrie, and worshipped the golden calfe,Exod. 32.19. the tables of Gods commandements (which they were vnworthie to inioie) were broken. When true reli∣gion was decaied vnder Rehoboam and Abija kings of Iudah:2. Cronicl. 15.3. Israel was without the Priest to teach, and without the Law.2. King. 22.8. When vnder the vngodlie gouernment of Manasse and Amon Idolatrie raigned and raged, the booke of God was neglected and lost: when Iehoiakim an Idolater ruled, the word of God vttered by Iere∣mie, and written by Baruch, was cut in peeces,Ierem. 36.23. and throwne into the fire. When cruell Antiochus had taken Ierusalem,1. Mach. 1.59. and sought to ouerthrow the true seruice of God, the books of the Law which were found were burnt in the fire, and cut in peeces. And whoso∣euer
had a booke of the Testament found by him was put to death. When bloudie Diocletian went about to roote out Christian reli∣gion, he caused the holie Scriptures to be burnt, as Eusebius in these words declareth:Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 8. cap. 2. & 3. Diuinásque & sacras Scripturas in me∣dio foro igni tradi ipsis oculis vidimus. i. We haue seene with our eies the diuine and holie Scriptures in the midst of the market place throwne into the fire. And euen so in these later ages, as su∣perstition and Idolatrie (wherwith God in his iust indignation hath punished the wickednesse of the world,2. Thess. 2.10. for not receiuing the loue of the truth vnto saluation) haue increased: so the word of God hath been greatlie neglected of the Priests, suppressed from the people, & being translated & published by faithfull men for the setting forth of Gods truth, and saluation of his elect, haue beene in open market places (as Eusebius saith) burnt in the fire.Ezech. 7.26. Deut. 33.10. How the law hath pe∣rished from the Priests, who should haue taught Iacob Gods iudgements, and Israel his Law, experience hath shewed, and lear∣ned mens writings do witnes. That famous man Erasmus (in whose daies after the long winter night of ignorance, began both the clouds of darknesse to be dispersed,Erasmus lib. 9. epist. ad Nata∣lem▪ Beddam. and the sunne of Gods word cleerely to shine forth) writeth thus: Nec pauci sunt Theologi praesertim seniores, qui adeo versati non sunt in priscis do∣ctoribus, vt nec Petrum Lombardum, nec scripturas cano∣nicas vnquam totas euoluerint. That is, There be not a few diuines, especiallie of those that be elder, who haue beene so little occupied in the old doctors, that they haue neuer read ouer Peter Lombard, nor the whole canonicall Scriptures. That learned man Andreas Hyperius witnesseth, that he had seene sundrie old ec∣clesiasticall men,Lib. de lectione Scripturae. who after they had receiued some tast of Gods truth, confessed and lamented, that they had neuer read the holie Scriptures. But if these testimonies will not serue to satisfie some, for the conuincing of the great and grosse ignorance, which as a vaile couered the Priests eies from beholding the bright beames of Gods word,Aeneas Syluius Comment. de dict. & fact. Alphons. Reg. lib. 2.17. let them marke what Pope Pius secundus writeth hereof in these words: Pudeat Italiae sacerdotes, quos ne se∣mel quidem nouam legem constat legisse. Apud Thabori∣tas vix mulierculam inuenias, quae de nouo Testamento & veteri respondere nesciat. That is, The Priests of Italie may be ashamed, who are knowne not once to haue read the new Testa∣ment: seeing with the Which fol∣lowed the doctrine preached by Hus. Thaborits (in Bohemia) one can hardly find
a seelie woman which cannot answere out of the old and new Testa∣ment. And if those Italian Priests, which were vnder that holie fathers nose, were so blind in Gods booke, what may be thought of them that were further off? vnlesse peraduenture, the neerer they were to him, the more they were infected, poysoned, and blinded by him. And if the sunne went downe vpon those Prophets,Mich. 3.6. and dark∣nesse was vnto them for a diuination, that should haue beene the light of the world, & the eies of the bodie,Matth. 5.14.6.23. how great was the dark∣nesse in the bodie it selfe? Especiallie seeing these hypocriticall pha∣risies tooke away the keie of knowledge,Luke 11.52. and as they entred not in themselues, so they forbad them that would, in keeping the light of Gods word vnder the bushell of a strange toong, and not permitting it to be translated into vulgar and knowne languages, and so to be set vpon a candlesticke to shine to the instruction and consolation of them that be in Gods house. Wherein they haue shewed themselues to be hereticall Priests,Chrysost. expo∣sit. 2. in Matth. hom. 44. who (as Chrysostom saith) shut vp the gates of the truth: for they know that if the truth once appeare, they must needs leaue their Church, & from the dignitie of their priest∣hood come downe to the state of other people. Euen so our Haereti∣call popish prelats and priests to mainteine their Idolatrie, pompe, pride, and couetousnesse haue shut vp the gates of the truth, by sup∣pressing Gods holie word, and keeping it from the knowledge of Gods people: as Erasmus trulie affirmeth in these words;Quis non intelligat istos sacras literas ideo velle paucis esse notas,Erasm. li. epist. 21. ad Nicol. Euerardum. ne quid decedat ipsorum autoritati quaestuíque. That is, Who knoweth not that these men (meaning popish Priests & Moonks) would therefore haue the holie Scriptures known but to few, least their authoritie and gaine should decaie. And euen so it is certaine, that if the holie scriptures had beene publikelie in the mother toong, and in the hands and harts of the people, they could neuer heretofore haue beene with the vsurped power of that pelting and powling Priest of Rome so astonied and amazed, with ima∣ges deceiued, with pardons beguiled, with fained & forged reliques mocked, with masses, trentals and purgatorie spoiled, with the hypo∣crisie of Moonks and such other locusts bewitched, and manie mo waies miserablie abused as they were But they being vtterlie be∣reft, and altogether depriued of this light of Gods word,Esai. 9.2. 1. Iohn 2.22. did sit in darknesse and in the shadow of death: Walked in darknesse and wist not whither they went, bicause the darknes had blinded their eies.
And whereas God of his great mercie, beholding our miserie, hath deliuered vs from this Aegyptiacall darknesse, and caused the day star of his holie word to rise vnto vs, to lead vs (as did that other the wise men) vnto Iesus Christ,Matth. 2.9. in him onely to seeke our saluati∣on:Esai. 9.2. Lib. de resurrect. carnis. so that we which haue heeretofore walked in darknesse, haue seene a great light, to our vnspeakeable comfort: these Fliers of the light of the Scriptures. Lucifugae Scripturarum (as Tertullian called some, and I may truly terme these Popish owles) haue howled and exclaimed against this light, which by the holy Scriptures translated into our mother toong hath shined vnto vs.D. Standish in a foolish booke set foorth in Q. Maries daies. They haue written against it, affirming that it ought not to be in the vulgar language, Idem ibid. pro∣bat. 3. calling it damnable libertie of so hauing it, Alfons. de ca∣stro contr. Haeres. lib. 1. cap. 13. Deut. 6.4. & 11.19. & 17.18. Coloss. 3.16. Chrysost. hom. 3. de Lazar. & in Gen. homil. 21. & 25. August. lib. 3. de doctr. Christ. ca. 1. Hieron. in ca. 3. ad Coloss. Theodoretus de cu∣raend. graec. affect. lib. 5. In the beginning of their Preface. and saying that it is an occasion of Heresie, and haue with all their might and maine gone about to extinguish it. These their assertions how false and absurd they be, contrarie to the word of God, and the writings of the ancient godly fathers, I will not (lest I be too tedious vnto your Honor) at this present further declare. Notwithstanding all this their barking against hauing the holie Scriptures in the mother toong: yet now our Rhemish and Romish Papists heerin differing from their fellowes, & playing the Apes in imitating vs, as they haue doone also in setting foorth Catechismes which before they could neuer abide, haue at the last published the new Testament in our English toong, and haue promised the rest, which (notwithstanding they saie was long ago doone) hath beene, and I doubt, will be long in performing. This they haue doone, not of a holie zeale, and godlie desire to haue the holie Scripture knowne and read of all people: but rather to keepe them, especiallie their adherents & fauorers from reading it translated & set foorth by vs. In this their worke so long deferred, and now published, they haue committed two foule faults: The one in falselie and foolishlie translating it, by following the corrupt streame of the Latin trans∣lation, and forsaking the fountaine of the Greeke, wherein the holy spirit of God did indite the new Testament, and the blessed Apostles of Christ our Sauior did write it. The other in corrupting & peruer∣ting the sense, and meaning of the holy Ghost by guilefull gloses, and absurd Annotations. Against the former of these faults I did, either almost, or altogether fiue yeers past, write the first part of this little discourse vpon this occasion: The right honorable and my verie good Lord, the L. Saint Iohns of Blet so shortlie after the comming foorth of the said Testament, did let me haue for the space of a month the
vse of it. The which I did verie egarly read, and diligentlie confer. And for that the booke was hard to come by, I did write much out of it, concerning the diuersitie, superfluitie, and want of the said trans∣lation in respect of the Greeke: and also their 10. friuolous reasons in their preface, which moued them to leaue the Greeke, and trans∣late the Latine, with diuers other things. Vnto the which 10. rea∣sons I did then vpon a particular occasion, & for a priuat vse write this answere, neuer intending (as both some men do know, and the long suppressing of it may shew) to publish the same in print. And the rather for that a full answere vnto the whole hath beene long looked for of manie, and wished for of me. The which I would right gladlie haue seene, to the perpetuall suppressing of this as I first in∣tended. But when no such answere came foorth, neither could I learne when anie would: hauing of late a little recognised my an∣swere that had lien long neglected by me, and added thereunto a discouerie of sundrie corruptions committed in the said translation, I haue beene mooued by some that haue seene it, to let it passe in print. The which although I was a long time vnwilling to doo: yet for that it is thought the said translation and Annotations haue seduced some, and confirmed others in error, and manie doo not a little glory of them, I haue yeelded to the putting foorth of this little treatise: that as some haue alreadie in part discouered the absurditie of the Annotations:D. Reynolds▪ D. Bilson. M. Prime. so this I trust may sufficiently shew the weaknesse of those reasons, and corruption of that translation. This small and simple discourse although I confesse it to be vnworthie your worthi∣nesse, yet vpon your great curtesie, I haue beene bold to offer it vn∣to your Honor, to testifie thereby my dutifull mind, and thankefull hart vnto your H. for your fauor shewed me, which I haue found and felt. Humblie beseeching your H. to accept this small mite in goodpart, not weighing the quantitie or value of the gift, but the sincere and hartie affection toward your H. of the giuer. God in great mercie blesse your H. increase his graces and good gifts in you, and long preserue you to the seruice & safetie of hir Maiestie, and the benefit of this Church and Commonwealth, Amen. At Woodhull the 9. of Aprill 1588. Your Honors most humble to command and vse, EDWARD BVEKELEY.
AN ANSWER TO THE FRIVOLOVS and reasonlesse reasons of the Rhemish Iesuits, for following and preferring the old Latin translation of the New Testament before the Greeke, wherein Gods Spirit indited it, and the holy Apostles did write it. Which reasons be set downe in their Preface before the New Testament, by them lately translated into English: by E. B. The first reason of the Iesuits. NOw to giue thee also intelligence in particular, most gentle Reader, of such things as it behoueth thee spe∣cially to know concerning our translation: we translate the old vulgar Latin text, nor the common Greeke text, for these causes. It is so ancient, that it was vsed in the Church of God aboue 1300. yeeres ago, as appeereth by the fathers of those times. Answer. HEre is an vncertaine assertion, and a foolish reason. For although I grant the said translation to be ancient, yet to be so old as they affirme, I suppose it wil be hard for al the Rhemish rout of Iesuits plainly to prooue. Tertulli∣an, who liued somwhat aboue 200. yeeres after Christ, doth not follow it, neither hath any steps of it in the places which he alledgeth. Cyprian, who liued about the yéere of Christ 284. doth not at all vse it. Hilarius, Hierom, and Augustine in their allegations of the Scriptures dissent from it. But to omit to speake any more of the antiquitie of it: what a foolish reason is this; It is 1300. yéeres old, ther∣fore true and vncorrupt. The Gréeke translations of the Septuaginta interpretors, of Symmachus, Aquila, and The∣odotion were ancient, yet euen in S. Hieroms time wan∣ted not many and great corruptions. The Latin translati∣ons (which in S. Hieroms and Augustines daies were ma∣ny) were euen then very corrupt, as héerafter I wil (by Gods
grace) out of S. Hierom declare. Or what a fond reason is this: It is 1300. yéeres old, therefore to be preferred before the Gréeke, which being the originall is aboue 1500. yéeres old. So that if this matter be to be measured by antiquitie, the Gréeke were to be preferred, and this Latin translation not to be followed. 2. Reason. IT is that (by common receiued opinion, and by all pro∣babilitie) which S. Hierom afterward corrected accor∣ding to the Greeke, by the appointment of Damasus then pope, as he maketh mention in his Preface before the iiij. Euangelists vnto the said Damasus, and in Catalogo in fine. Answer. THis is but a popish and foolish opinion, void of all pro∣babilitie and truth: for proofe whereof I will first al∣ledge the saying of that learned man Erasmus Rote∣rodamus, which I doubt not, but with all wise and learned men will counteruaile our Rhemish Iesuits, and all their adherents.Erasmus epist. N. amico ex a∣ninco dilecto. Who in an Epistle writeth thus: Ceu confessum assumit, hanc Noui Testamenti translationem qua vulgò vtimur esse Hieronimi, cum eam constet nec esse Cypriani, nec Hilarij, nec Ambrosij, nec Augustini, nec Hieronimi cùm is diuersa legat: mul∣tò minùs eam quam emendasse testatur, cùm in hac deprehendan∣tur, quae ille damnat, non solùm quantum ad verba, verùm etiam quantum ad sententiam. That is: He taketh it as granted, that this translation of the new Testament, which we do com∣monly vse is Hieroms, whereas it is certaine, that it is nei∣ther Cyprians, nor Hilaries, nor Ambroses, nor Augu∣stines, nor Hieroms, forasmuch as he dissenteth from it, and much lesse to be that which he testifieth that he corrected, sée∣ing there be found in this which he condemneth, not onely as touching the words, but also the sense and meaning. Héere Erasmus flatly affirmeth, that this common Latin translati∣on, was neither made by Hierom, nor is that which he at the request of Damasus corrected. And to prooue both the truth of Erasmus assertion, and the falshood of our Iesuits receiued opinion, I will set downe a few places, wherein Hierom not onely dissenteth from it, but also findeth fault with it. In
his first booke against Iouinian he writeth thus:Hierom. lib. 1. aduersus Ioui∣nianum. Ita tamen si ipsos filios erudiret in fide & dilectione & in sanctificatione & pu∣dicitia. Non enim (vt malè habetur in Latinis codicibus) Sobrietas est legenda, sed castitas, id est, . That is: Yet so if she instruct hir children in faith and loue, and in sanctification and chastitie: for it is not to be read Sobrietas, sobrietie (as it is euill translated in the Latin bookes) but Castitas, chastitie: for that is . Againe in the same booke: Sobrium (siue vt melius in Graeco dicitur) vigilātem, id est, . pudicum, hoc enim significat . That is: Sober, or as it is better in the Gréek watchfull, for that doth  signifie; chaste, for that doth  signifie. And againe in the same booke: Non plus sapere quàm oportet sapere, sed sapere ad pudicitiam, non ad sobrietatem, vt male in Latinis legitur, sed sapere inquit ad pudicitiam. That is: Not to be wise aboue that ye ought to be wise, but to be wise vnto chastitie, not vnto sobrietie, as it is euill translated in the Latin bookes, but, saith he, to be wise to chastitie. In all these places Hierom misliketh and condemneth that which is in our Latin common translation. And although I confesse that he to helpe his cause, doth without sufficient cause find fault in these places with the said translation, for that the words  and  do more properly and apt∣ly signifie Sobrietie and Sober, than chastitie and chaste: as also Erasmus in his Scholies in these words doth shew:Erasmus in Scholijs in lib. 1. aduersus Ie∣uinianum. Torquet nonnihil hunc locum Hieronimus ad commoditatem cau∣sae suae: nam hie certè magis quadrat vertere modestiam vel so∣brietatem quàm pudicitiam, , id est, ad hoc vt sobrij sint & modesti, non insolentes & elati. That is, Hierom some∣what wresteth this place to the commoditie of his cause: for surely it is more fit to translate it modestie or sobrietie than chastitie, that they should be sober and modest, not insolent and proud: yet it is sufficient for me, that he misliketh and findeth fault with that which is in our common Latin trans∣lation: which is a plaine proofe that this was not his, for then he would otherwise haue translated it. Hierom also findeth fault with the vulgar translation of that place of S. Paule, Galat. 5.9. in these words:Hierom. in e∣pist. ad Galat. cap. 5. Malè in nostris codicibus habetur: Modicum fermentum totam massam corrumpit: & sen∣sumpotiùs interpres suum, quàm verba Apostoli transtulit. That
is, It is euill translated in our Latin bookes, Modicum fer∣mentum totam massam corrumpit: and the interpretor hath translated rather his owne meaning, than the words of the Apostle. And there he doth translate it otherwise: Modicum fermentum totam conspersionem fermentat. But what néede I to busie my selfe in seeking mo places where S. Hierom fin∣deth fault with that which is in the vulgar Latin translati∣on, séeing that Andradius the Spanish Iesuit hath eased me of that labour, who hath piked out and produced a number of places, in the which Hierom misliketh that which is in the said translation.Andr. defens. Tri∣dent. fidei▪ fol. 411. Andradius liking of them that require more diligence and plainnes in the said old translator, writeth thus: Nàm dum vel Graecorum dicendi rationi nimium adhaeres∣cit, &c. That is, For whilest he either doth too much cleaue to the Gréeke phrase, or is not diligent inough in weighing the Latin and Greeke words, he becommeth somtime ouer obscure, and doth not sufficiently expresse the force and pow∣er of the sentences. The which although I could make ma∣nifest by many examples, yet I will produce some of those which S. Hierom noteth, that by reason of the authoritie of that most holy father, they may with all men be subiect to lesse enuie. In the Epistle to the Galathians (saith he) it is euill translated in Latin, Euacuati estis à Christo, where it should be said, In Christi opera cessastis, the which the force of the Gréeke word  doth most expresse, which signifieth to abolish, to make vaine and frustrate. In his commentarie also vpon the Epistle to the Ephesians, he findeth fault with the old translator for translating the Gréeke word , ar∣maturam, id est, armor, whereas it signifieth all furniture of armor, or whole armor. And expounding that saying of S. Paule,Tit. 2. Vt mundaret sibi populum acceptabilem, he doth at large accuse the drowsie negligence of the Latin interpretors, for translating the word,  acceptabilem, which signifieth ex∣cellent,Alledged be∣fore. speciall, and chiefly peculiar. And disputing against Iouinian of chastitie, in the first epistle to Timothie (saith he) it is not to be read, as it is euill in the Latin bookes, Si permanserint in fide cum sobrietate,He meaneth Erasmus, as is before alled∣ged. sed cum castitate, id enim est . although there be learned men which prefer héerein the vulgar translator before Hierom, who do thinke
to be as it were , that is, the soundnes or pre∣seruation of wisedome, as it is in Plato, wherevnto is oppo∣sed , that is, madnes. And in his first booke against the Pelagians, he saith: The simplicitie of the Latin translator doth count among the properties and duties of a Bishop, that he be docibilis, that is, docible, whereas Paule calleth a Bishop , that is, apt and méete to teach, the which word the same interpretor in the first Epistle to Timothie doth translate not very fitly, Doctorem, that is, a teacher, whereas many do so vnwoorthily performe the dutie of tea∣ching, that they séeme to be apt and fit to execute no dutie. But Paul (saith he) doth not onely thinke, that it is the part of a Bishop to performe vnto the Church that great dutie of teaching, but also that he ought to be furnished with excel∣lent gifts and helps to teach. It were long to handle all the places, in which not only Hierom, but also other very godly men require diligence in the vulgar translator. Hitherto An∣dradius the Spanish Iesuit. By the which it may plainly appéere, both that this vulgar Latin translation was not Hieroms, for that he doth so much mislike it, and find fault with it: and also what iarre in iudgement there is in this matter betweene our English Rhemish Iesuits, who héere iudge it to be S. Hieroms, and this Spanish Iesuit that doth denie it. By this I doubt not, but it doth most euidently appéere, how false this second assertion of the Iesuits is, and that this common Latin translation, was neither by S. Hie∣rom translated, nor that which he corrected. Whereunto I will adde further a saying or two of Erasmus, who writeth thus:Erasmus in Scholijs in Hieronimum ad Algasiam. Multò rectius haec vertit Hieronimus, quàm habet vulgata aeditio. That is, Hierom doth much better translate this, than our vulgar edition hath it, meaning that in 2. Thes. 2. where S. Paul speaketh of the man of sin, and sonne of perdition, &c. where no doubt if this had béene Hieroms translation as the Iesuits would haue it, he would as well haue translated it in the text, as he alledged it in his booke. Againe, Erasmus writeth thus of Hierom:Erasmus in Scholijs in e∣pist. Hieron. ad Pamma∣chium. Apertè damnat superiorem translati∣onem qua nos tamen maxima ex parte vtimur. That is, He plain∣ly condemneth the former translation, which we yet for the most part vse: meaning this old common translation, the
which he saith Hierom doth condemne. But if I should grant our Iesuits that this were either translated or corrected by Hierom, which they will neuer be able to prooue, and by that which I haue said, is apparantly false, what haue they then gained? Doth it therefore follow bicause it was either truly translated, or faithfully corrected by S. Hierom then, therefore it is true, sincere, and void of corruption now? S. Hierom himselfe complaineth of the great corruption of the Latin translations in his daies, the which yet came not so much by the translators, as by the negligent writers out of the bookes, and presumptuous cor∣rectors, or rather corruptors, as most plainly appéereth by Hierom himselfe in many places, whereof I will set downe some.Hieronimus praefatione in Iosue. In his preface before Iosue he writeth thus: Maximè cùm apud Latinos tot sunt exemplaria, quot codices: & vnusquis∣que pro arbitrio suo, vel adderit vel subtraxerit quod ei visum est. That is, séeing with the Latins there be as many examples or copies as books, and that euery one according to his owne will hath added and taken away as pleased him. And againe he writeth thus:Hieronimus ad Marcellum som. 3. Vt aliquid de Dominicis verbis aut corrigen∣dum putauerimus, aut non diuinitùs inspiratum: sed Latinorum co∣dicum vitiositatem, quae ex diuersitate librorum omnium compro∣batur, ad Graecam originem (vnde & ipsi translata esse non dene∣gant) voluisse reuocare. Quibus si displicet fontis vnda purissimi, coenosos riuulos bibant. That is, I do not thinke that the Lords words are to be corrected, or that they were not inspired of God: but I go about to correct the falsenes of the Latin bookes, the which is plainly prooued by the diuersity of them, and to bring them to the originall of the Gréeke (from the which they do not denie that they were translated) who if they mislike the water of the most pure fountaine, they may drinke their mirie puddles, meaning of the Latin. Last∣ly, S. Hierom in the same place héere alledged by the Iesuits hath these words:Hieronimus ad Damasum praefatione in 4. Euang. Si enim Latinis exemplaribus fides est adhi∣benda, respondeant quibus? Tot enim sunt exemplaria penè quot codices. Sin autem veritas est quaerenda de pluribus, cur non ad Graecam originem reuertentes, ea quae vel à vitiosis interpretibus malè reddita: vel à praesumptoribus imperitis emendata peruer∣sius, vel à librarijs dormitantibus aut addita sunt aut mutata corri∣gimus?
That is, If we must beléeue the Latin examples, let them tell vs which? for there be as many diuers copies as bookes. But if they thinke that the truth is to be sought out of the greater part, why do we not returne to the Gréeke ori∣ginall, and correct these things which either vnskilfull tran∣slators haue ill translated, or of ignorant presumptuous per∣sons haue béene foolishly amended, or of negligent writers haue béene either added or altered? By these and many such other places it doth appéere, how corrupt the Latin bookes of the new Testament were in those daies, which faults yet were most specially to be attributed to negligent writers. And if in those learned times of the primitiue Church, in which so many learned and godly fathers liued, such mani∣fold grosse and great corruptions crept into the Latin bookes of the Bible, what may we thinke of these latter times, in which all good learning was lost; and blindnes, ignorance, and barbarousnes haue raigned? Is it to be maruelled, though infinite great corruptions haue come into the Latin copies of the Testament? specially séeing the same were much written and copied out by blinde ignorant Moonks, who all in a maner were so vnlearned, that it became a pro∣uerbe, Monacho indoctior, that is, More vnlearned than a Moonke. By whose meanes such good authors as were most occupied and written out, were most corrupt, as Ludouicus Viues doth iustly complaine in these words:Ludouicus Vi∣ues de caus. corrupt. arti∣um. fol. 13. Videmus vt quis∣que veterum scriptorum hijs quingentis annis in studiosorum mani∣bus versatus est, ita ad nos venisse corruptissimos, vt Plinium, Se∣necam, Hieronimum, Augustinum, Aristotelem. Puriores sunt atque integriores qui in vetustis Bibliothecis situ & puluere latu∣erunt obsessi. That is, We sée how that as euery one of the old writers were these 500. yéeres most occupied in students hands, so they haue come most corrupt vnto vs, as Plinie, Se∣neca, Hierom, Augustine, & Aristotle. And that they haue remained more pure and perfect, which haue lien in old li∣braries in dust and filth. By which reason of Viues it may be gathered, that the Gréeke text of the Testament hath conti∣nued the more sound and sincere, bicause by reason of the ig∣norance of that toong, it hath béen lesse occupied, and seldomer in the vnwashen hands of those ignorant and filthy Moonks.
Héereby also it appéereth, that if this vulgar translation had béene of S. Hieroms either translation or correction, it doth not follow, that it is now sound and sincere. But forasmuch as there be many faults and corruptions in it (as by Gods grace héereafter shall be shewed) we ought (according to the iudgement of S. Hierom) returne to the originall of the Gréeke, and thereby correct them. The which our Rhemish and Romish Iesuits refusing to do, in forsaking the water of the most pure fountaine of the original Gréeke: we are con∣tent they drinke (to vse S. Hieroms words) the mirie pud∣dles of the Latin.Ad Marcellum. Finally, whereas our Iesuits would make their simple readers beléeue, that Damasus had such supreme power as is now by the Bishop of Rome claimed, by calling him Pope, and by shewing that S. Hierom by his appointment did correct the Latin copies: I thinke it not vnfit nor imper∣tinent to set downe the opinion of Erasmus in this matter, who as he was excellently learned, so is he not to be counted as partiall.Erasmus in e∣pist. amico ex animo dilecto. He in the Epistle before alledged, speaking of this matter hath these words: Quanquam hoc negotij non iniungit Damasus tanquam summus orbis Pontifex, quod an fuerit in me∣dio relinquo: certè nomen hoc nondum illis temporibus erat audi∣tum, quantum ex veterum omnium scriptis licet colligere, sed in∣iungit tanquam Romanus Pontifex Hieronimo hactenus Romano, quòd illic & baptizatus sit, & presbyteri consecutus honorem. That is, Although Damasus do not inioine this busines, as the chéefe Bishop of the world, the which whether he were or not, I will not define: surely this name in those daies was not as yet heard of, as far as we may gather by the writings of all the ancient fathers: but he doth inioine it as Bishop of Rome to Hierom hitherto a Roman, bicause both there he was baptized, and obtained the degrée and dignitie of priesthood. And as for the name Pope, in those daies it was a title not peculiar to the Bishop of Rome (as now they haue made it) but common to euery Bishop. Saint Hierom cal∣leth both S. Augustine Bishop of Hippo in Afrike, and Epi∣phanius Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus Pope. The elders and deacons of Rome called Cyprian Bishop of Carthage Pope. Thus I trust I haue sufficiently discouered the insuf∣ficiencie
of this second reason, and plainly prooued that there is no probabilitie in this opinion, and that this vulgar Latin translation, which our Rhemists haue followed, is not that which S. Hierom either translated or corrected. Now let vs examine the third reason. 3. Reason. COnsequently it is that same which S. Augustine so commendeth and alloweth in an Epistle to S. Hie∣rom.Epist. 10. Answer. THere is no consequence in this consequence. For the antecedent not being true (as I haue before sufficient∣ly prooued) the consequence non consequitur. Indéede Augustine doth commend Hieroms translation of the Gos∣pell out of the Gréeke: but that this which you follow is not that, I haue before plainly prooued. And if it were, yet it might since be corrupted, as I haue before shewed. And that it hath béene fowly corrupted, shall héerafter (Christ willing) euidently appéere. But whereas Augustine commendeth Hieroms translation out of the Gréeke: this doth make a∣gainst you, who refuse the Gréeke, and translate out of the Latin: which neither Hierom would do, nor Augustine commend. 4. Reason. IT is that which for the most part euer since hath beene vsed in the churches seruice, expounded in sermons, al∣ledged and interpreted in the commentaries and writings of the ancient fathers of the Latin Church. Answer. THere is small reason in this reason, why this Latin translation should be preferred and followed before the Gréeke. First, for that the Gréeke fathers haue followed the Gréeke originall, and not this Latin, from the which generally they do dissent, as shall héereafter be shew∣ed.
Secondly, the most ancient Latin fathers do not follow it, as Tertullian, Cyprian, Hilarie, and Hierom commonly in citations and allegations of places dissenteth from, yea and findeth fault with it (as hath béene shewed:) Ambrose and Augustine although they séeme more to incline vnto it, yet very oft they leaue it, and differ from it. Therefore the Gréeke fathers generally dissenting from it, and the most ancient Latin fathers hauing no footsteps of it, and the other fathers often going from it: there is (as I said) small reason why it should now be counted autentical, & be preferred and folowed before the original of the Gréeke. As for the Church seruice, it was in the primitiue Church in that language, which of the people was vnderstood. And where it was in Latin, it was there where the people by reason of the Ro∣man empire vnderstood latin, as appéereth by S. Augustines sermons, and other authors. As touching your popish seruice full of idolatrie & superstition, and vsed in a strange toong vn∣knowen to the people,1. Cor. 14. contrarie to the expresse word of God, as we care not what translation it hath followed, so we thinke the most corrupt most méete for it. 5. Reason. THe holy Councell of Trent, for these and many other important considerations, hath declared and defined this only of all other Latin translations to be autenticall, and so onely to be vsed and taken in publike lessons, dis∣putations, preachings, and expositions, and that no man presume vpon any pretence to reiect or refuse the same. Answer. THe decrée of some more ancient Councell in this mat∣ter, if any could be had, as none would be found, might haue stood you in far greater stead. For howsoeuer this Tridentine conuenticle (as euen Henrie 2. the French king termed it) moue you, surely it is of small force to per∣suade vs. We little care what it hath héerin determined, be∣ing called togither and gouerned by the Pope, whom we iustly accuse to be the Archenimie of God, whereof you all
shall neuer be able to excuse him, and consisting of about 40. blind Bishops his sworne seruants. This cursed conuenticle or Councell we no more estéeme, than the godly fathers e∣stéemed the Councels of Ariminum, Tyre, Ephesinum 2. and such others. And when you and all your adherents shall be able to prooue the canons of that Tridentine Councell to be grounded vpon the foundations of the Prophets and Apo∣stles, and agréeable with Gods blessed word, then will we acknowledge the truth of this constitution: In the meane time we will not maruell if a corrupt Councell maintaine a corrupt translation. 6. Reason. IT is the grauest, sincerest, of greatest maiestie, least par∣tialitie, as being without all respect of controuersies and contentions, specially of this our time, as appeereth by those which Erasmus and others at this day translate, much more to the aduantage of the catholike cause. Answer. HEre be bare and naked assertions without any proofe: which may as well be denied of vs as affirmed by them. And therefore this I say, that the translations of Erasmus and Beza be as graue, of as great maiestie, as sincere, and as little partiall, as is the common Latin. And in some part to prooue this my affirmation, this I say, that that translation which hath many both barbarous phrases, and grosse soloecismes, is not to be counted so graue, maiesti∣call, and sincere: but this vulgar translation, which they magnifie, hath many such: ergo it is not so graue, &c. Some few for example I will shew, to alledge all were infinite. What grauitie and sinceritie is in these words:Matth. 20.2 Principes gentium dominantur eorum: where the masculine gender is put for the feminine, eorum for earum, and the genitiue case for the datiue, contrarie to the rules of Grammar, and so false Latin committed. Or in these words:Matth. 6.26. Nònne vos magis plures estis illis. Or these:Hebr▪ 2.9. Eum qui modico quàm Angeli mino∣ratus est. Or these: Memorari testamenti sui sancti. Or these:Luc. 1.72.
Vir timoratus secundum legem.Act. 22.12. Matt. 24.6. Luc. 21.38. Or these: Opiniones praeliorum. Or, Populus manicabat ad eum in templo. Many such other and woorse might be alledged, wherein I suppose no wise and learned man will thinke any grauitie, maiestie, or sinceritie to be. As touching partialitie whatsoeuer you pretend, yet if you in your consciences did not iudge it to be more partiall and fauorable for your doctrine, you would neuer preferre it before the originall of the Greeke contrarie to the iudge∣ment of the ancient fathers, and of the best learned of your owne side lately and as yet liuing.Lud. Viues. Arius Mot. And that you do know it to be more partiall for you than the Grooke, I will prooue by a few examples which may serue for many. Iohn. 14. v. 26. The common Latin translation hath it thus: Suggeret vobis omnia quaecun{que} dixero vobis, which you thus finely translate: Shall suggest vnto you all things whatsoeuer I shall say vnto you. Where you know the Gréeke hath . all things which I haue said or spoken vnto you. Is not this translation of yours more partiall to maintaine the traditi∣ons of your church, and decrées of Popes and Councels, than the originall of the Gréeke? In the 10. of Luke, vers. 35. the vulgar Latin translation hath it thus: Et quodcunque supere∣rogaueris, ego cùm rediero, reddam tibi: which you haue tran∣slated; Whatsoeuer thou shalt supererogate, &c. doth not this make more for your works of supererogation (which I may well call supererrogant works) than the Gréeke, which is: Whatsoeuer thou spendest more, &c. In the 13. to the He∣brewes, vers. 16. the Latin translation is thus: Talibus enim hostijs promeretur Deus, which fond translation, you more fondly and foolishly translate thus: For with such hosts God is promerited. Doth not this make more for your doctrine of Merits than the fountaine of the Gréeke? which is, . That is, With such sacrifices God is de∣lighted or well pleased. And for defence of the same doctrine of Merit, doth not the omitting of those words, Rom. 11.6. serue to your purpose? But if it be of works, it is no more grace: or els were worke no worke. Doth not, I say, the dashing out of these words in the text well serue your turne? The which notwithstanding be found in al Gréeke copies, in the ancient Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, and other fathers. And
to the maintenance of the same doctrine, may not that which is in your vulgar translation, Philip. 1.28. be more fitly ap∣plied than the Gréeke? Will you not thereof better gather, that the suffering of afflictions is a cause of saluation,Causa. than of the Gréeke which saith,. it is a declaration or token of sal∣uation, whereunto the children of God do passe through ma∣nifold tribulations? Doth not the Latin vulgar translation in the 5. to the Ephesians: Sacramentum hoc magnum est: This is a great sacrament, stand you in better stead to prooue Mariage one of your seuen sacraments, than the Gréeke? . That is, This is a great mysterie or se∣cret, which S. Paul speaketh and meaneth of Christ and his Church. Sundrie such other examples might be alledged, but these at this time shall suffice to shew, that whatsoeuer you say in word, or pretend in shew, it is the partialitie it sée∣meth to beare to your doctrine, that mooueth you to follow it, and to prefer it before the fountaine of the Gréeke: the which how absurd it is shall héerafter be shewed. 7. Reason. IT is so exact and precise according to the Greeke both the phrase and the word, that delicate heretikes there∣fore reprehend it of rudenes. And that it followeth the Greeke more exactly than the Protestants translations, besides infinite other places we appeale to these, Tit. 3.14. Curent bonis operibus praeesse, . Engl. bib. 1577. to main∣taine good works, Hebr. 10.20. Viam nobis initiauit, . Engl. bib. he prepared. So in these words: Iustifications, Traditions, Idola, &c. In al which they come not neere the Greeke, but auoid it of purpose. Answer. WE do not mislike it for the simplicitie of phrase: for such is the Gréeke wherin the Apostles wrote, being far from the swelling eloquence of profane orators. Where vnder the low simplicitie of phrase, we be∣hold the mightie maiestie of Gods spirit: but bicause in some places it is barbarous, and in very many places is not (as
you say) exact and precise acording to the Gréeke, but dissen∣teth from it, and is euen contrarie to it. As for example, 1. Pet. 2.23. Tradidit iudicanti se iniustè, which you translate: He deliuered himselfe to him that iudged him vniustly; wheras you know it is in the Gréeke, . That is, He committed himselfe (or his cause) to him that iudgeth iustly. Now betwéene iudging iustly, as it is in the Gréeke, in the ancient Syrian translation, and in Oecume∣nius the Gréeke scholiast, and iudging vniustly, as it is in the Latin and your English, there is no exact nor precise agrée∣ment, but a plaine contradiction. So in the 1. Cor. 15.51. in the vulgar Latin translation it is thus: Omnes quidem resur∣gemus, sed non omnes immutabimur, which you translate thus: We shall all indéed rise againe, but we shall not all be chan∣ged. Wheras it is in the Gréeke, as we haue translated: We shall not all sléepe, but we shall al be changed. And that other is so far from being exact and precise according to the Gréeke, that S. Hierom writeth, it was not at all in the Gréeke co∣pies:Hieron. Minerio & Alexand. in fine. In Graecis codicibus non haberi. The which also prooueth this not to be S. Hieroms translation, nor that which he cor∣rected. In the 5. of Marke, vers. 35. and Luke 8. vers. 49. in the Latin translation thus: Veniunt ad Archisynagogam. That is, They came to the Archsynagog: wheras it is in the Gréeke, . That is, From the Archsynagog or ruler of the Synagog: meaning from his house. A like error there is in most of your Latin copies. Iohn 18.28. Adducunt ergo Ie∣sum ad Caiapham in praetorium. That is, They brought Iesus to Caiphas into the iudgement hal: where it is in the Gréek, From Caiaphas. Luke 11.52. The old Latin translation is thus: Coeperunt Pharisaei & legis periti grauiter insistere, & os eius opprimere de multis: which last words you translate thus: To stop his mouth about many things. Wheras the Gréeke , signifieth, To prouoke him to speak of many things, as Erasmus out of Theophylactus and Beza do prooue, and I will héerafter more largely shew, as also the words following do plainly declare. Act. 4. vers. 21. The said Latin translation is thus: Quia omnes clarificabant id quod factum fuerat, in eo quod acciderat: the which barbarous and false translation, you fondly translate thus: Bicause all glo∣rified
that which had béene done, in that which was chanced. Where the Greeke is: . That is, For all glorified God for that which was done. 1. Cor. 6.20. The common Latin translation is thus: Empti enim estis praetio magno: glorificate & portate Deum in corpore vestro, which you translate in this sort: For you are bought with a great price: glorifie and beare God in your bodie. Where you dis∣sent from the Gréeke, in adding this word, Beare, and in o∣mitting all these words: And in your spirit, which are Gods. By these places which I haue set downe, to omit infinite o∣thers, it sufficiently appéereth how true it is, that you say, it is so exact and precise according to the Gréeke. The falsenes of which shameles assertion may also sufficiently be conuin∣ced, by at least an hundred places, where that is in the said translation omitted, which is extant in the Gréeke. For ex∣ample sake I will set downe one notorious place, where the perfect praier which our Lord Iesus hath taught vs, is most miserably mangled, and curtalled, and made imperfect. In the 11. of Luke, all these things be left out of that holie and heauenly praier. First this word Our. Secondly, these words: Which art in heauen. Thirdly, these: Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heauen. Fourthly, these: But deliuer vs from euill. Thus we sée how far this old translation in this short praier is from exact and precise following the Gréeke: and thereby plainly perceiue what brasen browes our Rhemish Iesuits haue, who affirme it so to be, and to follow it more exactly than the Protestants translations: wherin as they say most vntruly (as may appéere by the places before alledged, and many others which shall be héerafter produced) so I verily thinke they write it contrarie to the testimonie of their own conscience. Yet to prooue this shameles assertion they alledge two examples: the one, Tit. 3.14. Curent bonis operibus praeesse, , which they say, we translate, to maintaine good works. And I beséech you, gentle Iesuits, shew vs why it may not so be translated? Doth not , and namely with a genitiue case, as héere S. Paul vseth it, signifie to maintain?Demost. in Timo∣cra. Badaeus tran∣slateth it: Iura vestra tueri & defensitare. Com∣ment. pag. 256. When Demosthenes saith: , is it not, and ought it not to be translated, to maintaine your right? And euen so why may not these words of S. Paul
be in like maner translated, to maintaine good works? What absurd sense or false doctrine is in these words? And whereas the Latin translateth it, Praeesse bonis operibus, and you translate it to excell in good works, although I mislike not of it, for that the sense is good: yet you may know, that it is not the propertie of the Gréeke phrase, for then it should be in the datiue case, , and not in the genitiue, as S. Paul twise héere hath it, vers. 8. & 14. But whether it be translated, to excel in good works, as you do, or to maintaine good works, as you say our Bibles haue it: or to shew foorth good works, as it is in those English Testaments which I haue séene, it maketh no great matter, neither any but vaine cauillers (such as our Iesuits shew themselues to be) will find so great fault with it. If I were disposed so narrowly to examine the old translation, I dare vndertake to find a 1000 places in the Bible more vnproperly translated in Latin, than either of these which you alledge, is in English. But let vs come to your second cauillation, where you find fault for translating the Gréeke word , which in your La∣tin is Initiauit,Hebr. 10.20. by this word Prepared. Our translation of that place is thus: Séeing therefore brethren, that by the blood of Iesus we may be bold to enter into the holie place by the new and liuing way, which he hath prepared for vs through the vaile, that is, his flesh, &c. What matter is héere amisse, that troubleth so much your quiet minds? Forsooth you say the word, Prepared, doth not so exactly agrée with the Gréeke, as doth Initiauit. What then? doth the old Latin more exactly followe the Gréeke generally, if héere in this place the Latin word do more aptly expresse the Gréeke, than the English? that doth not follow. But if we examine the etymologie, propertie, and signification of the words, I cannot sée, but our English doth as well answer to the Gréek as that Latin. For  is to renew, to make new or fresh. And although Initium do signifie a beginning, yet Initio doth not properly signifie to begin, to make new, or fresh; for that doth Innouo: but to instruct, to dedicate, to enter into. And therefore I sée no cause why the word, Prepared, may not as well answer the Gréeke, as the Latin Initiauit. Sure I am it neither goeth far from the signification of the word, nor mea∣ning
of the matter. But this being onely a friuolous cauill, I will omit it, being glad, that you can find no greater disa∣gréeing in our translations from the Gréeke, than these. And whereas you would commend the Latin for exactly following and kéeping these words, Iustifications, Traditi∣ons, Idola, &c. I answer, that as yet you neither haue, nor euer will be able to prooue, that our translations haue not truly expressed the sense of the Gréeke in all these words: so do some of them as much retaine the last, translating , I∣dols, as doth the Latin. For whereas you mislike that wée translate the Gréeke word , Image, and not Idoll, doth not your Latin often translate it Simulacrum, which (I pray you) what doth it else signifie but an image? As that place whereof Master How lets friend so much complaineth. 1. Iohn 5.21. . which in the vul∣gar Latin is thus: Filioli, custodite vos à simulacris, which how is it to be translated in English, but thus; Little children, kéepe your selues from images. For what is the English of Simulacrum, but an Image? If you say, Idoll, I say that that is rather the Gréeke of it than the English. And therfore you do nothing but wrangle and cauil, when you find fault with translating of , Image, as I doubt not, but by others hath and will be more largely prooued. In like maner, Act. 7.41. and Apocal. 9.20. the vulgar interpretor translateth the same word , Simulacrum, which doth signifie nothing els but an Image. And to prooue that  in Gréeke may be translated an Image in English, it may appéere by the e∣timologie which Tertullian maketh of it, in these words: Ad hoc necessaria est vocabuli interpretatio,Tertullianus lib. de Idola∣latria.  Graecè formam sonat, ab eo per diminutionem  diductam aequè apud nos for∣mulam fecit. Igitur omnis forma vel formula idolum se dici ex∣poscit. Inde Idololatria omnis circaidolum famulatus & seruitus. That is, Héereunto is necessarie the interpretation of the word,  in Gréeke signifieth a forme or image: and there∣of by diminution is  deriued, which in like maner sig∣nifieth a little forme or image. Therefore euery forme requi∣reth to be called Idolum. And thereupon Idolatrie is all that seruice and worship which is done about euerie Idoll. Doth it not héerby plainly appéere, that  signifieth the forme,
shape, or image of any thing, and therefore may well so be translated:Answer to Greg. Martin fol. 7. as also my learned brother D. Fulke hath lear∣nedly shewed. 8. Reason. THe aduersaries themselues, namely Beza prefer it be∣fore all the rest in Praefatione noui Testamenti, Ann. 1556. And againe he saith, that the old interpretor translated very religiously. Annot in 1. Luc. v. 1. Answer. IF Master Beza and others thinke reuerently of the old translator, they do as becommeth good and godly men to do, in accepting thankfully and in good part the labors of good men in so good a worke, as is the translating of the bles∣sed word of God, for the instruction and comfort of Gods peo∣ple: and passing by, and by charitie couering some faults that haue escaped. But it is the propertie of wicked men, and enimies to Gods truth, rather to cauill and carpe, to raile at and reuile good men laboring in this sort in Gods vineyards than either charitably to couer faults, or louingly to amend them themselues. So S. Hierom when he was raised vp of God, and prouoked by Damasus Bishop of Rome, to tran∣slate the holy Scriptures faithfully out of Hebrew & Gréeke into Latin, how was he handled of many? Forsooth railed vpon very miserably, as in infinite places of his Prefaces and Epistles doth appéere.Hier. ad Dom∣nion. et Rog. in Esdr. & Neh. For example I will set downe one or two: Legite de hijs exemplaribus, quae nuper à nobis edita, maledicorum quotidie linguis confodiuntur. That is, Read those copies which I haue lately set foorth, and are daily thrust throw with the toongs of railers and euill speakers. Againe: Sicubi ergò aeditio men à veteribus discreparit,Hieronimus Sophro. interroga quemli∣bet Hebraeorum & liquidò peruidebis me ab aemulis frustra lacera∣ri, qui malunt contemnere videri praeclara, quàm discere. That is, If my edition differ from the old, aske any Hebrew and Iew, and thou shalt plainly perceiue, that I am without cause torne in péeces of my aduersaries, who would rather séeme to despise good things, than to learne any thing. Thus
was S. Hierom for translating the holy Scriptures vsed. And was not that learned man Erasmus Roterodamus for his godly paines, in translating the new Testament, in like maner intreated? Being railed vpon by Lea in England, by Natalis Bedda in France, by Stunica in Spaine, and infi∣nite other vnlearned Moonks and Friers, as Erasmus him∣selfe doth declare in an Epistle to Mosellanus,Epist. lib. 6. where he sheweth, that a Carmelite Frier being a Doctor, in a pub∣like sermon charged him there present, with sinne against the holie Ghost, for altering some things in the new Testa∣ment, otherwise than was in the old translation. And ano∣ther cried out for the same cause, that the comming of Anti∣christ was at hand. And when Erasmus vrged him to shew one place in the Testament that did offend him: he said plainly, that he had neither read nor séene it. And euen so Master Beza and our godly countrimen, succéeding those godly learned fathers, in their godly labors, be in like sort handled by our Rhemish Iesuits in this Testament, and by Gregorie Martin in his booke intitled A Discouerie, wher∣in he too much discouereth his owne folly, and the melancho∣lie of his stomacke, in railing vpon them so rudely, or rather despitefully, who haue woorthily labored in bringing to light the light of Gods blessed word. Thus we sée how Satan by his imps and ministers, rageth against those that take pains to translate the holy Scripture: which is the sword that doth foyle him, the hammer that beateth downe his house, the light that driueth away his darknes: which also conuer∣teth the soule, lighteneth the eies, reioiceth the hart,Psal. 19. and ma∣keth vs circumspect in all our waies. But if they do not vn∣fainedly repent this their rude railing, and reuiling of Gods faithfull seruants, let them be assured, that they shall fall in∣to the clawes of him that is indéed , a railer, a slande∣rer, and a false accuser of Gods Saints. As touching my iudgement of the old translation of the new Testament, I say as S. Hierom somtime said to such superstitious admirers of the old translation that then was, as our Romish Papists be now.Hieronimus praefa. in lib. Iosue. Quòd si vetus eis tantum in∣terpretatio placet, quae & mihi non displicet, & nihil extra recipien∣dum putant, &c. That is, But if the old translation onely
please them, which displeaseth not me, and they thinke no∣thing els to be receiued, &c. Euen so say I to them now, that stand so much vpon the old translation: I do not generally disallow it, nor condemne it, although some faults haue béen both by the translator committed, and afterwards by negli∣gence crept into it, which are not malitiously to be railed at, but charitably in the feare of God to be reformed. But wher∣as you say Master Beza preferreth it before all the rest in his Preface before the Testament, 1556. you do misreport him: for he doth not in that Preface prefer it before all the rest, whereof he maketh no comparison, but onely defendeth it against Erasmus in some places, which he thought that he found fault with it, without sufficient cause. You cannot be ignorant, that Master Beza in that Preface affirmeth, be∣sides manifold faults crept in by the writers,Beza his words. it doth often dissent from the Gréeke, interpret many things obscurely, adde some things, and omit others. And wheras you further alledge, that in his Annotations vpon Luke he saith, the old translator translated very religiously, he did (as I haue be∣fore declared) reuerently thinke of him, who (no doubt) was a godly man, and tooke godly paines in setting foorth Gods holie word, to the benefit of his Church. Yet you know, that euen in that very place, Master Beza sheweth some imper∣fection in him. For these be his words, out of which you haue culled your testimonie:Beza in Anno∣tat. in Luc. v. 1. . Vetus autem interpres quamuis alioqui videatur summa religione sacros libros interpretatus, tamen quae significatio sit horum vocabulorum non videtur cognouisse, ne dum vt vim illorum intellexerit. That is, But the old interpretor although otherwise he may séeme very religiously to haue translated these holy bookes, yet it appéereth, that he did not know what is the signification of these words, much lesse that he vnderstood the force and power of them. And how iustly héere he findeth fault, any that is indued with any knowledge in the toongs, and not blinded with malice may plainly perceiue. Therefore, although Master Beza reue∣rently iudged of him, yet he did not thinke him to be with∣out his faults, which are charitably to be corrected and refor∣med, as he doth, and not malitiously to be carped and reproo∣ued, as is our Iesuits and Greg. Martins maner. It is not
also to be thought, but that most of those faults and corrupti∣ons, which be now in the text, were not committed at the first by the translator, but haue crept in since, either (as S. Hierom saith) by negligent writers, and copiers out of the bookes: or by presumptuous and ignorant correctors, &c. which are not to be imputed vnto him. Lastly, I say the que∣stion is not so much, which is the best translation, or whe∣ther it be better than the rest: but whether it is to be prefer∣red before the originall Gréeke: which héereafter is to be dis∣cussed. 9. Reason. IN the rest there is such diuersitie and dissention, and no end of reprehending one another, and translating euerie man according to his fantasie, that Luther said,Cocle. cap. 11. de cano. Script. au∣toritate. if the world should stand long time, we must receiue againe (which he thought absurd) the decrees of Councels, for preseruing the vnitie of faith, bicause of so diuers interpre∣tations of the Scripture. And Beza (in the place aboue mentioned) noteth the itching ambition of his fellowe translators, that had much rather disagree and dissent from the best, than seeme themselues to haue said or writ∣ten nothing. And Bezas translation it selfe being so estee∣med in our countrie, that the Geneua English Testaments be translated according to the same, yet sometime goeth so wide from the Greeke, and from the meaning of the holie Ghost, that themselues, which protest to translate it, dare not follow it. For example▪ Luc. 3. v. 36. they haue put these words: The sonne of Cainan, which he wittingly and wilfully left out. And Act. 1.14. they say: With the wo∣men, agreeably to the vulgar Latin, where he saith: Cum vxoribus, With their wiues. Answer. HEre in this 9. reason, you complaine of the diuersitie and dissention of other translations, by reason wher∣of, we should for the preseruing of vnitie of faith, if the world should long continue, receiue the decrées of Coun∣cels,
as you imagine, and make Luther to affirme. Why? may not vnitie of faith stand with diuersitie of translations? There were in the primitiue Church fower seuerall Gréeke translations of the old Testament. The first of the seuentie interpretors, second of Simmachus, third of Aquila, fourth of Theodotion: and yet there was vnitie of faith in the true Church: or whatsoeuer diuersitie of doctrine there was, I thinke you cannot prooue, that it came of the diuersitie of translations. There were in the Latin Church very many diuers translations, as S. Augustine in these words shew∣eth:August. lib. 2. de doctr. Christ. cap. 11. Qui enim Scripturas ex Hebraea lingua in Graecam verte∣rint numerari possunt: Latini autem interpretes nullo modo. That is, For they that haue translated the Scriptures out of the Hebrew toong into the Gréeke may be numbred: but the La∣tin translators cannot. Héere you sée that S. Augustine affir∣meth, the Latin translators of the Scriptures to haue béene so many, that they could not be numbred: yet he was so far from our Rhemists opinion, that they bred diuersitie of doc∣trine,August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 12 that he thought the same profitable, especially for them which wanted the knowledge of the originall toongs: foras∣much as that which is obscure in one, may be made manifest by another. And if there may be diuersitie of expositions of one place of Scripture without breach of vnitie of doctrine, why may not some diuersitie of translations stand with vni∣tie of faith and doctrine? Héerof S. Augustine writeth thus: Quos necesse est etiamsi rectae atque vnius fidei fuerint,August. epist. ad Hieron. varias pa∣rere in multorum locorum obscuritate sententias: quamuis nequd∣quam ipsa varietas ab eiusdem fidei vnitate discordet, sicut etiam vnus tractator secundum eandem fidem aliter atque aliter eundem locum potest exponere, quia hoc eius obscuritas patitur. That is, Who must néedes, although they be of one true faith, bring foorth by reason of the obscuritie of many places diuers opi∣nions and iudgements: albeit the same diuersitie doth no∣thing at all differ from the vnitie of one faith: as also one ex∣pounder agréeably to one faith, may diuersly expound one place,Chrysostom. in Gen. hom. 37. bicause that the hardnes thereof requireth the same. So saith Chrysostom: Talis enim Scripturae mos est, vt in pau∣cis verbis plurima saepè multitudo sensuum inueniatur. That is, Such is the maner of the Scripture, that in few words a
very great multitude of senses or expositions may be found. And therefore as there may be diuers expositions of places of the Scriptures, which may all agrée with the analogie and proportion of faith: euen so may there be in translations diuersitie in words and phrases, without dissention in doc∣trine, or breach of faith. I write not this, that I allow the itching ambition of some (of whom Master Beza doth iustly complaine) who without sufficient knowledge in the toongs, and sound iudgement, take ouer rashly vpon them to trans∣late that blessed booke of the holy Scriptures, which ought not to be handled with vnwashen hands, but with all reue∣rence and fidelitie in the feare of God ought to be dealt in. Neither do I thinke but that it were very expedient and profitable for the Church of Christ, that in euery toong there were one as exact and absolute translation, as might be a∣gréed vpon, which should either onely or principally be fol∣lowed. The which if it cannot be procured, I say that vnitie of faith may as well agrée with diuersitie of translations: as there might and would be diuersitie of doctrine through the malice of Satan, and weaknes of mans iudgement, though there were but one onely translation. And therfore I thinke you rather sucke that out of your owne fingers, than find it in Luthers works, in such sense and sort as you expresse it. And thereupon haue noted no place in his writings where it is to be found, but onely refer vs to a place of Coclaeus, who being a professed and malitious enimie to Master Lu∣ther, of what weight and force his report is to be accounted, let the indifferent Reader iudge. But whereas you charge Master Bezas translation so much estéemed of vs, to go so wide from the Gréeke, and meaning of the holy Ghost, that we dare not (as you say) follow it: I answer, that as we re∣uerence the man for his great gifts of learning, and woorthi∣ly estéeme his godly and learned labors, in translating faith∣fully the Testament of Iesus Christ: so neither he doth re∣quire, nor we iudge our selues to be bound in all things abso∣lutely without exception to follow him. He is a man and may erre, and as we thankfully to Gods glorie acknowledge that he hath euen hit the marke in many: so we doubt not, but he might misse it in some, and peraduenture so hath
done, not in substance of doctrine, but in some proprietie of words and phrases. Howbeit whereas you so maliciously and falsely accuse him to haue gone so far from the Gréeke, and meaning of the holy Ghost, let vs sée your proofes. You alledge héere but two places: the one Luc. 3. v. 36. the lea∣uing out of the name Cainan, which we haue put in. This is a great matter whereat you make such a tragicall exclamati∣on in your marginall note vpon that place, which is but the leauing out of one name, whereas both in the old Latin, and your owne new English, there are left out not onely words, but also sentences in at least an hundred places. Thus you can straine a gnat, and swallow a camell: sée a mote in your brothers eie, and not behold a great beame in your owne. Touching the matter it selfe, which concerneth neither faith nor doctrine: Master▪ Beza hath not without great and good cause omitted the said name of Cainan: partly bicause it is not in the Hebrew, Genes. 11. nor in the booke of Chro∣nicles,Genes. 11.12. 1. Chron. 1.18. where the same Genealogie is set out: and partly for that it is not expressed, but omitted in one most ancient Gréeke and Latin copie, that of late yéeres came to his hands, which he hath sent to the Vniuersitie of Cambridge there to be kept, and is there reserued. Whereupon Master Beza vpon good warrant hath omitted that name. And if we had had intelligence of that ancient Gréeke and Latin copie, we would not haue doubted to haue followed him. But whether it be expressed or omitted, it is a matter of no great moment, and concerneth no point of doctrine. Beda hauing shewed, that in the veritie of the Hebrew, the name of Cainan is in both those places of the old Testament left out, and that S. Luke alledged it (as he thought) out of the Septuaginta in∣terpretors,Beda in Luc. 3. standeth in a mammering at the matter, and writeth thus: Sed quid horum sit verius, aut si vtrumque verum esse possit Deus nouerit. That is, But whether of these rea∣dings be the truer, or whether both be true, God knoweth The second place wherein you charge Master Beza with disagréeing from the Gréeke, and vs with dissenting from him, is Act. 1. v. 14. He translating: Cum vxoribus; With the wiues, and we according to the old Latin, With the women. Wherein you do but cauill, according to your accustomed
maner, and find a knot in a rush. Doth not the Gréeke word  signifie indifferently both a woman in respect of hir sex, & a wife in respect of hir calling? S. Hierom can teach you this in these words:Hieron. lib. 1. aduersus Io∣uinianum. Numquid non habemus potestatem mulieres vel vxores circumducendi (quia  apud Graecos vtrumque signifi∣cat) sicut caeteri Apostoli & Cephas? &c. That is, Haue we not power to lead about, women or wiues (for the Gréeke word  doth signifie both) as the other Apostles and Cephas? &c. Héere S. Hierom doth not only flatly affirme, that the word  (which S. Luke in this place, which you alledge, Act. 1.14. doth vse) signifieth both a woman and wife: but also sheweth, that that place of S. Paul 1. Cor. 9.5. may be tran∣slated either women or wiues. And in his booke against Hel∣uidius, he doth translate it wiues.August. de opere Monacho. cap. 4. The which also S. Augu∣stine doth affirme, that som translated in that place Wiues. Therefore I beséech you, why may not this place in the Acts in like maner be translated either women or wiues, with∣out going so wide from the Gréeke, and meaning of the holy Ghost, as you complaine on? Doth your old translator, tran∣slating Act. 21.5. the very same two Gréeke words  (which be héer in this place vsed) Cum vxoribus, and you, with their wiues, go so wide from the Gréeke? Or doth Master Beza go wide from the Gréeke translating the same Gréeke words, with the very same Latin words, as the old interpre∣tor doth, and he néere vnto the same? But you will say,Act. 1.14. the sense of this place requireth to be translated Women, and not wiues: and the sense of the other, Act. 21.5. Wiues, and not women. Then it followeth by your owne confession, that Master Beza hath not gone wide from the signification of the word, howsoeuer he haue gone from the sense of the place, and meaning of the matter. But if you examine that with an indifferent eie, there may as good reason be yéelded for the translating of it Wiues, as Women: as appéereth by the reasons which Erasmus and Beza do bring. Erasmus in his Annotations saith, it may be either way translated, his words be these: Accipi potest & cum vxoribus, propterea quòd separauit Mariam à mulieribus. That is, It may be taken,Erasmus in An∣notat. and with their wiues, bicause he did separate Marie from the wo∣men. And euen so Master Beza saith in his Annotations,
that it may be translated either Wiues or Women: but he preferred the former: bicause the Apostles wiues were to be confirmed, who partly should be companions of their tra∣uels, and partly should patiently abide their absence at home. But whether it be translated Women or Wiues, it maketh no matter, the Gréeke word will indifferently beare both. God be thanked that our Rhemish and Romish Ie∣suits can alledge no greater disagréement in Bezas and our translations from the Gréeke: The which may be a good and sufficient testimonie, euen to the simple and vnlearned, of the soundnes and sinceritie of them. But I am ashamed to persist any longer in confuting these friuolous follies and cauillations. 10. Reason. IT is not only better than al other translations, but than the Greeke text it selfe, in those places where they do disagree. Answer. THe tenth and last reason that hath mooued our Rhe∣mish Runnagates to translate rather out of the olde Latin than the Gréeke, is a very strange paradoxe, that the vulgar Latin translation, is not onely better than al other translations, but than the Gréeke it selfe when they differ. This I count and call a strange paradoxe, bicause it is contrarie not onely to the generall iudgement of the ancient fathers and learned writers (as héerafter shall appéere:) but also to the common course of all learning. For whereas in all other authors and writings, the originall languages, where∣in the authors did first write themselues, are preferred be∣fore all translations, as in Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, De∣mosthenes, Homer, Galen, Euclyde, &c. and al translations are examined and reformed by the said originals: now by our Iesuits new Diuinitie, onely the Testament of Iesus Christ, written in Gréeke by his blessed Apostles, through the inspiration of Gods holie spirit, must come behind the Latin translation, translated we know not when, nor by whom.
The Latin must not now be examined by the Gréeke (as S. Hierom, Erasmus, and other learned men haue labored to do) but the Gréeke by the Latin: for it is, they say, the better; and it is méete that the woorse be reformed by the better. Now bicause héere is the principall controuersie in this mat∣ter, and héereupon depend all the diuersities that be in the English translation of the Iesuits fetched from the Latin, and ours deriued from the Gréeke: (for if the Gréeke, wher∣in they cannot denie but the Apostles did write, be general∣ly to be preferred before that old Latin, then ours is true, and theirs false: if otherwise the Latin be more sound and sin∣cere than the Gréeke, then is theirs true, and ours false) let vs therefore somewhat more exactly examine this matter, and weigh our Rhemists reasons which mooue them to broach abrode this new doctrine and strange opinion. And although that which I haue said, may to any reasonable man séeme sufficient, that it is contrarie to all reason and all lear∣ning: yet bicause our Iesuits would séeme greatly to depend vpon the Doctors, and to carrie all their annotations, and guilefull gloses in this Testament, vnder the visor of some father, let vs sée what the Latin godly and ancient fathers say in this matter. For to them in this point I must special∣ly appeale, and not to the Gréeke fathers, who followed the fountaine of the Gréeke, and medled not with translations, as streames flowing from it. And after I will come to other learned men, and euen such as misliked not the Romish religion. S. Hierom who was not onely excellently learned in the thrée learned languages, but also greatly occupied in translating the whole Bible out of the Hebrew and Gréeke (as before appéereth) writeth thus:Hieronimus aduersus Hel∣uidium. Non necesse est nunc de ex∣emplarium varietate tractare, cùm omne & veteris & nouae Scripturae instrumentum in Latinum sermonem exinde transla∣tum sit, & multò purior manare credenda sit fontis vnda quàm riui. That is, I néed not now to intreat of the varietie of the copies or examples (meaning the Latin) séeing that the whole instrument of the old and new Scripture was from thence translated into the Latin toong, and the water of the fountaine is thought to flow more pure than that of the ri∣uer or streame. In these words S. Hierom doth not onely
affirme the Latin to be translated dut of the Gréeke, but also the Gréeke to be more pure than the Latin, as the water of the fountaine is more cleane and swéete than that in the streame or riuer,Hieronimus ad Lucinium. according to the old true saying: Dulcius ex ipso fonte bibuntur aquae. Againe, the same Hierom saith: Vt e∣nim veterum librorū fides de Hebraeis examinanda est, ita nouorū Graeci sermonis normam desiderat. That is, As the truth of the books of the old Testament is to be examined by the Hebrew: so the bookes of the new Testament require the triall of the Gréeke.Hieronimus Suniae & Fre∣tellae. Againe he writeth thus: Sicut autem in nouo Testa∣mento si quando apud Latinos quaestio exoritur, & est inter exem∣plaria varietas, recurrimus ad fontem Graeci sermonis quo nouum scriptum est instrumentum: ita in veteri Testamento, si quando inter Graecos Latinósque diuersitas est ad Hebraicam recurrimus veritatem: vt quicquid de fonte proficiscitur, hoc quaeramus in ri∣uulis. That is, As in the new Testament if there arise any questions among the Latins, and there be varietie among the copies, we returne vnto the fountaine of the Gréeke toong in the which the new Testament was written: so in the old Testament if at any time there be diuersitie among the Greekes and Latins, we returne vnto the Hebrew veritie, that whatsoeuer floweth from the fountaine, we may séeke the same in the streames. Infinite such other places there be in S. Hierom both in his Prefaces, Epistles, and other works: and those also which before I haue in the beginning set downe, do plainly declare S. Hieroms iudgement héerin, and that he thought it most absurd to prefer the Latin before the Gréeke, as our Rhemish Iesuits are not ashamed for to do. Now let vs heare what S. Augustines opinion was, who although he were vtterly ignorant in the Hebrew▪ and as it is thought had no great knowledge in the Gréeke, writeth thus:Augustinus de ciuitate Dei, lib. 15. cap. 13. Ei linguae potius credatur, vnde est in alia per interpretes fa∣cta translatio. That is, We ought rather to beléeue that toong, from the which it is by interpretation deriued into another. Againe:August. in Psal. 38. Sed quia non sunt loquelae neque sermones quorum non audiantur voces eorum, exponit sequentem lingua praecedens, & fit certum in alia, quod erat ambiguum in alia. That is, But bicause there are no languages nor toongs, where their words be not heard, the former toong expoundeth the later, and it is made
plaine in one, which was doubtfull in another. Againe:August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 12. Quis interpretum vera sequutus sit, nisi exemplaria linguae praecedentis legantur, incertū est? That is, Which of the interpretors hath folowed the truth, vnles the examples of the former toong be read, it is vncertaine? Againe: Libros noui Testamenti,Ibid. cap. 15. si quid in Latinis varietatibus titubat, Graecis cedere oportere non est dubiū. That is, It is not to be doubted, but that the bookes of the new Testament, if that there be any doubt in the varieties of the Latin, ought to giue place vnto the Gréeke. The like he affirmeth, Sermone Domini in monte, lib. 1.August. epist. 59. And in his Epi∣stles he writeth thus: Secundum Graecum eloquium discernenda sunt: nam nostri interpretes vix reperiuntur qui ea diligenter & scienter transferre curauerint. That is, These words are to be discerned by the Gréeke toong: for we can hardly find of our translators that haue béene carefull to translate this exactly and cunningly. He meaneth of the distinguishing those words, Praiers, Supplications, and intercessions, 1. Tim. 2.1. And how we ought to deale when there be any varieties in the bookes and copies of the Scriptures, S. Augustine gi∣ueth vs this counsell:August. lib. 11. contra Faustū Manich. cap. 2 Ita si de fide exemplarium quaestio verte∣retur, sicut in nonnullis quae & paucae sunt & sacrarum literarum studiosis notissimae sententiarum varietates, vel ex aliarum regio∣num codicibus vnde ipsa doctrina commeauit, nostra dubitatio diju∣dicaretur: vel si ibi quoque codices variarent, plures paucioribus, vel vetustiores recentioribus praeferrentur. Et si adhuc esset incer∣ta varietas, praecedens lingua, vnde hoc interpretatum est, consule∣retur. Hoc modo quaerunt, qui quod eos mouet in Scripturis tanta autoritate firmatis inuenire volunt, vt habeant vndè instruantur, non vnde rixentur. That is, So if there be any question tou∣ching the truth of the copies or examples of the Scripture, as in some there be varieties of sentences, which both be few, and also well knowen to those that be studious in the holie Scripture, then our doubt is to be iudged either by the books of other countries, from whence the doctrine came vnto vs: or if there also the bookes differ, then the mo be to be prefer∣red before the fewer, and the more ancient before the later. And if as yet there remaine a doubtfull varietie, the former toong, from whence it was translated, should be conferred with. In this sort do they séeke, which would find in the holy
Scriptures, confirmed by so great authoritie, that which troubleth them, that they may haue wherewith they may be edified and instructed, and not wherewith to wrangle and raile. This is the good counsell of that good father, the which our Rhemish Iesuits not following, it séemeth, and by their writings it plainly appéereth, that in this edition of the Te∣stament, they séeke rather to wrangle and raile, than either to be instructed themselues,Ambros. de in∣carnat. verbi, cap. 8. or to profit Gods people. Saint Ambrose also preferreth the Gréeke text in these words: Ita enim inuenimus in Graecis codicibus quorum potior autoritas est. That is, For so we find it in the Gréeke bookes, whose auto∣ritie is better. Tertullian also preferreth the Gréeke in these words:Tertullianus lib. 2. aduersus Marcionem. In primis tenendum quod Graeca Scriptura signauit, affla∣tum nominans non spiritum. Quidam enim de Graeco interpretan∣tes, non recogitata differentia, nec curata proprietate verborum pro afflatu spiritum ponunt, & dant haereticis occasionem Spiritum Dei infussandi, id est, ipsum Deum. That is, Especially we must hold that which the Scripture in Gréeke hath set downe, na∣ming afflatum, that is, breath or wind, and not spirit. For some translating from the Gréeke, and not considering the difference, nor regarding the propertie of the words, haue for breath put spirit, and giue occasion to heretikes to attri∣bute sinne to the spirit of God, that is, to God himselfe. By these sayings of these ancient fathers it may suffici∣ently appéere, what was their iudgement concerning the o∣riginall text of the holie Scripture, and how far they were from this absurd assertion of our Rhemish Iesuits in prefer∣ring the troubled streame of their Latin translation before the pure fountaine of the Gréeke. Now I will set downe the iudgement of some later writers, and such as were no ad∣uersaries, but fauorers of the Romish religion. Ludouicus Viues in his Commentaries vpon S. Augustine De ciuitate Dei,Ludouicus Vi∣ues in Aug. de ciuitate Dei, lib. 15. cap. 13. vpon those words of Augustine before alledged: Ei lin∣guae potius credatur, &c. writeth thus: Hoc ipsum Hieronimus clamat, hoc ipsa docet ratio. Et nullus est saniore iudicio qui repug∣net. Sed frustra consensus bonorum ingeniorum hoc censet. Nam rigidus stupor velut moles opponitur. Non quia isti inscij sunt ea∣rum linguarum, nam nec Hebraicè sciebat Augustinus, & Graecè minus quàm mediocriter. Sed non est in hijs ea modestia animi quae
in Augustino. Hic vndiquaque paratus erat doceri, isti nusquam volunt doceri, vbique docere quod ignorant. That is, This Hie∣rom earnestly (vz. that more credit and autoritie be giuen to the Hebrew in the old, and Gréeke in the new Testament, than to any translations) this reason it selfe teacheth. And there is none of any sound iudgement, that will denie the same. But in vaine doth the consent of good wits thus thinke. For stiffe sturdines as a bulwarke is set against it. The which they do not, bicause they be ignorant of those toongs. For neither S. Augustine did vnderstand the Hebrew any thing, and but meanly the Gréeke. But there is not in these men that modestie of mind which was in Augustine. He was readie and willing any waies to be taught: these men will neuer be taught, but will alwaies teach that which they do not vnderstand. Hitherto Lud▪ Viues. Erasmus also who too much continued vnder the obedience of the Romish church, writeth thus:Erasmus in prae∣fatione in Anno∣tat. Noui Test. Testamentum quod vo∣cant Nouum, &c. That is, The new Testament as they call it, we haue recognised with as great, both diligence as wée might, and faithfulnes as we ought, and that first according to the truth of the Gréeke, whereunto for to flie, if any doubt fall out, not onely the examples of famous Diuines do coun∣sell vs, but also Hierom and Augustine do often bid vs, and the very decrées of the Bishops of Rome do command vs.
But now let vs examine our Iesuits proofes for the confirming of this strange Paradoxe. Rhemish Iesuits. THe proofe heerof is euident, bicause most of the anci∣ent heretikes were Grecians, and therefore the Scrip∣tures in Greeke were more corrupted by them, as the an∣cient fathers often complaine. Answer. LEt the good Christian Reader héere consider the desperate dealing of the Papists against the holy Worde of God. First they haue with all careful∣nes and diligence kept it vnder the bushell of a strange toong, that the light thereof might not shine in the eies of the common people to the dis∣couering of their errors, Idolatries, and mockeries. But when through the great mercie of God this light hath béene taken from vnder this bushell, and set vpon a candlestick, to giue light to al that are in Gods house, to the directing of their féete to walke in Gods waies: then they haue fallen to raile on it, and reprochfully to speake of it. Iohn Ecchius calleth the Scripture, Euangelium nigrum & Theologiam atramentariam. That is, the blacke Gospell, and Inken Diuinitie.Hierar. lib. 3. cap. 3 fol. 103. Albertus Pighius another patron of the Popes cause, writeth thus: Sunt Scripturae, vt non minus verè, quàm festiuè dixit quidam, velut nasus cereus, qui se horsum illor∣sum, & in quamcunque volueris partem trahi, retrahi, fingí{que} fa∣cilè permittit. That is, The Scriptures be (as one no lesse tru∣ly than pleasantly said) like a nose of waxe, which maybe drawen this way, and that way, & be applied to whatsoeuer part a man will.Ludouicus citatur ab Illyrico in Nor. Concilij. One Ludouicus a canon of the Laterane church in Rome, thus spake in an oration in the late goodly Councell of Trident: Ecclesia est viuum pectus Christi, Scrip∣tura
autem est quasi mortuum atramentum. That is, the Church is the liuely brest of Christ: but the Scripture is as it were dead inke. How contemptuously writeth Cardinall Hosius of those comfortable and swéet Psalmes of Dauid, which be a pretious part of the holy canonicall Scripture? For where∣as it was obiected for the proofe of kings and princes power in Ecclesiasticall causes, that king Dauid did not onely deale in such causes for the restoring and planting of Gods true worship and seruice, greatly decaied in the daies of king Saul a wicked hypocrite: but also did write Psalmes, which per∣taine to the canon of the Scripture, for the instruction and di∣rection of Gods Church for euer: Hosius answereth in these words: Scripsit Dauid Psalmos aliquot,Hosius contra Brentium▪ lib. 2 si quid Athanasio credi∣mus quinque tantùm. Quid ni scriberet? Ne nunc quidem regi prohibetur, aut principi, quominus aut rythmos, aut Psalmos aut carmina scribat, quibus Dei laudes celebret. Scribimus indocti doctíque poemata passim. That is, Dauid did write certaine Psalmes, if we beléeue Athanasius but fiue onely. Why might he not write? Euen now a king or prince is not pro∣hibited to write either rimes, or Psalmes, or verses where∣with he may praise God. We write learned and vnlearned poems apace. Thus contemptuously writeth that popish pre∣late and president in that Tridentine Conuenticle of the Psalmes, comparing them with rimes and verses that kings may or do now write: and thereunto disdainfully and blas∣phemously applying that verse of Horace the profane poet. Besides this contemptuous speaking of the holy Scriptures, our Papists be now procéeded a step further: in accusing the originall texts of the Scriptures to be corrupted, the old Te∣stament by the Iewes, and the New by Gréeke heretikes. Is not this desperate dealing against the word of God? First to suppresse it, and kéepe it in a strange toong, then reproch∣fully to speake of it, and now lastly to accuse the original and autenticall copies thereof to be corrupted? What can they do more vtterly to deface and discredit the word of God con∣tained in the Scriptures: the which may séeme to be the marke they shoote at, that by pulling downe the credit of the holy Scriptures, they may set vp their owne vaine inuenti∣ons, and wicked traditions, wherewith their religion doth
much better agrée than with the Scriptures. But now let vs more particularly come to the examina∣tion of this assertion. The proofe heerof is euident (say our Rhemish Iesuits) bicause most of the ancient heretikes were Grecians, &c. I answer, that the disproofe héerof is ea∣sie. For this is not the complaint as you most falsely affirme of ancient fathers: but a false slander of ancient wicked here∣tikes, as by the ancient godly fathers doth most plainly ap∣péere.Hieronimus aduersus Hel∣uidium. So did Heluidius as Saint Hierom sheweth, whose words I may aptly apply vnto you, which be these: Ac nè fortè de exemplariorum veritate causeris: quia tibi stultissimè per∣suasisti Graecos codices esse falsatos: ad Ioannis Euangelium venio. That is, But least peraduenture you complaine of the truth of the copies, bicause thou hast most foolishly persuaded thy selfe, that the Gréeke bookes be falsified, I come to the Gospel of Iohn. In which words you may sée, how that you who will be worshippers of the virgin Marie, ioine héerin hand in hand with Heluidius, whom otherwise you would séeme much to mislike, for denying the perpetuall virginitie of hir. And as Hierom said, that Heluidius was most foolishly per∣suaded then, that the Gréeke bookes of the Testament were corrupted: Euen so may I say vnto you, that this is an ex∣treame folly thus to iudge now, as did Heluidius then: for what reason is it to thinke, that the Gréeke heretikes could corrupt all the Gréeke copies in the world? Or why shall not we thinke, that the godly learned fathers were as carefull to kéepe them pure from corruption, as the heretikes were to corrupt them?With Rainolds. And whereas there were (as the Papists al∣so do now) that thought the Iewes had corrupted the He∣brew in the old Testament,August. lib. 15. de ciuitate Dei cap. 13. S. Augustine answereth thus: Sed absit vt prudens quispiam vel Iudaeos cuiuslibet peruersitatis at{que} malitiae tantum potuisse credat in codicibus tam multis & tam longè laté{que} dispersis, vel septuaginta illos memorabiles viros hoc de inuidenda gentibus veritate vnum communicasse consilium. That is, But God forbid that any wise man should beléeue that the Iewes, how peruerse or malitious soeuer they were, could do so much as to corrupt so many copies, and so far and wide dispersed abroad, or that those woorthy men the seuentie interpretors did take this counsell togither to de∣priue
the Gentils of the truth.Lud. Viues in illa August. verba. Vpon which words of S. Au∣gustine, Ludouicus Viues writeth thus: Hoc idem responderi potest hijs, qui falsatos corruptós{que} & ab Hebraeis codices veteris instrumenti, & à Graecis noui obijciunt, nè veritas sacrorum libro∣rum ex illis fontibus petatur. That is, This same may be an∣swered to them, who do obiect vnto vs (as our Rhemish Ie∣suits do now) that the bookes of the old Testament were cor∣rupted and falsified by the Iewes, and the bookes of the new Testament by the Grecians, to the end that the truth of those holy bookes might not be fetched from those fountains. Thus you sée how S. Augustine and Ludouicus Viues, one other∣wise of your owne side, dissent frō you in this your shameles assertion of the corruption of the Gréeke copies. But let vs sée what other holy fathers our holy Iesuits haue followed, in accusing the Gréeke copies of the Scriptures to be corrup∣ted. Those monsters the Manichées were of the same opini∣on, as appéereth by S. Augustine in these words:August. Hie∣ronimo. epist. 19. Manichaei plurima diuinarum Scripturarum quibus eorum nefarius error clarissima sententiarum perspicuitate conuincitur: quia in alium sensum detorquere non possunt, falsa esse contendunt: ita tamen vt eandem falsitatem, non scribentibus Apostolis tribuant, sed nescio quibus codicum corruptoribus. Quod tamen quia nec pluribus siue antiquioribus exemplaribus nec praecedentis linguae autoritate (vn∣de Latini libri interpretati sunt) probare aliquando potuerunt: no∣tissima omnibus veritate superati confusíque discedunt. That is, The Manichées bicause they cannot writhe into another sense very many places of the holie Scriptures, by the which their wicked error is by most plaine and euident sentences conuinced, affirme the same to be false: yet so, that they attri∣bute the same not to the Apostles which wrote them, but I know not to what others, who afterward corrupted them. The which notwithstanding, bicause they cannot prooue, neither by the most copies, nor by the most ancient, nor by the autoritie of the former toong (from which the Latin books were translated) they are ouercome and confounded by the truth, being made most manifest vnto all men. These be the fathers, whom our Rhemish Iesuits haue followed, in accu∣sing the Gréeke text of the Testament to be corrupted. As for the godly and learned fathers, you may sée both by these
places, and those which I haue before alledged, how far they dissent from them, who alwaies appealed to the Gréeke in the new Testament, and haue affirmed that the Latin tran∣slations are to be examined and reformed by it. And whereas you say, most of the ancient heretikes were Grecians, and therefore the Scriptures in Gréeke more corrupted by them, as you say the ancient fathers complaine. I say that you haue not receiued this friuolous cauillation, and false accusation from the godly ancient fathers, but (besides those heretikes whom I haue named) from the barbarous absurd Gloser vp∣on Gratians decrées, Dist. 9. cap. Vt veterum: the summe of whose words you haue alledged, which I will more largely lay downe as they be there to be séene.Glossa dist. 9. cap. Vt vete∣rum. Hieronimus in 2. prolo∣go Bibliae contra ait dicens quòd emendatiora sunt exemplaria La∣tina quàm Graeca: & Graeca quàm Hebraea. Sed Augustinus ad pri∣mitiuam Ecclesiam respicit quando exemplaria Graeca & Hebraea non erant corrupta. Sed procedente tempore cùm populus Christia∣nus mulium esset auctus, & haereses essent factae inter Graecos, in in∣uidia Christianorum Iudaei & Graeci sua exemplaria corruperunt. Et sic factum est, quòd exemplaria eorum magis corrupta sint quàm Latinorum, ad quod tempus respicit Hieronimus. That is, Hie∣rom in the second prolog of the Bible saith the contrarie (vz. to Augustine) affirming the Latin copies to be more true than the Gréeke, and the Gréeke than the Hebrew. But Au∣gustine speaketh in respect of the primitiue Church, when the Gréeke and Hebrew copies were not corrupt. But in processe of time, when the Christian people was much in∣creased, and manie heresies sprang among the Grecians: the Iewes and Grecians for enuie of the Christians corrup∣ted their copies. And so it is come to passe, that their copies be more corrupt than the Latins, the which time Hierom respecteth. Hitherto the Gloser: from whom it most plain∣ly appéereth, that you haue borrowed this reason, or rather accusation of the corruption of the Gréeke copies, which is an author fit for you to follow: who hath in these words deli∣uered almost as manie grosse absurdities and lies, as there  be lines. For first he maketh Augustine and Hierom dissen∣ting in iudgement: Augustine preferring the Gréeke and Hebrew copies, and Hierom the Latin: attributing to Au∣gustine
a sentence which is not his, but Hieroms Ad Lucini∣um, as I haue before alledged, whose words againe be these: Vt veterum librorum fides, &c. As the truth of the bookes of the old Testament is to be examined by the Hebrew bookes: so the truth of the new requireth the triall of the Gréeke toong. And so this blind Gloser attributing to Augustine a saying which indéed is Hieroms, maketh Hierom contrarie to him∣selfe. Secondly, in alledging S. Hieroms words out of the  second prolog of the Bible, and making him there to affirme the Latin copies to be more true than the Gréeke, he doth cleane peruert S. Hieroms meaning. For there in that very place he doth affirme the cleane contrarie in these words:Hieronimus in prologo in pen∣tateuchum. Si∣cubi in translatione tibi videor errare, interroga Hebraeos: diuer∣sarum vrbium magistros consule. Quod illi habent de Christo, tui codices non habent. Aliud est, si contra se poste à ab Apostolis vsur∣pata testimonia probauerunt, & emendatiora sunt exemplaria La∣tina quàm Graeca, & Graeca quàm Hebraica. That is, If so be that I séeme to thée to erre in my translation, aske the He∣brewes, consult with the Masters of diuers cities. That which they haue of Christ, thy bookes haue not. It is another matter, if they haue allowed the testimonies afterward vsed by the Apostles against them, & that the Latin examples be more true than the Gréeke, and the Gréeke than the Hebrew. Héere S. Hierom doth infer this as absurd, that the Latin copies should be more true than the Gréeke, and the Gréeke than the Hebrew, which the blind Gloser our Iesuits Ma∣ster thought he simply ment. And that the reader may per∣ceiue this more plainly, I will set downe some of Erasmus words in his scholies vpon this place of Hierom:Erasmus in il∣lum locum Hieron. Hunc locum insulsissime citat glossometarius quisquis is fuit in decretis pontifi∣cum, dist. 9. cap. Vt veterum librorum, putans Hieronimum verè sensisse Graecorum exemplaria emendatiora esse quàm Hebraea, & Latina emendatiora quàm Graeca. Et hunc nodum multis modis dissoluit, nugacissimè nugans in re non intellecta, vel dic, vel dic, vel dic. Tantúmne est istis autoritatis vt cū remprorsus nō intelligant, tamen illis ius sit quic quid lubitū fuerit dicere? Nam Hieronimus inducit hoc velut , & dictu absurdū quo magis refellat quod isti volebant. That is, This place the writer of the Glosse vp∣on the Popes decrées, Dist. 9. cap. Vt veterum librorum, whoso∣euer
he was, doth most absurdly cite, supposing that Hierom did indéed thinke, that the Gréeke examples and copies were more true than the Hebrew, and the Latin more true than the Gréeke. And this knot he goeth about to lose by manie meanes, most triflingly trifling in a matter that he did not vnderstand, with his vel dic, say so, and say so, &c. Haue these men so great autoritie, that when they do not at all vnder∣stand a matter, yet it shall be lawfall for them to vtter and write what they list? For Hierom doth bring in this as a thing impossible, and absurd to be spoken, that he might the more confute that which they would infer, &c. Hitherto E∣rasmus. Thirdly, whereas this barbarous blind Gloser maketh Augustine preferring the Gréeke and Hebrew copies, and Hierom the Latin, he doth very foolishly and preposterously. For Hierom in all his writings, and also as appéered by his translations, did most earnestly maintaine the contrarie: whereas Augustine by reason of his ignorance in the He∣brew, did ouermuch attribute to the Septuaginta interpre∣tors in Gréeke, and wished that Hierom had translated the old Testament rather out of them, than out of the Hebrew, as appéereth by his owne words in his Epistle to Hierom himselfe,August. Hie∣ronimo. epist. 10. which be these: Ego sanè te mallem Graecas potius ca∣nonicas nobis interpretari Scripturas, quae Septuaginta interpretum autoritate perhibentur. That is, I had rather that you did translate vnto vs the Gréeke canonicall Scriptures, which be confirmed by the autoritie of the Seuentie interpretors. This is that woorthy writer vpon the Popes holie Decrées, who hath taught our Rhemish Iesuits this lesson, and lent them this reason or rather accusation of the holy Scriptures. A méete author for them to follow. But how false this accusation of the corruption of the Gréeke text is, may euidently appéere partly by the writings of Chrysostom, Basill, Theophylactus, and other ancient Gréeke and godly fathers, who generally agrée with the Gréeke text, and dissent from the Latin when they differ, as héerafter shall be shewed: and partly by those places of the Latin fathers before alledged. For whereas most of the Gréeke heretikes were before the time of Ambrose, Hierom
and Augustine, as by Epiphanius it doth appéere: yet in their daies the Gréeke bookes were sound, pure, and vndefiled. Let them therefore shew vs in what age, and by what heretikes all the Gréeke bookes in the world were corrupted. And if our Rhemish Iesuits may thinke that the Gréeke text hath béene corrupted by old Gréeke heretikes: why may it not also be thought, that the Latin text hath in like maner béene corrupted by Latin heretikes? But they will say: There were not so many of them as of the other: Besides that it is not greatly materiall for the multitude, yet what if it may be prooued, that all Papists be heretikes, may not they in number be compared with the Gréeke heretikes? I will not enter into this discourse at this present, and the ra∣ther for that it hath béene effectually shewed,In his booke against D. Saun∣ders. and pithily prooued by my good and learned brother Master Whitakers of late: and also was so largely and learnedly handled in Quéene Maries daies, by that reuerend and learned father D. Poynet Bishop of Winchester, that it hath hitherto ne∣uer béene answered as far as I know: and therefore it shall be lesse néedful for me to prooue it against M. Gregorie Mar∣tin, the supposed and reported author of these reasons and this translation. I will onely refer him and his fellowes vn∣to it: beséeching God that it may likewise effectually worke in them, that they may sée their owne errors and ignorance, and in time repent their railing against Gods truth and ser∣uants. Moreouer, I say that all the Iesuits in Rhemes and Rome are not able to shew one such a fowle corruption in al the Gréeke Testament, to the ouerthrowing of any article of faith, as I can shew a most notable place, concerning euen the very Deitie of Iesus Christ corrupted fowly in the La∣tin, which our Corrupt Rhemists in their English haue fol∣lowed. The place is 1. Timoth. 3.16. And in Gréeke thus: . &c. That is, And without controuersie great is the mysterie of godli∣nes. God was made manifest in the flesh, iustified in the spi∣rit, &c. The vulgar Latin is thus: Et manifestè magnum est pi∣etatis sacramentum, Quod manifestatum est in carne, &c. And is by you englished thus: And manifestly it is a great sacra∣ment
of pietie, Which was manifested in the flesh, &c. Héer in stead of these words: God was reuealed in the flesh, which plainly prooue both the Deitie and Humanitie of Ie∣sus Christ, agréeably to that other place of S. Paul to the Co∣lossians:Coloss. 2.9. In him dwelleth all the fulnes of the Godhead bodily, they haue put these words: Which was manifested in the flesh: and so séeke to depriue vs of this most excellent testimonie, which maketh strongly against the Arrians and other heretikes, and corrupted the place which briefly, yet very pithily comprehendeth the doctrine of our redemption. The which corruption is not onely contrarie to all Gréeke copies, and the ancient Syrian translation: but also to Chry∣sostom, to Theophylactus, to Theodoretus dialog. 1. and to the Gréeke scholies which so alledge it, and expound it. Such a place so like to be corrupted by heretikes, I dare say that all our Rhemish rout is not able to shew in al the Gréeke text. Lastly, I omit to shew what a wide window these popish Rhemists do open to all heretikes, by this their absurd asser∣tion and accusation of the Gréeke originall text of the Testa∣ment, who if they be pressed with any plaine place to the confounding of their heresie, why may they not, as Heluidi∣us and the Manichées of old time did, and our Iebusites do now, say the same were corrupted by ancient heretikes. But wo be to them that cannot maintaine their doctrine but by such shamelesse shifts. But for the further manifestation of this matter, and that the Christian reader may sée what con∣sent there is betwéene these Catholike fathers, I will set downe a place or two out of Iohn Driedon a Louanian,Lib. 2. cap. 1. who writeth thus: Eisdem argumentis vtentes, possumus de∣monstrare Graecos noui Testamenti codices non esse de industria vniuersaliter falsatos, &c. That is, Vsing the same arguments we may prooue, that the Gréeke bookes of the new Testa∣ment haue not béen of purpose vniuersally falsified, as though any truth had béene rased togither out of all the holy Gréeke bookes, being dispersed so far abroad, and kept in the Libra∣ries not onely of the Grecians, but also of the Latins. Again the same Driedon of Louaine writeth thus: Quantum verò ad Nouum attinet Testamentum, verisimile est, si Graeci suos codi∣ces noui Testamenti voluissent deprauare, &c. That is, But as
touching the new Testament, it is likely that if the Greci∣ans would haue corrupted their bookes of the new Testa∣ment, they would chéefly haue done it in those places, in which matters be handled, wherein they haue long agone begun to dissent from the Latin Church: but we sée and per∣ceiue such places to agrée with the most ancient Latin copies: Therefore neither any other place ought to be suspected as corrupted by the common schoole of the Grecians. Lastly, the same Driedon writeth héerof thus: Nam Scriptura sacra si sit iam olim in suo fonte suá{que} origine corrupta & deprauata, iam non erit vlla in illis canonica autoritas, &c. That is, Now if the holy Scripture haue béene long ago corrupted and depraued in hir fountaine and originall language, then there will be no ca∣nonicall authoritie in it, neither shall it be néedfull for Latin men to returne to the fountaine of the Gréeke toong, where∣in the new Testament was written: or of the Hebrew, wherein the old Testament was set foorth. Hitherto Drie∣don. Whereby we may sée, to what impudencie our Rhe∣mists be growen, who by this impudent assertion, take all canonicall autoritie from the holy Scriptures. I might shew what vnfaithfull kéepers of Gods holy records they haue béene: who haue héertofore bragged, that they haue kept the holie Scriptures, and whence haue we had them, but from them? And yet now of their owne accord, they confesse that they haue suffered the originall and autenticall copies of Christs Testament to be corrupted. But omitting these things, which might be more amplified, I come to their par∣ticular proofe of this their strange paradoxe, concerning the corruption of the Gréeke text. Rhemish Iesuits. TErtullian noteth the Greeke text which is at this day,Lib. 5. contr. Marc. 1. Cor. 15.47. to be an old corruption of Marcion the heretike, and the truth to be as in our vulgar Latin: Se∣cundus homo de coelo coelestis: The second man is from hea∣uen heauenlie. So read other ancient fathers,Ambr. Hieron. and Erasmus thinketh it must be so. And Caluin himselfe followeth it, Instit. lib. 2. cap. 13. par. 2.
Answer. HEre as touching Tertullian, vpon whom doth depend the speciall proofe of this pretended corruption, to speake in plaine words, you make one notorious lie. For Tertullian doth not say, that the truth of that text is as in the vulgar Latin translation, neither he in his booke De resurrectione, doth so alledge it, as héereafter I will shew. Indéed I grant that Marcion did mangle that place, and cor∣ruptly cite it, as Tertullian in these words sheweth:Tertull. aduersus Marcionem, lib. 5. Primus inquit homo de humo terrenus: secundus Dominus de coelo. That is, The first man is of earth earthly: the second is the Lord from heauen. Héere Marcion denying the true manhood of Christ, did leaue out this word Homo, that is, Man, and so did mangle that place, the which is not omitted, but expressed in all Gréeke copies. And therefore the Gréeke doth not agrée with Marcions corruption, as Gregorie Martin and his fellowes corruptly iudge. I grant also that it séemeth Ter∣tullian thought, that Marcion in the latter part did alledge this word Dominus, that is, Lord, which ought not: for his words after the text before alledged be these: Quare secundus si non homo quod & primus? aut nunquid primus Dominus si & se∣cundus. That is, Why is he called the second, if he be not man as the first? Or is not the first Lord, if the second be? Héer∣by, I say, it séemeth, that Marcions corruption of this place, was partly in leauing out this word Homo, which is expressed in the Gréeke, and partly (as it séemeth Tertullian supposed) by putting in this word Dominus, which our Gréek copies also haue. Now whether he did corruptly alledge this word Dominus, Lord, that is the question. First, I sée no cause why this is to be accounted a corrup∣tion of Marcions, for that it doth no more maintaine his blasphemous heresie, in denying the true Humanitie of Christ, than doth the Latin. For how doth this, The second man is the Lord from heauen, séeme more to fauor Marci∣ons false doctrine, than the other: The second man is from heauen heauenly? Why might not Marcion haue abused this, to prooue Christ to haue brought his bodie from heauen,
and not to haue taken flesh of the virgin Marie, as well as the other? And therefore if this had béene a corruption of Marcions, he would no doubt haue otherwise corrupted it to the further furthering of his heresie. Secondly, I say that  the Gréeke text doth not onelie as well agrée with all true doctrine as the Latin: but also is more pregnant in sense, and more agréeable to the meaning of the Apostle in that place, containing a more excellent  and opposition be∣twéene Adam and Christ, than doth the Latin,In Annotat. as Master Beza learnedly sheweth. Thirdly, whereas Marcion did cor∣rupt  the 45. verse going before (as most plainly appéereth by Tertullian in the same place) and yet the same corruption is not in the Gréeke, but it is pure and sincere as it ought to be, it is not likely that this corruption should any more remaine than that. Fourthly, not onely all Gréeke copies, both old  and new so haue it, expressing the word , that is, Lord: but also the Syrian and Arabian translations which are ve∣ry ancient, do agrée with the Gréeke. And how likely it is for such a corruption of Marcions to be in all Gréeke copies, and in those very ancient Syrian and Arabian translations, I leaue it to the iudgement of all men to consider. And where you say that other ancient fathers haue read according to the vulgar Latin: I grant that some Latin fathers following the old translation so do: but Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Gréeke Scholies, Damascenus De orthodoxa fide, lib. 3. cap. 12. (who I trow were none of Marcions disciples) agrée with the Gréeke: And Tertullian your author alledgeth it thus: Primus homo de terra choicus, id est, limaceus, id est, Adam:Tertullianus de resurrect. carnis. secundus homo de coelo, id est, sermo Dei, id est, Christus, differing from the Latin, in leauing out this word, Coelestis. So rea∣deth both Cyprian and Hilarius: Primus homo de terrae limo:Cypian. de zelo & liuore: & aduer∣sus Iudaeos & alios. Hilarius de Trini∣tate. lib. 10. secundus homo de coelo. That is, The first man of the slime of the earth: the second man from heauen. So that these thrée Latin fathers, as they differ from the Gréeke in leauing out the word Dominus, Lord: so do they also dissent from the La∣tin, in leauing out the word Coelestis, Heauenly: And yet whether either of these words, or both of them be expressed or omitted, it is not repugnant to any article of faith, nor to the sense of the Apostle. And therefore might Erasmus be of
that opinion, to thinke it should be as in the Latin: especial∣ly hauing respect to the sound of the opposition of words be∣twéene of earth earthly: and from heauen heauenly. And M. Caluin might so alledge it: And yet the Gréeke may be the true reading, wherein the Apostle wrote, as no doubt it is. But if I should grant, that this word, Lord, crept in either by Marcions means or any others (which is vtterly vnlike, as hath béene shewed) yet it must néedes be confessed to be but a small fault, to expresse this word, Lord, and to attribute it to Iesus Christ, to whom it doth so properly appertaine: and of small force to discredit generally the autenticall text of the Gréeke. Two hundred greater corruptions may be found in the vulgar Latin. Furthermore, whereas héere is produced the onely single testimonie of Tertullian, I may iustly say: that If by the law of God one mans witnes be not sufficient against a man:Deut. 19. much lesse may it be against the originall copie of the Testa∣ment of Iesus Christ. Moreouer, I may except against the credit of this one witnes, as vnsufficient to giue testimonie against the originall text of Christs Testament. For where∣as Heluidius alledged his autoritie in defence of his opinion: S. Hierom answereth him in these words:Hieronimus aduersus Hel∣uidium. Et de Tertulliano quidem nihil amplius dico, quàm ecclesiae hominem non fuisse. That is, And as touching Tertullian I say no more, but that hée was not a man of the Church. And so without more ado tur∣neth him ouer. If Hierom refuse his credit as vnsufficient in that cause: surely we will as well reiect him in this, and not credit him in séeming to say that this word, Lord, came  into the text by Marcions meanes.Chrysostom. in Ioannem, hom. 38. Lastly, I say that where∣as Chrysostom doth charge that great heretike Paulus Sa∣mosatenus with corrupting a place, Iohn 5.27. yet notwith∣standing your vulgar Latin and your owne English do fol∣low and allow that, which Chrysostom counted to haue béen corruptly read and distinguished by the said P. Samosatenus. The like may be said of Epiphanius, who thinketh a place of S. Paul, 2. Tim. 4.10. otherwise to be read, than either your vulgar Latin,Epiphanius lib. 2. Tom. 1. haeres. 51. or you do, whose words be these: Cresces in∣quit in Gallia. Non enim in Gallatia, velut quidam decepti putant, sed in Gallia legendum est. That is, Cresces saith he, is gone
into Fraunce, not into Gallatia, as some being deceiued do thinke, but it is to be read, In Gallia, into Fraunce. Now if you will not iudge these places to be corrupted, although Chrysostom & Epiphanius did so thinke (who were fathers far more sound & sincere than Tertullian that fel into the he∣resies of Montanus) why shall we be bound to thinke this place of the Corinthians to be corrupted by Marcion, bi∣cause Tertullian séemeth so to say? Surely if you will not al∣low the iudgement of Chrysostom and Epiphanius in those places, we wil not approoue the opinion of Tertullian in this. The which also may be said concerning the two testimonies of Hierom and Socrates following, to the former whereof (hauing sufficiently spoken of this) I will now come. Rhemish Iesuits. AGaine, S. Hierom noteth that the Greeke text,Lib. 1. cont. Iou∣nia. cap. 7. 1. Cor. 7.33. which is at this day, is not the Apostolicall veri∣tie, or true text of the Apostle, but that which is in the vul∣gar Latin: Qui cum vxore est, solicitus est quae sunt mundi, quo∣modo placeat vxori & diuisus est. That is, He that is with a wife is carefull of worldly things, how he may please his wife, and is diuided or distracted. Answer. HEre is brought in the onely testimonie of S. Hierom to discredit the Gréeke text, the autoritie whereof he greatly magnified, and by which he labored to reform the Latin bookes, as hath béene shewed. But to this single testimonie of Hierom héere produced, I may obiect a saying of Hierom himselfe, agréeable to the law of God before al∣ledged: Vni testi nè Catoni creditum est. That is,Hieronimus ad∣uersus Ruffinum. lib. 2. Men beléeue not one witnes, though he were Cato. And therefore both by the law of God, and saying of S. Hierom himselfe, we are not bound to beléeue this single witnes of Hierom, especial∣ly in so great and weightie a matter, as is the discrediting of the originall text of Christs Testament. Secondly, to this one testimonie of Hierom, I oppose  not onely the consent of Gréeke copies, and those ancient
translations of the Syrian and Arabian, which both agrée with it: but also S. Basil, who in his Morals . and thrise in another booke doth so alledge it as it is in the Gréeke;Basil. . also Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Gréeke Scholies: Epipha∣nius also contra Hiera. haeres. 67. and Tertullian De virginibus veland. And lastly I oppose Hierom to Hierom himselfe; who both in his booke against Heluidius, and also Ad Eu∣stochium de seruanda virginitate, doth alledge this place as it is in the Gréeke, referring the Gréeke word , to that which followeth, and not to that which goeth before: The which S. Hierom ought not to haue done, if he had thought it not to be the Apostolicall veritie. But héereby it doth ap∣péere, that Hierom in that booke against Iouinian, did deale with this place,Vide supra pag. 3. as he did with many other, which he wre∣sted from the simple sense to serue his owne cause. For how Hierom in those bookes abused certaine places of Scripture to serue his purpose, and how hardly, or rather contemptu∣ously he spake of Matrimonie, any man of any iudgement reading the bookes, may easily perceiue. Whereupon it came to passe, that euen in those daies those bookes were misliked of them that were learned and godly, as appéereth by Hie∣roms owne Apologies vnto Pammachius and Domnion: insomuch that the said Pammachius,Hieron. epist ad Pammach. tom. 3. being a godly man, and Hieroms great friend, went about to suppresse them. But least I should séeme ouer hardly to charge Hierom (whom o∣therwise I confesse to haue béene a godly and learned father) I wil set downe for a taste two or thrée places:Hieron. li. 1. aduer∣sus Iouinian. Bonum est, in∣quit, homini mulierem non tangere. Si bonum est mulierem non tan∣gere, malum est ergò tangere. That is, It is good, saith he, for a man not to touch a woman, then it is euill to touch hir. Héere Hierom doth not onely wrest that place (for S. Paul doth not there oppose, Good, to sinne and euill, but doth take it for con∣uenient,In Annotat. expedient and commodious, as Erasmus sheweth:) but also doth ouer iniuriously speake of matrimonie, in say∣ing it is euill to touch a woman, which God hath ordained and sanctified.Ibidem. Againe Hierom saith: Si prudentia carnis ini∣micitia est in Deum, & qui in carne sunt Deo placere non possunt: arbitror eos qui seruiunt officio coniugali, quòd prudentiam carnis diligant, & in carne sint. That is, If the wisedome of the flesh
be enimitie against God, and that they which be in the flesh cannot please God: I thinke that they which do the dutie of marriage, loue the wisedome of the flesh, and be in the flesh. How iniuriously Hierom héere speaketh of Marriage, and how he abuseth these places of S. Paul, Rom. 8. it is so plaine that I néed not to shew. S. Paul in the same place saith: Vos non estis in carne, You are not in the flesh, but in the spirit: speaking generally of the faithfull at Rome, of whom no doubt but many were married. Lastly, to omit many other places hardly handled by Hierom, he writeth thus:Ibidem. Quan∣quam & hoc pro nobis faciat. Qui enim semel venit ad nuptias, se∣mel docuit esse nubendum. That is, Although this make for vs. For he that came once to a marriage, hath taught vs but once to marrie. Héere we sée how friuolously Hierom would infer vpon our Sauiour Christs comming once to a marriage, that none should but once marrie: and so in effect with the Montanists condemneth second marriages, which Gods word doth plainly allow. Now these things considered, and well weighed, whether this one witnes of Hierom not a∣gréeing with himselfe, and vttered in heate in that booke, wherein through an immoderate admiration of virginitie, he so hardly or rather contemptuously speaketh of Matrimo∣nie, and so abuseth other places of Scripture, be sufficient to discredit the Gréeke text, confirmed with the Syrian and A∣rabian very ancient translations, with Chrysostom, Epi∣phanius, Basil, Theophylactus, the Gréeke Scholies, let the indifferent Reader iudge. Now let vs come to the third pre∣tended corruption, which our Iesuits thinke they haue spied out in the Gréeke text. Rhemish Iesuits. THe Ecclesiasticall historie called the Tripartite,Lib. 12. cap 4. noteth the Greeke text that now is, 1. Iohn 4.3. to be an old corruption of the ancient Greeke copies by the Nestorian heretikes, & the true reading to be as in our vulgar Latin: Omnis spiritus qui soluit Iesum ex Deo non est. That is, Euerie spirit that dissolueth Iesus is not of God. And Beza con∣fesseth that Socrates in his Ecclesiasticall historie readeth so in the Greeke, ·Lib. 7. cap, 32.
Answer. HEre be two witnesses brought in to disprooue the Gréeke text, whom they haue not far fetched: for they be brought vnto their hand, the one by Erasmus, and the other by Beza in their Annotations. But what if these two in shew, be in substance and déede but one. I assure thée good Christian Reader, that héere is but one witnes: for the Tripartite storie being by Cassiodorus gathered and compi∣led out of Socrates, Theodoretus, and Sozomenus, it is most certaine, that he in the said storie alledged this place out of Socrates: for in the other it is not to be found. And therefore of what force this one single witnes of Socrates is to condemne the Gréeke text, hath béene before declared. I grant that he writeth as Master Beza, and our Iesuits out of him alledge. But let vs examine the same: Prouided alwaies that although Erasmus and Beza alledge, as is aforesaid, the said reading, which is in the Latin, yet neither of them do al∣low the same, but prefer that which is in the Gréeke. The words of S. Iohn be these according to the Gréeke: And euerie spirit that confesseth not Iesus Christ to bee come in the flesh is not of God. For the which in the vul∣gar Latin is that which our Iesuits set downe: Et omnis spi∣ritus qui soluit Iesum ex Deo non est. That is, Euerie spirit that dissolueth Iesus is not of God. Let vs now consider whether of these two is more likely to be the true text of the  Apostle. First I say, that the Gréeke Text in this place con∣taineth no false, but very sound and comfortable doctrine, and  therefore not very like to be a corruption of an heretike. Se∣condly, the Gréeke reading doth much more fitly agrée with the circumstance of the place, and the vsual phrase of S. Iohn, that the other. For in the verse before, S.Iohns words be these: Heereby you know the spirit of God. Euerie spirit that confesseth Iesus Christ to be come in the flesh is of God. And then immediately he addeth these words which be in question: And euerie spirit that confesseth not Iesus Christ to be come in the flesh is not of God. Where we sée how this doth aptly answer to that which went before. The
which is a vsuall and common phrase with S. Iohn, to am∣plifie one thing with comparing of contradictories, to im∣print the same the more in our minds: as for example a lit∣tle after in the same chapter, vers. 6. He that knoweth God heareth vs: He that is not of God heareth vs not. Againe, vers. 7. Whosoeuer loueth, is borne of God, and knoweth God: He that loueth not, knoweth not God. Againe, cap. 5. vers. 10. He that beleeueth in the sonne of God hath the witnes in him: Hee that beleeueth not the sonne of God hath made him a liar, &c. Againe, vers. 12. He that hath the sonne hath life: He that hath not the sonne of God hath not life, &c. Euen after the same maner S. Iohn saith in this place: Euerie spirit that confesseth Iesus Christ to be come in the flesh is of God: And euerie spirit that confesseth not Iesus Christ to be come in the flesh, is not of God. Thus I doubt not but euerie indifferent reader may plainly perceiue, that this doth more aptly agrée both with the sentence before, and with S. Iohns vsuall phrase & maner of spéech, than that which is in the vulgar Latin: E∣uerie spirit that dissolueth Iesus is not of God: and so doth Erasmus iudge. Moreouer, the Syrian translation doth agrée  with the Gréeke. Cyprian doth so cite it as Erasmus shew∣eth: Theodoritus doth so alledge it:In Annot. Theod. dialogo 1. Oecumenius the Gréek Scholiast so hath it. These fathers I trust our Iesuits will not count to haue béene Nestorian heretikes. Lastly, besides  that héere is but one onely witnes, the vnsufficiencie▪ where∣of I haue before sufficiently shewed, what if this witnes be alreadie branded in the face by our Iesuits own déer friends, as a false witnes, and not sufficient to beare witnes in a matter of such importance. For whereas we alledge both out of the said Socrates,Socrates lib. 1. cap. 11. & Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 23. and also Sozomenus the saying of that godly father and constant confessor Paphnutius in defence of Ecclesiasticall mens marriage: Alanus Copus one of our Iesuits déere brethren, or as it is gathered now by certaine letters, Master Harpsfield a bird of the same nest, in the doughtie dialog written by the one, and set out by the other, writeth thus:Copus dialogo pag. 154. Mihi nescio quo modo in dubium venit fides huius historiae de Paphnutio. Sunt enim quae suspicionem important, eam esse Arianorum, aut impudicorum hominum commentum. Tota
enim haec res à Socrate pendet, & Sozomene: quorum alter No∣uatianus fuit: alter Theodorum Mopsuestensem à quinta Synodo damnatum magnis laudibus extulit.That is, I know not how the truth of this storie of Paphnutius séemeth to me to be doubtfull. For there be matters, which cause me to suspect it to be a fained fable of the Arian heretikes, or of some vnchast persons. For the whole matter dependeth vpon Socrates and Sozomenus: of whom one was a Nouatian heretike: the other greatly commended Theodorus of Mopsuesta being condemned in the fift Councell. Héere M. Cope or Harps∣field make Socrates and Sozomenus both heretikes, and fil∣thie vnchast persons, and therefore labour to discredit them as not sufficient to beare witnes in that matter of Paphnu∣tius: Socrates. And yet shall our Rhemish and Romish Iesuits so much aduance his credit now, thereby to discredit the auten∣ticall and originall copies of the word of God? Surely if that matter of Paphnutius may not stand with them in the mouth of those two witnesses, then this matter which ten∣deth to the discrediting of the Gréeke text of the Testament, shall not be confirmed to vs in the words of one of them. And if they refuse him as vnsufficient in that: we will not admit him for sufficient in this. These thrée be the onely places which our Rhemish Ie∣suits with all their conference and diligence haue piked out of the old writers, to discredit the Gréeke text of Christs Te∣stament, and to conuince it of corruption: the which whether I haue not sufficiently answered and discharged it of that shameles slander, let the indifferent reader vprightly in the feare of God iudge. I haue procéeded no further in answering the rest of that Preface, partly bicause I had not any long vse of that Testa∣ment, being lent vnto me for a very short time by a noble personage: by means whereof I did write out that which I haue héere answered: and partly for that I doubt not, but this and the rest will shortly be more fully and effectually answered by others, to the shame and confusion of them that write it, and all their adherents. God confound al errors, and giue frée passage in all places to his holy truth, Amen. Amen.
A discouerie of Corruptions in the English new TESTAMENT set foorth by the Papists at Rhemes: diuided into three parts. 1. The first of such places as be diuers, or contrarie to the Greeke. 2. The second of such places wherein words and sentences be omit∣ted, which be expressed in the Greeke. 3. The third of such places wherein be superfluities, vz. words and sentences which do abound, and be not in the Greeke. In all which the Greeke text is approoued and iustified, by the testi∣monies, 1. of ancient translations in the Syrian toong, and in some bookes the Arabian: 2. of ancient godlie fathers of Christs Church: and lastly of some ancient Latin copies al∣ledged by Erasmus and Hentenius a Louanian Doctor. WHere let the good Christian Reader consider, whe∣ther the Gréeke text, wherin they cannot denie, but the Apostles of Christ by the inspiration of Gods Spirit did write, being compassed with such a cloud of sufficient wit∣nesses, be to be preferred and followed, or the streame of the Latin translation, troubled with the filthie féete of many vn∣cleane beasts, which haue waded in it, in transcribing and writing it out: Remembring withal and diligently marking this woorthie saying of S. Hierom to Heluidius:Hieronimus aduers. Hel∣uidium. Licet tu mi∣ra impudentia haec in Graecis codicibus falsata contendas, quae, &c. Although thou with maruellous impudencie dost earnestly affirme these things to be falsified in the Gréeke books, which not onely all the Gréeke expounders in a maner haue left in their works: but also some of the Latins haue so vsed them, as they be in the Gréeke. Neither néede I now to intreat of the varietie of the examples, séeing the whole instrument of the old and new Scripture was from thence translated into the Latin language, and the water of the fountaine is to be thought to run more pure than that of the riuer. Hitherto S. Hierom, who withall woundeth our Rhemists, which be not ashamed with no lesse impudencie to affirme these pla∣ces in the Gréeke bookes to be corrupted, being confirmed ge∣nerally with the Gréeke writers; and somtimes the Latin. I do not lay downe these places at large: but of many pro∣duce a few, that by them the godly Reader may iudge of the rest, and of the whole worke.
The first part of diuersities and contradictions betweene the Greeke text and the English Rhemish. HEre I do first set downe the translation which is in the Iesuits English Rhemish Testament: Then, ei∣ther the Gréeke, or that which is agréeable to it. Last∣ly, I prooue the Gréeke to be true, and so the Rhemish and Romish translation false by the testimonie of very ancient translations, of the old Doctors, and somtime by ancient La∣tin copies, as is beforesaid. Matth. 8.15.And ministred vnto him. Graecè . that is vnto them. So is it in the Ancient Syrian translation, in Theophylac∣tus. Cap. 14.22.He commanded: Graec. . that is, Compulit: he vrged or compelled. So hath the Syrian translation, Origen, Hie∣rome,See the Latin Bible printed at Antwerpe by Christopher Plantine, Anno 1567. and Theophilactus. Hentenius the Doctor of Lo∣uayne who conferred and corrected the Latin copies, shew∣eth that it was in seuen of his Latin copies, Compulit, that is, compelled. Erasmus also sheweth that it was Compulit in a Latin copie that he had, which he calleth Codex aureus, that is, the golden booke. Cap. 27.34.Wine to drinke. Graec.  that is, vineger. So is the Sy∣rian translation. So read S. Chrysostom and S. Hierom. Mark. ca. 5.35.They came to the Archsynagog. Graece: . that is, from the Archsynagog, or ruler of the synagog, mea∣ning from his house. So readeth Theophylactus: & Hente∣nius the Louanian Doctor sheweth that it was in nine of his Latin copies: ab Archisynagogo, that is, from the ruler of the Synagog.Erasmus in An∣notat. And Erasmus affirmeth that it was so in his latin Constance copie. He also sheweth how some through ignorance not vnderstanding the phrase of spéech corrupted the place, which yet our corrupt Rhemists thought best to follow in the text, thrusting the true reading (from) into the margent. Cap. 12.29.The Lord thy God is one God: Graec. , &c. The Lord our God is one Lord or only Lord. So is the Syrian translation and Theophylactus. The place in Hebrew out of which it is alledged, Deut. 6.4. is, Our God, and So it is in some latin copies.
Who hauing heard. Graec. , that is,Luke. 1.29. who hauing séene him. So is the Syrian translation. So hath Theophy∣lactus. Ambrose also lib. 1. officiorum cap. 18.In Annotat. So hath also a certaine Gréeke writer whose words be rehearsed in Catena aurea, as Erasmus sheweth. Hentenius also the Louanian Doctor sheweth that it was Ʋidisset, séene, in 2. of his Latin copies. And thence do not depart. Graec. . that is,Cap. 9.4. And thence depart. So hath the Syrian translation, so readeth and expoundeth it Theophylactus: Hentenius sheweth that it was so in one copie. Erasmus iudgeth the Negatiue, Ne, in latin to haue béene a corruption of the writers, which yet our corrupt Rhemists doo follow. The seuentie two returned: Graec. . that is,Cap. 10.17. In Euthymius. In moral. . Se∣uentie. So it is in the Syrian translation, in Ambrose, in Theophylactus. So doth S. Basill alledge it. Dorotheus in Synopsi, & Eusebius Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 12. name but seuentie disciples. Hierom ad Fabiolam maus. 6. Irenaeus & Cyrillus,In Annotat. as Erasmus sheweth. Damasus also bishop of Rome. Epist. 4. And to stop his mouth about many things.Cap. 11.53. Grae. . that is, to prouoke him to speake of many things. For the Gréeke word  doth not here signifie to stop the mouth: for that doth  signifie, as appeareth in S. Paul Tit. 1.11. But it signifieth to prouoke to speake, or often to aske, as Erasmus doth largly & learnedly prooue, and namely out of Theophylactus, who doth expound the said Gréeke word  thus: . that is, often to aske: and so the words folowing in the Euangelist doo plainely prooue, which be these: Liyng in waite for him, and seeking to catch some thing of his mouth, whereby they might accuse him. For they that would catch some∣thing from ons mouth to accuse him, will rather prouoke him to speake of many things, whereby they may take ad∣uantage in some, than to stop his mouth from speaking any thing. Was buried in hell. and lifting vp his eies.Luke. 16.22. falsely poin∣ted and distinguished. Graecè: , &c. that is, And the rich man died also, and was buried. And being in hel lift vp his eies. So it is in the Syriā trans∣lation.
So doth Theophylactus read, who at these words, being in hell, beginneth a new diuision of the text. So doth also S. Augustine distinguish it, as Erasmus sheweth. Iohn. 8.27.And they knew not that he said to them that his father was God. Grae. . that is, They knew or vnderstood not that he spake to them of the father. So hath the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylac∣tus, and Euthymius: Yea sundry old Latin copies had not the word Deum, God. Cap. 10 29.My Father, that which he hath giuen me is greater than all. In the margent they haue these words: An other rea∣ding is, my father that hath giuen me, &c. Héere the true reading is iustled out of the text into the margent. For the Gréeke is▪ . My father which hath giuen (them) me, is greater than all. Héereunto agréeth the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and Nonnus. Hentenius also the doctor of Louaine sheweth that in one of his Latin copies it was, qui dedit mihi maior, &c. The circumstance and sense of the place requireth this reading. Cap. 12.32.Will draw all things to my selfe: Graec. , &c. that is, I will draw all men to my selfe. So hath the Syrian translation, Chrysostom and Theophylactus, who expound it that he would draw not onely Iewes but also Gentiles to himselfe. Theodoretus also in his tenth sermon , printed at Rome, doth twise alledge it as it is in the Gréeke,  pag. 241. & pag. 243. This error and the former may séeme to haue come by omitting in the Gréeke one letter vz. . therby writing , for : Héere by writing  for . Iohn. 14.26.Whatsoeuer I shall say vnto you: Graec. . that is, I haue said vnto you. So in sense is the Syrian tran∣slation. So doth Chrysostom as appéereth by his exposition in these words: Fortasse quae dixi non intelligitis, Sed ille mani∣festus magister erit. that is, Peraduenture you do not vnder∣stand those things that I haue spoken, but he (vz. the holie Ghost) shall be a manifest teacher to you. Theophylactus al∣so agréeth with the Gréeke. But this Latin our Remish and Romish Iesuits will rather follow, bicause it better serueth to prooue their traditions and trifles than the Gréeke.
So I will haue him to remaine till I come what to thee.Cap. 21.2. Graec:  &c. If I wil haue him to remaine til I come, what is it to thée? Héere it most plainly appéereth, that Si, by the negligence of writers was turned into Sic, which easilie might be done. But there is no such likenes, betwéene the Gréeke words , and . With the Gréeke agrée the Sy∣rian translation, Cyrillus, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, Euthymius. Hierom also doth so alleage it: Si eum volo, &c.Lib. 1. aduers. Io∣uinianum. Erasmus also sheweth that the ancient Latin bookes had Si, if. And Hentenius of Louaine sheweth that in two of his Latine copies it was Si. Finally the sense of the place doth plainly shew that it must be read Si if, and not Sic so, as Erasmus in his annotations prooueth. Hierom saith well: Neque enim si quid Scriptorum est errore mutatum,Hierom ad Suni∣am & Fretellam tom. 4. stulta debe∣mus contentione defendere. that is, If any thing by error of the writers haue béene changed, we ought not through foolish contention defend it. The which good counsell if our Rhe∣mists had followed, they would neuer haue maintained this, which a blinde man with his fingers may féele to be a corruption. The which they do alledging in their margent, Ambrose and Augustine for defence of it. But Erasmus in his annotations vpon this place, and diuers others doth shew, that such as haue written out and copied the Latin fa∣thers finding them alledging places of Scripture otherwise than was in the vulgar Latin which they vsed, haue altered such places, and written them in the fathers booke as it was in the said translation: And namely in this place Erasmus sheweth by the sense, that Augustine did read Si and non Sic, as the Iesuits would haue him, and some foolish writer hath made him. Let the learned Reader read Erasmus vpon this place: and thereby he shall plainely perceiue what corrupt Cauillers our Rhemish Iesuits shew themselues to be. And our Lord increased them that should be saued togi∣ther. Graecè, . &c.Act. 2.47. The Lord added daily to the Church such as should be saued. So hath the Syrian transla∣tion, and also the Arabian which is very ancient. In the La∣tin translation which our Rhemists follow be thrée faults. First, the changing of this word Addebat, that is, he added, into this word augebat, that is, he increased. Which was by
the negligence and ignorance of some writer, and not of the interpretor, as Erasmus thinketh. Secondly, the omitting this word Church, which is in all Gréeke copies, in Chryso∣stom, in the Arabian translation, and in sense in the Syrian. Thirdly, in putting this, in idipsum, that is, togither, to that which went before, whereas it pertaineth to that which fol∣loweth, as plainly appéereth by Chrysostom, who with that , that is, in idipsum, beginneth a new chapter, and so do the Gréeke bookes, the Syrian and Arabian translations. Oecumenius also the Gréeke scholiast printed at Verona in all points agréeth with the Gréeke. Cap. 4.21.Bicause all glorified that which had beene done, in that which was chanced. Graecè, . that is, Bicause all glorified God for that which was done. So it is in the ancient Syrian and Arabian translations. So read Chrysostom, as appéereth both by his commentarie, and by the Gréeke text it selfe printed by Arnold Birkman at Co∣len, Ann. 1567. Oecumenius also the Gréeke scholiast prin∣ted at Verona, 1532. agréeth with the Gréeke. And let the godlie Christian Reader consider, whether it is the more godly reading and sense to say, The people glorified God for that miracle which was done: or that they glorified the thing it selfe? Note also what a foolish and néedlesse repetition is in this Rhemish translation in these words: That which had beene done,In Annotat. in that which was chanced: which thing Eras∣mus doth well obserue. Act. 13.32.To our children. In the margent they put the Gréeke and true reading, To vs their children. Whereunto agréeth the Syrian translation, & in sense the Arabian thus: God hath fulfilled it to their children in that he raised vp Iesus to vs. With the Gréeke agrée also Chrysostom, and Oecumenius the Gréeke scholiast. Yet the true reading confirmed by these testimonies is thrust out of the text, and faine to stand pée∣ring in the margent. Act. 24.14.I do so serue the father my God, beleeuing. Graecè, . &c. I do so serue the God of my fathers. So are the Syrian and Arabian translations, and Oecumenius the Gréeke scholiast. And the true reading héere also they haue thrust into the margent.
The grace of God by Iesus Christ our Lord. Graec.Rom. 7.25. , &c. that is, I thanke God through Iesus Christ our Lord. So hath the Syrian translation, so haue Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and the Gréeke scholies.Basil  doth twise so alledge it, fol. 114. & fol. 122. Hie∣rom also ad Algasiam, quaest. 8. agréeth with the Gréeke both in alledging and expounding the place. Erasmus also sheweth that the Gréeke reading was in some of the truest Latin co∣pies which he had. Of one conception. Graec. , that is,Cap. 9.10. Hauing conceiued by one, euen our father Isaac. So hath the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and the Gréeke scholies. Erasmus sheweth the Latin reading, which our Rhemists follow, to be a manifest corruption. For the Gréek  one, and  conception, be not only diuers cases the ge∣nitiue and the accusatiue, but also diuers genders, the mascu∣line and the feminine, & therefore can neuer agrée togither. The loue of thy neighbour worketh no euill.Rom. 13.10. Graec. . that is, Loue doth not euil to his neigh∣bour. So is the Syrian translation. So read Chrysostom and Theophylacte in Gréeke, and also the Gréeke scholies. But he that discerneth if he eate is damned.Cap. 14.23. Graec. . that is, He that doubteth, in the Syrian translation it is he that is diuided, that is, doubteth whether he may eate or not. Erasmus translateth it, Qui haesitat, that is, that doubteth. Of Asia. Graec. . that is,Cap. 16.5. Achaia. So is the Syrian trans∣lation. So read Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and the Gréeke scholies. Are ye not men. Graec. . that is,1. Cor. 3.4. are ye not carnall? which our Rhemists haue put in the margent. With the Gréeke, the Syrian translation and the Arabian agrée. Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Gréeke scholies, Ambrose, and Augustine de continentia cap. 4. And both Erasmus and Hentenius of Louaine shew that carnales was in sundry Ancient Latin copies. Yet the false reading kéepeth possessi∣on in the text, and the true thrust out of the doore to stand in the margent. The ministers of him whom you haue beleeued.1. Cor. 3.5. Graec. . that is, But the ministers by whom
you haue beléeued. The Syrian translation agréeth with the Gréeke. So doth the Arabian also vsing an hebrew phrase: By whose hands ye haue beleeued. that is, by whose mini∣strie and labor in preaching the Gospell. Chrysostom, Theo∣phylactus, and the Gréeke scholies agrée with the Gréeke. Glorifie and beare God in your body. Graec. .Cap. 6.20. that is, glo∣rifie God in your body and in your spirit, for they be Gods, or of God. Here our Rhemish translation hath this word Beare, which is not in the Gréeke, and hath omitted all this, and in your Spirit which are Gods: with the Gréeke agrée the Syrian translation, and the Arabian, Chrysostom, Theo∣phylactus, and the Gréeke scholies. How he may please his wife, and is diuided. Graec. .Cap. 7.33. that is, How he may please his wife. A wife and a virgine are diuided: or, there is a difference betwéene a wife and a virgine, of this place read before page 45. and 46. &c. That I speake with the toong of you all. In the margent they put the true reading agréeable to the Gréeke.Cap. 14.18. With toongs more than you all. Which is approoued by the Syri∣an translation, and the Arabian, by Chrysostom, Theophy∣lactus, the Gréeke scholies, and lastly by Hierom, who thus alledgeth it: Paulus &c. Gratias agit Deo, quòd cunctis. Apo∣stolis magis linguis loquatur. That is, Paul giueth thanks to God that he spake with toongs more than all the Apostles. But if any man know not, he shall not be knowen, Graec. .Ibidem 38. that is, Let him be ignorant. So is the Syrian tran∣slation, and the Arabian, Chrysostom, Theophylactus and the Gréeke scholies. Cap. 15.5.Cephas: and after to the eleuen: Graec. , that is, After to the twelue. So is the Syrian translation, and the Arabian, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Gréeke scholies. Augustinus Quaest. in vet. Testamentum, lib. 1. & lib. 3. de consensu Euang. Ibidem 26.The enimie death shall be destroied last. Graec. , that is, the last enimie that shall be destroied is death. The Rhemish translation differeth not onely from the Gréeke, wherewith agrée the Syrian translation, and the Arabian,
Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Gréeke scholies, Epiphanius contra Ario. haeres. 69. Hieronimus in Esaiam, Augustinus in Psal. 51. & alibi. Ambrose de fide ad Gratianum lib. 5. But also from their owne best copies, which read Nouissima, and not Nouissime, as appéereth by the Bible printed by Plantine at Antwerpe, and as Erasmus sheweth. The second man from heauen heauenly.1. Cor. 15.47. Graec. . that is, The Lord from heauen. Héereof read before pag. 41.42. &c. We shal al indeed rise again:Ibid. 51. but we shall not al be chan∣ged. Graec. , that is, We shall not all sléepe, but we shall all be changed.Lib. 2. aduersus Celsum. So is the Syrian translation, and the Arabian. So doth Origen alledge it. So Chrysostom both in his commentarie vpon that place readeth, and vpon the 11. chap. to the Romaines al∣ledgeth it. Iustinus martyr also, so hath it. , pag. 281. Theophylactus so readeth. The Gréeke scholies so haue it and expounde it. Of this place read before pag. 14. Out of so great dangers. Graec. , that is,2. Cor. 1.10. From so great death. So is the Syrian translation, and the Arabian, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and the Gréeke scholies. That the children of Israel might not behold his face which is made void.Cap. 3.13. Graec. . that is, That the children of Israel should not looke vnto the end of that which should be abolished. So is the Syrian translation, and the Arabian, Chrysostome, Theophylactus, the Gréeke scholies, and Ambrose. But we measure our selues in our selues,2. Cor. 10.12. and compare our selues to our selues. Graec. , &c. that they mea∣sure themselues with themselues, and compare themselues with themselues. So is the Syrian translation, Chryso∣stom, Theophylactus, the Gréeke scholies, and Augustin in many places, as Erasmus sheweth. I haue done nothing les than the great Apostles:Cap. 11.5. Graec.  that is, That I was not inferi∣or to the very chiefe Apostles. So is the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Gréeke scholies, Ambrose also who thus translateth it, aestimo enim me in nullo inferio∣rem
fuisse ab hijs qui valde sunt Apostoli. that is, I count my self in nothing to be inferior to the chiefe apostles. Galat. 3.21.That could iustifie. Graec. . that is, That could haue giuen life. So is the Syrian translation, Chry∣sostom, and the Gréeke scholies. Yea and so is their owne Latin which they pretend to follow: Quae posset viuificare. Cap. 4.14.And your tentation in my flesh you despised not. Graecè. . that is, And the tentation, or triall of me which was in my flesh, &c. So is the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, and the Gréeke scholies. Yea Hen∣tenius The Louanian Doctor sheweth that it was in one Latin copie meam.. Basill in his Morals alledgeth it thus: . that is, And the tentation which was in my flesh, &c. in sense all one. Galat. 4.31.But of the free: by the freedome wherwith Christ hath made vs free. Héere these words, By the freedome, &c. are referred to that which goeth before, and are made the end of the fourth chapter: which in the Gréeke are the beginning of the fift chapter, and referred to that which followeth in this sort: Stand therefore in the libertie wherewith Christ hath made vs free. Whereunto agrée the Syrian translati∣on, Chrysostom, & Theophylactus. The Gréeke scholies so read and expound it.. Basil also in his Morals so alledgeth it. Philip. 1.28.The cause of perdition. Graec. , that is, A token or declaration of perdition. So read Chrysostom, Theophy∣lactus, and the Gréeke scholies. And Ambrose also, who thus hath it: Ostentatio interitus: And the Syrian translation in sense agréeth. Cap. 3.15.Who hath reuealed to you. In the margent they haue put this word, Will, and so put the false reading in the text, and the true in the margent, agréeable to the Gréek, , will reueale. So haue the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, the Gréeke scholies, Hilarius de Trinitate, lib. 11. Augustinus de verbis Apostoli, serm. 15. Hentenius sheweth, Reuelabit to haue béene in sixe of his Latin copies. 1. Thess. 2.7.We became children in the midst of you. In the mar∣gent they haue put this word, Milde, agréeing with the Gréeke, which is , Milde, and not , Children: Héere a∣gaine the true reading is thrust out of the text into the mar∣gent,
which is confirmed by the Syrian translation, by Chry∣sostom, Theophylactus, and Basil in his questions, . And Hentenius of Louaine sheweth, that it was in some of his Latin copies, Lenes, that is, mild. Chosen you first fruits. Graec. , from the beginning.2. Thes. 2.13. So is the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and the Gréeke scholies. Ambrose also translateth it, à prin∣cipio: from the beginning. Héere note, that wheras the Gréeke word being one in this maner , doth signifie first fruits: but being two words thus, , the later being the geni∣tiue case (as it is héere) signifieth, from the beginning. This old translator, or else some other corruptor doth héere tran∣slate it, primitias, first fruits, whereas being two words, it should haue béene translated, from the beginning. But in the first of Iames, vers. 18. he translateth the Gréek word, , initium, that is, beginning, wheras being one word, it should haue béene translated primitias, that is first fruits. And manifestly it is a great sacrament of pietie,1. Tim. 3.16. Which was manifested in the flesh, &c. Graec. , &c. that is, And without con∣trouersie, great is the mysterie of godlines, God was mani∣fested in the flesh, &c. So is the Syrian translation, Chryso∣stom, Theophylactus, and the Gréeke scholies, which so al∣ledge and expound it. Theodoretus doth so alledge it.Dialog. 1. Héerof read before, pag. 39.40. O Timothie keepe the depositum,Cap. 6.20. auoiding the pro∣fane Nouelties of voices. Graec. . that is, O Timothie, kéepe that which is committed to thée, and auoid profane and vaine bab∣lings, &c. Héere first our Rhemists haue fondly set downe the Latin word Depositum, whereby is vnderstood the graces and gifts of Gods spirit committed to Timothie for the profit of Gods Church. Secondly, they vntruly translate, following their corrupt Latin, Noueltie of voices, whereas it is in the Gréeke , vaine words; and not , nouelties of words. With the Gréeke agrée the Syrian translation, Gre∣gorius Nazianzenus, Theophylactus,. pag. 195. and the Gréeke scho∣lies which expound it thus: , that is, vaine spéeches.
Philem. ve. 16.Now not as a seruant, but for a seruant. Graec. , that is, aboue a seruant. So is the Syrian translation. Saint Hierom translateth it, sed plus seruo, that is, more than a ser∣uant,In Annotat. as Erasmus sheweth. And the sense of the place so re∣quireth it: for he desireth Philemon to receiue Onesimus (whom he had woon vnto Iesus Christ) not now as a ser∣uant, which he had béene before, but aboue a seruant, a belo∣ued brother specially to me, saith he, how much more then vnto thée, &c. And what a vaine contradiction there is in this Rhemish translation: Not as a seruant, but for a seruant, let the Christian reader consider. Hebr. 7.25.Whereby he is able to saue also for euer going by him∣selfe to God. Héere againe is the true reading thrust out of the text into the margent, which is this, them that go, which agréeth with the Gréeke, , that is, those that come (or go) vnto God by him. So is the Syrian translation, so read Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and Eu∣thymius. Erasmus sheweth that the most ancient Latin books had not accedens, but accedentes, that is, them that come. And Hentenius the Louanian doctor affirmeth in 8. of his copies to haue béen accedentes. And so the sense of the place re∣quireth. Yet notwithstanding al this, that which is a mani∣fest and grosse corruption kéepeth possession in the text, when the true reading is forced to stand without the doore in the margent. So againe in the 9. chap. vers. 14. they haue thrust the true reading agréeable to the Gréeke confirmed by the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, and the Gréeke scholies into the margent: which also Hentenius sheweth to haue béene in 7. of his copies, emundabit, shall clense: for the which some negligent writer did write emundauit, hath clensed. Hebr. 11.8.By faith, he that is called Abraham obeied, Graec: . that is, By faith, Abraham being called, obeied. So is the Syrian translation, Chrysostom and Theo∣philactus. Ibidem.By faith Sara also hirselfe being barren receiued vertue in conceiuing of seed, yea past the time of age: bicause she beleeued, &c. Graec: . that is, By faith Sara also recei∣ued
strength to conceiue séed, and past the time of age did beare a childe, bicause, &c. Héere first they haue these words, Being barren, which are not in the Gréeke. Secondly they haue foolishly and falsely translated this: receiued vertue in conceiuing of seed. For, receiued strength to conceiue seed. For although the Latin word Virtus do somtimes sig∣nifie power and strength, and answereth to the Gréeke word  which is héere vsed: yet in our English this word Ver∣tue is not so vsed, but onely answereth to the other Gréeke word . But more absurdly in the 18. of the Apoca. v. 3. they translate thus: Rich by the vertue of hir delicacies, Grae. , that is by the power, greatnes or abundance of hir delicacies; Is not this fond and absurd to attribute vertue to the delicacies of the great whoore of Ba∣bylon of whom S. Iohn speaketh? Thirdly, they haue omit∣ted this, bare a childe, which is in the Gréeke, wherevnto agrée Chrysostom, Theophylactus and the Gréeke scholies. And also the Syrian translation sauing that it hath those words, being barren. And beneficence and communication do not forget,Hebr. 13.16. for with such hosts God is promerited. Graec. . that is, God is delighted, or well pleased. Héere for the main∣tenance of their Merits, they translate, promerited: wher∣as the Gréeke word signifieth to please or delight. And that God is pleased with the good works of his children is confes∣sed: but that they merit and deserue any thing, that is (by reason of the corruption and imperfection of them) denied: with the Gréeke agrée the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, and the Gréeke scholies. I omit to shew how obscurely and vnproperly they vse these words, Beneficence, Communi∣cation, and Hosts, the former two, for liberalitie and almes, the last for sacrifices. Where Communication is improper∣ly vsed for almes: for that in our English toong it is vsed for conference of spéech, and not for distribution of almes. That sentence we translate thus: To do good & to distribute for∣get not: for with such sacrifices God is pleased. Let the godlie and learned reader consider whether is the truer, ap∣ter, and plainer translation. You know my deerest brethren, and let euerie man, &c.Iames. 1.19.
Graec. , &c. that is, Wherefore my déere brethren, let euery man be swift to heare. So is the Syrian translation, and the Gréeke scholies. It séemeth the old translator did read  for , but falsely, and without sense. Iames. 1.25.He that hath looked in the law of perfect libertie. Graec. . that is, into the perfect law of liber∣tie. So is the Syrian translation, and the Gréeke scholies. E∣rasmus sheweth, that in one Latin copie it was, in lege perfe∣cta. Hentenius sheweth, that in one Latin copie of his, it was in legem perfectam, that is, into the perfect law. Cap. 2.20.Is idle. In the margent they put, Dead, which is the true reading agréeing with the Gréeke, with the Syrian transla∣tion, and fiue of Hentenius Latin copies. Cap. 3.5.Behold how much fire what a great wood it kindleth. Graec. , that is, behold how great wood a little fire kindleth or burneth. In the margent they haue put this word, Little, which agréeth with the Gréeke, and is confirmed by the Syrian translation, by S. Hierom, who vpon the 66. chapter of Esaie thus citeth this place: Par∣uus ignis quàm grandem succendit materiam, that is, a little fire what a great deale of wood or matter it burneth. Beda also sheweth, that in some copies it was written, modicus ignis, that is, a little fire. The sense and circumstance of the place, and comparison which the Apostle vseth, requireth it to be so: that as a little fire burneth a great deale of stuffe, so the toong being but a little member braggeth of great things, and doth much mischiefe. Erasmus doth probably coniec∣ture, that the interpretor did translate it, Quantulus ignis, the which an ignorant or negligent writer did alter in∣to Quantus: and now by prescription the corruption posses∣seth the text, and the true reading is thrust out into the margent. 1. Pet. 2.23.He deliuered himselfe to him that iudged him vniustly. Graec. , that is, He committed (himselfe or his cause) to him that iudgeth iustly. So is the Syrian translation, and Oecumenius the Gréeke scholiast. Augu∣stine also Tract. in Iohan. 21. agréeth with the Gréeke. Héereof read before, pag. 14.
Our Lord command.Iude vers 9. In the margent they haue put this word, Rebuke, which is the true reading, agréeing with the Gréeke, , that is, The Lord rebuke thée.Hieron. apolog. ad∣uersus Ruffinum lib. 2. Epiphanius contra Gnostic. haeres. 26. doth alledge it as it is in the Greeke. So doth S. Hierom alledge it, Increpet tibi Dominus, and the Gréeke scholies so read it, as it is in the Gréeke. So is the Hebrew, Zachar. 3.2. out of which S. Iude doth alledge it,  The Lord rebuke thée satan. In like maner, Matth. 8.26. the old translator hath translated the same Gréeke word, , Imperauit, and our Rhemists, He commanded, wher∣as it should be, He rebuked. And these certes reprooue being iudged: but them saue,Iude vers. 22. pulling out of the fire. And on other haue mercie in feare, hating also that which is carnall the spotted cote. Graec. . that is, And haue compassion on some in putting difference: and others saue with feare, pulling them out of the fire, and hate euen the garment spot∣ted by the flesh. With the Gréeke agrée the Gréeke scholies. Blessed are they that wash their stoles.Apocal. 22.14. Graec. . that is, Blessed are they that kéepe his commandements. So readeth Arethas, and Cyprian lib. 2. aduers. Iudaeos, cap. 22.
A few places of manie, in which words and sen∣tences be omitted and want in the Rhemish English translation of the new Testament, and be expressed in the Greeke, which is approoued to be true by ancient translations, fathers, and other testimonies. Heere I do first set downe the text of Scripture agreeable to the Greeke: and then shew what is omitted in the Rhemish translation of the Papists: And lastly I bring in witnesses to confirme the Greeke, and confound the other. Matth. 5.22.He that is angrie with his brother vnaduisedly, &c. Héere this word , which may be translated vnaduisedly, or with∣out cause, is left out. The ancient Syrian translation hath it, retaining euen the very Gréeke word  Chrysostom, Euthymius, and Theophylactus also haue it. Basil in his Morals doth so alledge it.. So doth also Iustinus Martyr, . pag. 5. In the same chapter, vers. 44. these words be omitted: Blesse them that curse you, which be in the Syrian transla∣tion, in Chrysostom and Theophylactus. Cap. 6.12.In the end of the praier which our Sauiour Christ hath taught vs, be omitted these words: For thine is the king∣dome, the power, and the glorie for euer. Which be in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, and Theophylactus. Cap. 9.13.I came not to cal the righteous but sinners to repentance: these words, , that is, to repentance, be omitted. Which be expressed in Chrysostom, Theophylactus. Iusti∣nus Martyr,Apolog. 2. p. 140. Moral. . & . Lib. 2. aduersus Pelagianos. and Basil do so alledge it: Hierom also so alled∣geth it, Sed peccatores ad poenitentiam. Hentenius the Louani∣an Doctor sheweth, that he found them in two Latin copies. And in the 5. of Luke, vers. 32. they in the Latin translation, and their owne English, and therefore héere ought not to be omitted. Cap. 12.22.So that the blind and dum spake and sawe: these words, blind & dum, are left out. Which be in the Syrian transla∣tion, in Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and in S. Basill in his
Morals, . fol. 19. Iesus said vnto them, vnderstand ye all these things:Matth. 13.51. these words, Iesus said vnto them, be left out, which be in the Sy∣rian translation, in Chrysostom and Theophylactus. This people draweth néere vnto me with their mouth,Cap. 15.8. and honoreth me with their lips, &c. These words, Draweth neere vnto me with their mouth, be omitted, which be not onely in all Gréeke copies, but also in the place of Esaie the prophet, cap. 29.13. out of which it is alledged. They be also in Chrysostom, and Theophylactus. So likewise shall mine heauenly father do vnto you,Cap. 18.35. ex∣cept ye forgiue from your harts, ech one to his brother their trespasses. These words, their trespasses, be omitted, which be in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, and Theophy∣lactus. Go ye also into my vineyard,Cap. 20.7. and whatsoeuer is right yée shall receiue. These last words: and whatsoeuer is right ye shall receiue, be omitted, which be in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, and Theophylactus. These words left out, With my owne,Ibid. vers. 15. which be in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and Augustine Sermone 59. de verbis Domini. These words following be twise omitted:Cap. 20.22. Be baptised with the baptisme that I shall be baptised: Which be extant in the Syrian translation, in Origen, Chrysostom, and The∣ophylactus. And in Mark. 10.39. where this story is rehear∣sed, in their owne translation be expressed. All this sentence following left out:Mark. 6.11. Verily I say vnto you, it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha at the day of iudgement than for that citie. Which is in the Syrian translation, Theophylactus, and in Matthew 10.15. And againe he sent vnto them another seruant,Cap. 12.4. and at him they cast stones: these words, cast stones, omitted, which be in the Syrian translation and Theophylactus. And when they lead you, and deliuer you vp,Cap. 13.11. take no thought afore, neither premeditate what ye shall say. These words, neither praemeditate, omitted, which be in the Syri∣an translation and Theophylactus. Moreouer,Ibid. vers. 14. when ye shall sée the abomination of desolation
(spoken of by Daniel the prophet) standing, &c. These words, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, be left out, which be in the Syrian translation, in Theophylactus, and are expressed in Matth. 24.15. where the same matter is rehearsed. Mark. 14.70.Surely thou art one of them: for thou art of Galile, and thy spéech is like. These words: and thy speech is like, are omitted, which be in the Syrian translation, and in Theo∣phylactus. Luke 4.8.But Iesus answered him and said: Hence from me satan, for it is written &c. These words: Hence from me Satan, be omitted, which be in Theophylactus and the 4. of Mathew. Ibid. vers. 41.Thou art the Christ the sonne of God, These words, the Christ, omitted, which be expressed in the Syrian translation and in Theophylactus. Cap. 6.10.And his hand was restored whole as the other. As the other, omitted, which be in the Syrian translation and The∣ophylactus. Cap. 8.48.Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith hath made thée whole. These words, Be of good comfort, omitted, which be in the Syrian translation and Theophylactus. Cap. 9.54.That fire come downe from Heauen and consume them as Helias did. These words, as Helias did, omitted in the text, and thrust into the margent, which be in the Syrian translation,. in Theophylactus, and in S. Basill in his mo∣rals. Luke 11.2.In the praier of our Lord Iesus Christ all these words fol∣lowing be omitted:Vide supra, pag. 15. Our, which art in heauen, thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen, but deliuer vs from euill. Which be all in the Syrian translation, in Theophylactus, Euthymius, yea and some Latin copies. Ibid. vers. 44.Woe be vnto you Scribes, and Pharisies Hypocrits. These wordes: Scribes, Pharisies Hypocrites, omitted, which be in the Syrian translation and Theophylactus. Cap. 23.23.And the voices of them, and of the high Priests preuai∣led, &c. These words: and of the high Priests, omitted, which be in the Syrian translation, and Theophylactus. It may séeme that our Rhemists were glad that these words were in the Latin left out, that the simple people might not knowe, that the voices of the high Priests preuai∣led
to the crucifiyng of Iesus Christ: the which if they did, they might gather that the high Priest of Rome may not onely erre, but also séeke to crucifie Iesus Christ in his mem∣bers, as he dayly doth. Therefore the Iewes did persecute Iesus,Iohn. 5.16. and sought to slea him, bicause he had done these things on the Sabboth day. These words, and sought to slea him, be omitted, which be in the Syrian translation, and in Theophylactus. And the bread that I will giue is my flesh, which I will giue for the life of the world. These words, which I will giue,Cap. 6.51. be left out, but be expressed in the Syrian translation, and in Theophylactus. Iesus shewed himselfe againe to his disciples at the Sea of Tyberias. These words, to his disciples, be omitted,Cap. 21.1. but be extant in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, and in some copies of the old Latin translation. Hentenius of Lo∣uaine confesseth that they were in 4. of his copies. Send therefore to Ioppa,Act. 10.32. and call for Simon whose sur∣name is Peter, (he is lodged in the house of Simon a tanner by the sea side) who when he commeth shall speake vnto thée. These last words, who when he commeth shall speake vn∣to thee, be omitted, which be in the Syrian and Arabian translations, in Chrysostom, and in the Gréeke scholies. Not to all the people,Act. 10.41. but vnto the witnesses chosen before of God. These words, vnto the witnesses chosen before of God, be omitted, which be in the Syrian and Arabian trans∣lations, in Chrysostom, in Oecumenius, the Gréeke Scho∣liast, and in those copies of their owne Latin translation, which I haue séene, as namely in the Bible printed by Plan∣tine at Antwerp 1567. These words following be omitted: Saying,Cap. 15.24. ye must be circumcised and keepe the Law. Which be expressed in the Syrian and Arabian translations, in Chrysostom, and in Oecumenius the Gréeke scholiast. But bade them farewell saying, I must néeds kéepe this feast that commeth at Ierusalem. These words:Cap. 18.21. I must needes keepe this feast that cōmeth at Ierusalem, omitted, which be in the Syrian and Arabian translations, in Chry∣sostom, and Oecumenius the Gréeke scholiaste.
Cap. 20.15.The next day we arriued at Samos and taried at Tro∣gillium, &c. These words, and taried at Trogillium, be omit∣ted, which be extant in the Syrian and Arabian translations, in Chrysostom, and in Oecumenius. Act. 24.27.He hoped also that money should haue béene giuen him of Paul, that he might loose him. These words, that he might loose him, omitted, which be in the Arabian translation, in Chrysostom and Oecumenius. Cap. 25.7.Laid many and gréeuous complaints against Paul: these words, against Paul, omitted: in the Syrian and Arabian translations it is, against him. In Chrysostom and Oecu∣menius the name of Paul is expressed. Cap. 25.16.It is not the maner of the Romaines for fauor to deliuer any man to the death: to the death, be omitted, which be in the Syrian and Arabian translations, in Chrysostom and Oecumenius the Gréeke scholiast. Rom. 11.6.All this omitted: but if it be of works it is no more grace, or else were worke no more worke. Which is in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, in Theophylactus, and in the Gréeke scholies. Cap. 14.6.All this omitted. and he that obserueth not the day, ob∣serueth it not to the Lord. Which is in the Syrian tran∣slation, in Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and in Photius the Gréeke scholiast.. fol. 21. S. Basill also in his Morals doth so alleage it. Rom. 15.29.I shall come to you with abundance of the blessing of the Gospell of Christ. These words, of the Gospell, be omitted, which are in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, Theo∣phylactus, and the Gréeke scholies. 1. Cor. 5.7.For Christ our passeouer is sacrificed for vs. These words, for vs, be omitted, which be in the Syrian translati∣on,Pag. 166. in Theodoretus alledging this place dialog. 2. and in the Gréeke scholies. Cap. 11.19.There must be heresies among you. These words, among you, omitted, which be in the Syrian translation, in Chry∣sostom and the Gréeke scholies. Cap. 15.54.These words omitted. So when this corruptible hath put on incorruption. Which be in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, in Theophylactus, in the Gréeke scholies, in
Augustine, Serm. 43. in Ioannem & alibi. And Hentenius of Louaine sheweth them to haue béene in one Latin copie. I was a foole to boast my selfe, &c. These words,2. Cor. 12.11. to boast my selfe, be omitted, which be in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, in Theophylactus, and the Gréeke scholies. . that is, If a sonne,Galat. 4.7. an heire al∣so of God by Christ. Which they translate thus: and if a sonne, an heire also by God. Héere these words by Christ be omitted, and the other falsely translated, by God, for, of God. With the Gréeke agrée the Syrian translation, Chry∣sostom, Hierom, and the Gréeke scholies. If any faithfull man, or faithfull woman haue widows.1. Tim. 5.16. These words, or faithfull woman, be omitted: which be in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, Theophylactus, Ambrose, and the Gréeke scholies which so expound it, . that is, Well is this put, faithfull man or faithfull woman. Thou art a priest for euer after the order of Melchisedec.Hebr. 7.21. These words, after the order of Melchisedec, be left out, which be in the Syrian translation, in Chrysostom, in The∣ophylactus, and in the Gréeke scholies. All this omitted: which on their part is euill spoken of,1. Pet. 4.14. but on your part is glorified. Which is in Cyprian, lib. 4. epist. 6. and in Oecumenius the Gréeke scholiast. These words omitted:1. Iohn. 2.14. I haue written vnto you fathers bicause you haue known him that is from the beginning. Which be in the Syrian translation, in the Gréeke scholies, in Augustine, and Erasmus sheweth that he found them in some ancient Latin copies. Many mo places there be wherein words and sentences be omitted in this Rhemish English translation: but these shall suffice to shew the corruption and imperfection of it. And as I said before, let the Christian Reader consider whether he is to beleeue the originall text of the Greek, confirmed and approoued by these good and faithfull witnesses whom I haue produced: or the corrupt streame, and myrie puddle of this transla∣tion, which often dissenteth from the ancient copies of the Latin which they pretend and professe to follow.
Superfluities in the Rhemish English translati∣on, vz. Words and sentences abounding in the said translation, which are not in the Greeke: which is approoued as before by sundry good and sufficient witnesses. Matth. 7.21.These words added: He shal enter into the kingdome of heauen: which be not in the Syrian translation, nor in Chrysostom, nor in Theophylactus, nor in Basil who often alledgeth it, morall . & in Ase. : nor in Hierom, as Erasmus sheweth. Mar. 2.16.Your maister, added: which be not in the Syrian transla∣tion, nor in Theophylactus. And Hentenius sheweth not to haue béene in sixe of his Latin copies. Luke. 4.19.These words added: and the day of retribution, which be not in the Syrian translation, nor in Theophylactus, nor in Hierom citing this place as Erasmus sheweth. Cap. 19.32.These words added, the colte standing, which be not in the Syrian translation, nor in Theophylactus. Cap. 24.43.In the Rhemish translation it is thus: And when he had eaten before, taking the remaines he gaue to them. In Gréek . that is, And he taking it did eate before them. Whereunto agrée the Syrian translation and Theophylactus. Act. 2.43.These words added: In Hierusalem, and there was great feare in all, which are not in the Syrian translation, sa∣uing that Hierusalem is expressed, whereunto agréeth the Arabian translation. They are omitted also in Chrysostom and in Oecumenius the Gréeke scholiast Cap. 5.15.These words added: and they all might be deliuered from their infirmities, which are not in the Syrian transla∣tion, nor in Oecumenius the Gréeke scholiast, nor in some Latin copies as Erasmus sheweth, and Hentenius noteth them not to haue béene in 5. of his Latin copies. Cap. 15.34.These words added: and Iudas departed alone, which be not in the Syrian translation, nor in the Arabian, nor in Oecumenius, and Hentenius sheweth them to haue béene omitted in 7. of his Latin copies.
These words added:Cap. 15.41. commanding them to keepe the praecepts of the Apostles and the ancients, which be not in the Syrian nor Arabian translations, nor in Oecumenius the Gréek scholiast, nor in fower of Hentenius Latin copies: they be taken out of the next chapter, vers. 4. These words added:Act. 18.4. interposing the name of our Lord Iesus, which are not in the Syrian nor Arabian translati∣ons, nor in Oecumenius the Gréeke scholiast, nor in some Latin copies as Erasmus sheweth. All this added:Cap. 23.25. for he feared that perhaps the Iewes might take him away, and kill him, & himselfe afterward should susteine reproch, as though he would haue taken money, which is not in the Syrian nor Arabian translati∣ons, nor in Chrysostom, nor in Oecumenius, and Henteni∣us confesseth not to haue béene in 9. of his Latin copies: frier Lyra also auoucheth not to haue béene in the truest Latin books. And vowes, added:Cap. 24.17. which is not in the Syrian translati∣on, nor in the Arabian, nor in Oecumenius the Gréeke scho∣liast. To him, added:Rom. 1.3. which is not in the Syrian translati∣on, nor in Chrysostom in Gréeke printed at Verona, nor in the Gréeke scholies, nor in two of Hentenius Latin co∣pies. All this added:Cap. 4.5. according to the purpose of the grace of God, which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in two of Hentenius Latin copies, nor in the Gréeke scholies. This added: as the stars of heauen,Cap. 4.18. and the sand of the sea, which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in Chryso∣stom, nor in Theophylactus, nor in Ambrose, nor in the Gréeke scholies, nor in 7. of Hentenius Latin copies, nor in an old Latin booke which Iohn Colete lent Erasmus out of the librarie of Poules. All this added: and hir that hath not obteined mercy,Cap. 9.25. hauing obteined mercy, which is not in the Syrian tran∣slation, nor in Chrysostom, nor in Ambrose, nor in Origen, nor in Theophylactus, nor in the Gréeke scholies, nor in Augustine, lib. 22. contra Faustum cap. 29. nor Ambrose vpon this place.
1. Cor. 15.23.This word added, Beleeued, which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in Chrysostom, nor in the Gréeke scholies, nor in 2. of Hentenius Latin copies. Colos. 3.25.With God, added: which is not in the Syrian translati∣on, nor in the Gréeke scholies, nor in one of Hentenius co∣pies. 1. Thes. 4.1.These words added, as you do walke, which be not in the Syrian translation, nor in Chrysostom, nor in Theophyla∣ctus, nor in the Gréeke scholies. 1. Timoth. 6.9.Of the diuell, added: which is not in the Syrian transla∣tion, nor in Basill alledging it in his Morals, . nor in the Greeke scholies, nor in Ambrose. Tit. 2.1.Our Sauior, added, or rather in the Latin the word Salu∣taris, agréeing with the Gréeke , was changed into Saluatoris. For Hentenius the Doctor of Louaine sheweth, that in two of his copies it was Salutaris. With the Gréeke agrée the Syrian translation, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, and the Gréeke scholies. Iames. 3.17.These words added, consenting to the good: which be not in the Syrian translation, nor in Oecumenius the Gréeke scholiast, nor in 4. of Hentenius Latin copies, nor in an old Latin copie which Erasmus had. 1. Pet. 1.8.And beleeuing, added: which is not in the Syrian trans∣lation, nor in Oecumenius, nor in one of Hentenius Latin copies. 1. Pet. 3.22.Al this added, Swallowing death, that we might be made heires of life euerlasting: which is not in the Syrian trans∣lation, nor in the Gréeke scholies. 1. Pet. 5.2.According to God, added: which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in Oecumenius the Gréeke scholiast. 1. Ioh. 1.4.This added, That you may reioice: which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in Oecumenius, nor in two of Hen∣tenius Latin copies, nor in an old Latin copie of Constance which Erasmus had. 1. Ioh. 5.9.This added, Which is greater: which is not in the Syri∣an translation, nor in Oecumenius. Ibid. vers. 20.God, added: which is not in the Syrian translation, nor in Hilarius lib. 6. de Trinitate, nor in Augustine lib. 1. de Tri∣nitate, cap. 6. nor in Hierom in Esaiae, cap. 65.
This added, In the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ:Iudae vers. 14. which is not in the Gréeke scholies, nor in 3. of Hentenius Latin copies, nor in the Latin booke of Constance, which E∣rasmus had. This added, In Latin hauing the name exterminans:Apocal. 9.11. which is not in Arethas. And it is most manifest to haue béen added by the Latin translator, wherewith Laurentius Valla not without cause findeth fault. By these places which I haue set downe, it may suf∣ficiently appéere, that the Latin bookes of the new Te∣stament, as they were very diuers and corrupt in S. Hieroms daies, as by his complaint before alledged it is euident: euen so they be now.Praefatio in Iosue. Pag. 3. For the right reformation whereof, we ought to returne to the originall fountaine of the Gréeke,Pag. 6. as S. Hierom before alledged doth exhort vs: and as he, Erasmus, Valla, and others haue indeuo∣red to do.
Strange words, and affected phrases, which the Iesuits in their Latin translation of the English Te∣stament haue without need vsed, as it may seeme for these causes: First, to shew their fine eloquence, and thereby to mooue their sim∣ple readers and hearers to admire them, who commonly haue in admiration such strange things as they do not vnderstand. Secondly, to make the Scripture darke, and hard to be vn∣derstood of the vnlearned people, and so to depriue them of that profit and comfort which they might re∣ceiue by it. And lastly, for that they would as much dissent, and as little agree with vs, as they might. Matt. 1, 19 Dismisse hir, for put away. 2, 2 Adore, for worship. 16 Deluded. 3, 1 Desert. 5, 30 Scandalize. 6, 11 Supersubstantiall. 8, 12 Exterior darknes. 10, 8 Gratis, for fréely. 12, 4 Loaues of proposition. 19, 13 Impose his hands. 24, 14 Consummation, for end. 27 Aduent. 26, 2 Pasche. 17 Day of azymes. 27, 6 Corbona. 59 Syndon. 60 Monument. 62 Parasceue.
Mark. 4, 34 Explicated. 7, 21 Auarices, impudicities. 9, 19 Incredulous. 49 Victime. 12, 33 Holocausts. 14, 14 Refertorie. 36 Transferre. 38 Infirme. 16, 14 Exprobrated. Luke 1, 14 Exultation. 58 Congratulate. 69 Erected. 78 The orient from an high. 79 To illuminate. 3, 14 Calumniate. 5, 33 Make obsecrations. 6, 48 Inundation. 7, 34 A gurmander. 9, 31 Decease. 10, 1 Designed. 35 Supererogate. 12, 58 Exactor. Iohn 8, 46 Argue me of sinne. 12, 40 Indurated their hart. 14, 16 Paraclete. 18, 1 The torrent Cedron. 28 Contaminated. Acts 1, 7 Times or moments. 9 He was eleuated. 25 Hath preuaricated. 2, 37 Were compunct in hart. 7, 19 Circumuenting our stocke. expose their chil∣dren. 59 Inuocating. 8, 12 Euangelizing. 9, 21 Expugned those that inuocated this name. Acts 10, 10 Excesse of mind. 11, 26 Conuersed there in the Church. 13, 8 Auerte the proconsull. 45 Contradicted those things.
Acts. 15, 29 Immolated to idols. 17, 3 Insinuating. 21, 28 Violated this holy place. 22, 3 An emulator of the Law. 4 Deliuering into custodies. 23, 1 Haue conuersed before God. Rom. 1, 27 Working turpitude. 31 Detractions, odible to God. 2, 3 Longanimitie, benignitie. 23 Preuarication of the Law. 26 If then the prepuce keepe the Iustices of the Law. 4, 5 Impious. 6, 5 Complanted to the Similitude. 8, 18 Condigne to the glorie. 28 All things operiate vnto good. 9, 18 Indurate. 21 Vnto contumelie. 11, 11 Emulate them. 12, 1 A liuing host. 1. Cor. 3, 9 Gods coadiutors. 2, 10 Yea the profundities of God. 4, 9 Deputed to death. 4, 15 Tenne thousand pedagoges. 5, 7 As ye are azimes, for our pasche Christ is im∣molated. 6, 3 Secular things. 18 He that doth fornicate. 7, 22 Is the franchised of our Lord. 9, 13 Participate with the altar. 22 Do we emulate our Lord. 11, 24 Commemoration of me. 14, 12 Be emulators of spirits. 15, 8 Of an Abortiue. 2. Cor. 1.12 Haue conuersed in this world. 2, 17 Adulterating the word of God. 4, 4 Illumination of the Gospell. 6, 13 Be you also dilated. 7, 1 Inquination of the flesh. 11, 28 My daily instance.
Galat. 1, 13 Expugned it. 3, 1 Was proscribed. 5, 4 Euacuated from Christ. 21 Ebrieties, commessations. 6, 1 Praeoccupated in any fault. 10 Domesticals of faith. Ephes. 1, 3 In coelestials. 14 To the redemption of acquisition. 18 Eies of your hart illuminated. 2, 14 Euacuating the law. 3 6 Coheires and concorporate and compartici∣pant. 9 To the prefinition of worlds. 4, 19 To impudicitie, vnto the operation of all vn∣cleannes, vnto auarice. 30 Contristate not the spirit. Philip. 2, 7 He exinanited himselfe. 17 If I be immolated. congratulate with you all. 3, 6 According to emulation. conuersing without blame. 9 Configurated to his death. 14 Supernall vocation. 1. Thess. 2, 5 In the word of adulation. 4, 15 In the aduent of our Lord. 5, 1 Moments. 1. Tim. 1, 9 To the wicked and contaminate. 3, 6 Not a Neophyte. 11 Not detracting. 6, 20 Keepe the depositum. 2. Tim. 1, 6 That thou resuscitate the grace of God. 9 Secular times. 10 By the illumination of our Sauiour. illumina∣ted life. 15 Be auerted from me. 4, 6 Time of my resolution. Hebr. 2, 10 To consummate the author of their saluation. 17 That he might repropitiate the Sinnes of the people. 3, 12 Be obdurate with the fallacie of Sinne. 13 That none of you obdurate your harts as in
the exacerbation. Hebr. 5, 11 Inexplicable to vtter. 6, 17 He interposed an oth. 20 Where Iesus the precursor for vs. 7, 15 Of life indissoluble. 9, 2 Proposition of Loaues. 17 Whiles he that tested liueth. 28 To exhaust the sinnes of many. 10, 6 Holocausts and for sinne did not please thee. 35 Which hath a great remuneration. 11, 30 By circuiting seuen daies. 12, 4 Repugning against sinne. 13, 16 And beneficence and communication do not forget, for with such hosts God is promeri∣ted. Iames. 4, 11 Detract not one from an other. 1. Pet. 3, 16 Which Caluminate your good conuersation. 2. Pet. 2, 5 Originall world. Bringing in the deluge vpon the world of the impious. 13 Coinquinations, delicacies. 3, 15 The Longanimitie of our Lord. 1. Iohn. 1, 5 This is the Annuntiation which. Iude ve. 14 Impious, impietie, impiously. Apoc. 1, 10 Dominicall day. 13 Vested in a princely garment. 16, 15 See his turpitude. These be the fine words wherewith our fine Iesuites haue sought to beautifie this there translation, of which I may say as S. Hierom sometimes said.Hieron. lib. 1. ad∣uersus Iouinian. Rogo quae sunt haec portenta Verborum? that is, I pray thée what monstrous words be these? And as Demosthenes said, these be not  but ,Nazianzen. de mo∣dest. seruanda in disput. not words but wonders. This is not to obey the wise counsell of Gregorie Nazianzene who saith: . that is, vse natiue and common words. Nor to doo the office of a good interpretor, whose dutie is as S. Hi∣erom saith,Hieron. ad Mar∣cellam, tom. 4. Non quo ipse disertus appareat, &c. Not that he should séeme to be eloquent himselfe, but to make him that readeth it, so to vnderstand it, as he that write it.
To the Christian Reader. WHereas I did not purpose to make a full answeare to the Rhemists whole preface, which I hope hereafter will be performed by some other: I haue thought good to set downe here a few places out of the holy scriptures, and ancient godly fathers, partly to oppose for an answeare to the first part of their said preface, wherein they goe about to shew, that it is neither necessarie nor profitable to haue the holy Scriptures in Vulgar lan∣guages to be read and heard of all people: and partly to stir vp them that be godly and faithfull, to the dayly diligent and reuerent rea∣ding of them, that they may thereby dayly more and more increase in the true knowledge and feare of God. If thou good Christian rea∣der receiue any benefite and comfort by these my poore and simple labors, commend me to God in thy faithfull praiers. Iohn 5.39. Search the Scriptures: for in them ye thinke to haue eternall life, and they are they which testifie of me. Certaine places of Scripture, to shew how re∣quisite and profitable it is, for all men dili∣gently and reuerently to read and heare the word of GOD. Deut. 6.4. & 11.19. HEare, O Israell, the Lord our God is Lord only. And thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with al thine hart, and with all thy soule, and with all thy might. And these words which I command thée this day, shall be in thine hart, and thou shalt rehearse them continually vnto thy children, and shalt talke of them when thou tariest in thine house, and as thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest downe, and when thou risest vp. And thou shalt binde them for a signe vpon thine hand, and they shal be
as frontlets betwéene thine eies. Also thou shalt write them vpon the posts of thine house, and vpon thy gates. Deut. 17.18. And when the king shall sit vpon the throne of his king∣dome, then shall he write him this Law repeated in a booke by the priests of the Leuites. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the daies of his life, that he may learne to feare the Lord his God, and to kéepe all the words of this Law, and these ordinances for to do them. That his hart be not lifted vp aboue his brethren, and that he turne not from the commandement, to the right hand or to the left, but that he may prolong his daies in his kingdome, He and his sonnes in the middest of Israell. Iosue 1.6. Let not this booke of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that thou maist obserue and doo according to all that is written therein. For then shalt thou make thy way prosperous, and then shalt thou haue good successe. Psalm. 1.1. Blessed is the man that doth not walke in the counsell of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seate of the scornfull. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law doth he mediate day and night. Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect conuerting the soule: the testimonie of the Lord is sure, and giueth wisedome vnto the Simple. The statutes of the Lord are right and reioice the hart: the commandement of the Lord is pure, and giueth light vnto the eies. The feare of Lord is cleane and endu∣reth for euer: the iudgements of the Lord are truth: they are righteous altogither, & more to be desired than gold: swéeter also than hony, and the hony combe. Moreouer by them is thy seruant made circumspect, and in kéeping of them there is great reward. Psal. 119.9. Wherewith shall a yoong man redresse his way? in ta∣king héed thereto according to thy word. Ibid. vers. 130. The entrance into thy words sheweth light, and giueth vnderstanding to the Simple. Ibid. vers. 155. Saluation is far from the wicked, bicause they séeke not thy statutes. Esai. 8.20. To the Law and to the testimonie, if they speake not ac∣cording to this word: it is bicause there is no light in them. Hierem. 8.9.
Lo, they haue reiected the word of the Lord, and what wisedome is in them? Amos 2.4. Thus saith the Lord, for thrée transgressions of Iudah, and for fower, I will not turne to it, bicause they haue cast a∣way the Law of the Lord, and haue not kept his commande∣ments, and their lies caused them to erre, after the which their fathers haue walked. Matt. 22.29. Then Iesus answered & said vnto the Sadducées, ye are deceiued, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God. Matt. 23.13. Wo be to you Scribes, & Pharisies, Hipocrits, bicause ye shut vp the kingdom of heauen before men: for ye your selues go not in, neither suffer ye them that would enter, to com in. Luke 11.52. Wo be to you interpreters of the Law: for ye haue taken away the key of knowledge: ye entred not in your selues, and them that came in, ye forbad. Rom. 15.4. Whatsoeuer things were written aforetime, are written for our learning, that we through pacience and comfort of the Scriptures might haue hope. Colos. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plentiously in all wisedome, teaching and admonishing your owne selues in psalmes, and hymnes, and spirituall songs, &c. 2. Tim. 3.14. But continue thou in the things which thou hast lear∣ned, and art persuaded thereof, knowing of whom thou hast learned them: and that thou hast known the holy Scriptures of a child, which are able to make thée wise vnto saluation, through the faith which is in Christ Iesus. For the whole Scripture is giuen by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousnes, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect vn∣to all good works. Act. 17.11. These were also more noble men than they which were at Thessalonica, which receiued the word with al readines, & searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. 1. Pet. 2.2. As new borne babes desire the sincere milke of the word, that ye may grow thereby. Vide Ioh. 5.3 & Act. 8.28. 2. Pet. 1.19. We haue also a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which ye doo well that ye take héed, as vnto a light that shi∣neth in a darke place, vntill the day dawne, and the day star arise in your harts.
Out of the first part of the third Homilie of S. Iohn Chrysostom, vpon the parable of the rich Glutton and poore Lazarus, written by Saint Luke, Cap. 16. THerfore I doo often foreshew you ma∣nie daies before the Argument wher∣of I will intreat, that on the daies which be betwixt, you taking the booke, and weying & considering the sum of the matter, after you vnder∣stand what hath alreadie béene said, and what remaineth to be said, you may the better prepare your mind to heare that which after shall be intreated of. Therfore I doo alwaies exhort you, and will not cease to exhort you, that you would not onelie marke the things which are héere spoken, but also when you are in your houses, you would continually giue your selues to the reading of the holie scriptures. The which thing I cease not to inculcate and beat into them who pri∣uatlie haue companie with me. Neither let anie man saie to me (for they be cold and vaine words, and ought al∣togither to be contemned) I am troubled with worldlie matters, I haue in hand publike affaires, I exercise an Art and occupation, I haue a wife and bring vp children, I haue care of familie, I am a worldlie man, it is not my duetie to read the scriptures: but theirs who haue left the world, who dwell in the toppe of the mountaines and lead such a conti∣nent life. What saiest thou O man? is it not thy part to read and study the scriptures, because thou art troubled with manie cares? yea it rather belongeth to thée than to them: for they doo not so much néed the helpe & defence of the scrip∣tures as you doo, who are tossed as it were in the middest of the waues of worldlie affaires. For solitarie men being frée from the court and courtlie causes, hauing their cottages in the wildernesse, and kéeping companie with none, but in that quietnesse with much securitie doo liue a studious and diuine life, and as it were resting on the hauen, doo liue verie
safelie: But we on the contrarie part tossed as it were on the middest of the sea, and falling will we nill we, into sundrie sinnes, haue alwaies néed of continuall solace and comfort of the scriptures. They sit far from the conflict, and therefore receiue not manie wounds: But thou that standest alwaies in the front of the battle, and receiuest manie strokes, hast more néed of remedie. For as much as thy wife prouoketh thée, thy sonne gréeueth thée, and mooueth thée to anger, thy enimie laieth wait for thée, thy friend enuieth thée, thy neighbour contendeth with thée, thy fellow supplanteth thée, the iudge often threateneth thée, pouertie troubleth thée, the losse of some of thy familie maketh thée to lament, prosperi∣tie puffeth thée vp, and aduersitie beateth and presseth thée downe: Bréefelie séeing that sundrie occasions, yea and ne∣cessities of cares, troubles, sorrow, vexations, & feare doo on euerie side compasse thée, and innumerable darts doo on eue∣rie part flie vpon thée, thou hast néed continuallie to receiue armor from the holie scriptures.Eccles. 9. Know therefore that thou art in the middest of snares, and walkest on the pinacles of the citie: for the concupiscence, of the flesh doo more vehe∣mentlie and sharpelie inuad them which liue in the continu∣all companie of the people: whom both the faire face, and bewtifull bodie by the eies catcheth, & filthie talke with arti∣ficiall & swéet songs by the eares mooueth, and manie times ouercommeth. But what doo I speake of these things? That which is more vile than anie of these, euen the odour of oint∣ments, which smelleth from wicked women liuing in stewes and séeking filthie lucre often inueigleth many, & lea∣deth them captiue. Séeing therfore there be so manie things that doo assault our soules, we stand the more in néed of those diuine remedies, that we may both heale the wounds recei∣ued, & repell those that afterward shall be inflicted, and by the continual reading of the scriptures extinguish the fiery darts of the diuell. For it cannot be, I saie it cannot be, that anie man can obtaine saluation although we be continuallie par∣takers of this diuine medicine. But if we be dailie wounded, and be destitute of remedie, what hope can we haue of life or saluation. Doost thou not sée Ironsmithes, Goldsmithes, and Siluersmithes, and all those that occupie anie handie craft,
how they alwaies haue readie & kéepe whole all the instru∣ments of their art, although famine pinch them, and pouer∣tie afflict them, rather desiring to sustaine anie aduersitie, than to sell anie of the instruments of their occupation, and by the monie thereof to be nourished: Yea and many times they will rather take vpon vsurie, than put in pawne and pledge the smallest of their tooles, and this they doo not with∣out iust cause: for they know that if they be sold, their art is altogither vnprofitable to them, and that the substance of their profit is lost: but if they retaine and kéepe them, it may be that by exercising continuallie their occupation, at the last by progresse of time they may discharge their debt. But if they doo sell their instruments to other before their debt be discharged, there remaineth no meanes to helpe their hun∣ger, and ease their pouertie. Euen after the same sort ought we to be minded and affected: for as the hammer, the puntch and the tongs, are instruments to them, so the books of the Apostles and Prophets and all the holie Scripture which commeth by diuine inspiration, & is verie profitable, are in∣struments to vs. And as they by those their instruments doo worke and finish that which they take in hand: euen so we also by these our instruments doo forme and frame our soule, and when it is depraued, we amend it, and when it is cor∣rupted, we correct and renew it. And they herein onelie doo vse their art to adde a forme to things, for they cannot alter and change the matter and substance of vessels, as to make Gold of Siluer, but they doo onlie make the forme and fashion of things. But thou maist not onlie doo that, but more to: for thou maist of a wodden at the last make a golden ves∣sel, as Paul witnesseth, writing in this manner, 2. Tim. 2. In a great house are not onelie vessels of gold and of siluer, but also of wood and of earth, some for honor, and some for dis∣honor. If a man purge him from these, he shall be a vessell vnto honor, sanctified and made méete for the Lord, and pre∣pared vnto all good works. Therefore let vs not neglect to prepare and get vs those diuine bookes, lest we in things tou∣ching our life be wounded. Neither let vs hide and dig gold in the ground for vs, but let vs hide to our selues the trea∣sures of those spirituall bookes. Indéed gold when it most in∣creaseth,
it most deceiueth them that possesse it: but these di∣uine bookes being reposed and kept doo greatlie profit those that haue them. For euen as where the kings armor and munition is reposed and laid, although there be none that haue the ouersight of it, yet it causeth much safetie & defence to them that dwell there, whilest neither open théefe, nor priuie piker, nor anie wicked person dare assault the house: euen so wheresoeuer those spirituall bookes be, from thence all diuellish power is expelled, and to them that dwell there much comfort and consolation is added. For euen the ve∣rie sight of those bookes maketh vs more slacke and slouthfull to sinne, for whether we haue attempted anie thing which is prohibited and forbidden vs, and therewith haue polluted our selues, whē we returne home, & behold those holie bookes, our conscience dooth more sharplie condemne vs, and we are therby warned and admonished from committing the same againe: or whether we persist in holines we are made by those books more firme and constant: for assoone as one hath touched the Gospell, by and by he frameth his minde, and withdraweth it from worldly matters, and that onely by the sight thereof. But if diligent reading be ioined thereto, the soule being occupied in those holy and diuine mysteries, is purged and purified, for as much as God speaketh to it by the Scriptures. But what then (say they) if we vnder∣stand not the matters which are conteined in the scriptures? Yes verily although thou vnderstand not that which is se∣cret and obscure, yet euen by the reading thou maist get much godlines: and yet it cannot be that thou shouldest equally and alike be ignorant of all. For the gracious spirit of God hath so disposed and tempered the Scriptures, that euen publicanes, fishers, tentmakers, shepheards, apostles, and simple and vnlearned men might by them be saued, that no simple or vnlearned man should flie to this excuse of diffi∣cultie and hardnes, séeing that the thing which in those di∣uine books be vttered, are so easie for all men, that euen craftsmen, seruants, women, and those that be most void of learning may not a little profit euen by the hearing of them read. For they whom God from the beginning vouchsafed to indue with his spirit of grace, did not write and compose
these books for vaine glory as did the ethnicks, but for the sal∣uation of those which should heare them. For those pro∣phane Philosophers, eloquent Orators, and fine Rhetoriti∣ans, when they did write books, did not séeke what was most for the publike profit of the people: but onely had a regard héereto and studied for this, euen to be in admiration, and therefore albeit they vttered any thing that was profitable, yet they did couer and hide it in the darknes of their wisdom which they much vsed. But the Apostles and Prophets did al things contrary, for they vttered things in cleare and ma∣nifest maner, and opened them to all men, being as it were the common teachers of the world, that euery man might learne the things that are set foorth by the onely reading thereof. And this the prophet foreshewed before saieng, They all shall be taught of God,Ierem. 31. & euery one shall not say to to his neighbor, know God, for al shal know me frō the least of them to the greatest of them. And S. Paul saith, 1. Cor. 2. And I brethren when I came to you, came not in glorious∣nes of words or of wisdom, shewing to you the mysteries of God. And againe: My words and preaching were not in the faire inticing spéech of mans wisedome: but in the plaine euidence of spirituall power. And againe: We speake (saith he) the wisedome not of this world, nor of the princes of this world, which come to naught. To whom are not manifest the things that be written in the Gospell? Who hearing blessed be the milde, blessed be the mercifull, blessed be the cleane in hart, and such other saiengs, will require therin to be instructed, or to haue the same expounded? Also to whom be not signes, myracles and histories plaine and manifest? This is but a vaine pretence, excuse and cloke or couer of slothfulnes. Thou doest not vnderstand the things that are conteined in the Scriptures? How canst thou euer vnder∣stand them, when as thou wilt not once vouchsafe lightly to looke vpon them? Take the booke into thy hands, read the whole storie, and kéeping in memorie the things which thou vnderstandest, often reuolue and read ouer the things which be obscure and hard. But if thou cannot by continuance of reading attaine to the sense and meaning of it, come to a wise man, go to a learned man, and communicate with them the
things which thou hast read, shew them thy vehement de∣sire and flagrant affection. And if God do sée thée hauing so willing a minde, and so desirous an affection, he wil not neg∣lect thy vigilancie and carefulnes. But though no man should teach thée that which thou séekest, he without doubt will open it to thée.Act. 8. Remember the Quéene of Ethiopians chamberlaine, who being a Barbarian, and distracted with many cares, & on euery side troubled with sundry affaires, al∣though he did not vnderstād what he did read, yet neuerthe∣lesse he sitting in his chariot did read the diuine Scriptures. If he shewed such diligēce laboring by the way: cōsider what he would do being in his house? If in his iourney he would not cease or abstaine from reading, much lesse would he re∣fraine being quiet in his house. If so be whilest he was igno∣rant, & did not vnderstand, yet notwithstanding did read, and ceased not from reading, much lesse would he cease after he was instructed and did vnderstand. For that thou maiest know that he vnderstood not what he did read, heare what Philip said to him: Dost thou vnderstand what thou readest? The which whē he heard, he was not abashed nor ashamed, but confessed his ignorance, and said: How can I, vnlesse I haue an instructor, whilest as yet he had none to teach him, yet notwithstanding he did read, and thereby quickly obtai∣ned an instructor. God séeing his willing mind, embraced his good affection, and straight waies sent him a teacher. And al∣though Phillip be not now with vs, yet the same spirit which moued Phillip, is with vs. Dearely beloued, let vs not neglect our saluation, al these things were written to put vs in remembrance, whom the ends of the world are come vp∣on. The reading of the scriptures is a great defence and safe∣gard against sin: the ignorance of the Scriptures is a verie slippery meanes to fall into sinne, and a great gulfe of sinne. It is a great perdition and destruction to saluation to be ig∣norant of the diuine Scriptures: this thing hath bred here∣sies, brought in corrupt life, and hath turned all things vp∣side downe. It cannot be, I say it cannot be, that any man which giueth himselfe to the dayly and diligent reading of the Scriptures, should depart without fruit. Hitherto Chry∣sostom in that place.
Chrysostomus in Genes. Homil. 21. LEt vs not pretend the gouernment of our house, the care of wife and children: that we should thinke the same sufficient to excuse our negligent and idle life. Neither let vs alledge those cold and friuolous spéeches, in saying I am a worldly man, I haue a wife and care of children, as many men vse to speake, if at any time we exhort them to vertuous exercises, or to bestow studie and diligence in rea∣ding the holy Scriptures. Then they say, That pertaineth not to me. Haue I forsaken the world? Am I a monke or a so∣litarie man? What saiest thou O man? Doth it onely per∣taine to solitary men, to please God? He will haue all men to be saued, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, and that no man neglect vertue. A little after. I beséech you therefore let vs not deceiue our selues, but the more we be intangled with such cares, let vs the more di∣ligently séek remedies by the reading of the holy Scriptures. A little after. WHerefore I beséech you, let vs not lightly run ouer those things which be contained in the holie Scrip∣tures, but attentiuely let vs read them, that attaining profit by them, at the last we may giue our selues to vertue where∣with God is pleased. Chrysostom in Genes. Homil. 29. YOu haue séene how whatsoeuer calamitie afflicteth our humane nature, we may take a conuenient reme∣die for the same out of the Scriptures, and repell all the cares and griefes of this life, and not be grieued with any that shall happen. Therefore I beséech you that often times you would come hither, and diligently harken to the reading
of the holy Scripture, and not onely when you come hither, but also at home in your houses, take the holy Bible into your hands, and with earnest studie séeke to get the profit which is contained in it. For from thence great gaine is got∣ten. First by reading the toong and spéech is reformed. More∣ouer the soule getting thereby wings is lifted vp on hie, and is lightened with the beames of the Sunne of righteousnes, and during that time being deliuered from the inticements of filthy thoughts, enioyeth great quietnes and tranquillity. Moreouer that which sensible meat doth to the increasing of the strength of the body, the same doth reading vnto the soule. For it is a spirituall foode, and maketh the soule strong and constant, and giuen to the loue of wisedome: not permit∣ting it to be ouercome of absurde affections: but making it light, and by wings causeth it to flie (as it is said) into the ve∣rie heauen. Therefore I pray you let vs not through negli∣gence loose so great gaine and profite: but euen in our houses let vs giue our selues to the reading of the holy Scriptures. And when we be héere present, let vs not spend the time in trifles and vnprofitable talke. But to the ende that we be come togither, let vs marke diligently those things that be read, that hauing gotten great profit we may depart. Chrysostom vpon Genes. homil. 35. BEloued the reading of the holie Scriptures is a great good thing. For this maketh the soule endued with good maners, this lifteth the minde into heauen, this ma∣keth a man thankfull. This causeth vs not to looke vpon any thing that is present, but to haue our minds alwaies vpon another life: and that looking to the Lords reward we should do all things, and chéerefully take in hand vertuous exerci∣ses. Out of the Scriptures we may learne the prouidence of God quickly helping vs, the valiantnes of iust men, the good∣nes of our Lord, the greatnes of his rewards. From hence we may be stirred to the imitation and following of the good life of godly men, that we waxe not cold and careles in vertuous exercises and battels, but euen before they come vpon vs to put our confidence in Gods promises. Therefore
let vs giue our selues with great diligence to the reading of the diuine Scriptures. For so we get knowledge, if we read continually the things which be there contained. Neither can it be, that he who with great studie & feruent desire gi∣ueth himself to the reading of the holy Scriptures, should be alwais neglected, but albeit we want the instructiō of man, the Lord himselfe from an high entring into our harts, ligh∣teneth our mind, illuminateth our vnderstanding, reuealeth those things which be secret, & teacheth vs the things which we do not vnderstand if we of our selues will do our owne endeuor. For you shall not, saith he, call any man master vp∣on earth. Therefore when we take that spirituall booke into our hands, all worldly care laid aside, let vs kéepe our cogita∣tions, and restraining our minde that it be not caried away, let vs with good deuotion and great attention giue our selues to reading, that we may by the holie Ghost be lead vnto the vnderstanding of the things that be written, and receiue great profit therby. That Barbarian an eunuch to the Quéen of the Ethiopians, who was in so great glorie, and did ride in his coach, yet in that time neglected not reading: but ha∣uing the prophet in his hand, vsed great diligence, and that not knowing what was contained therein, yet he did his in∣deuor, and vsed studie, willingnes, and attentiuenes. Consi∣der I pray you, how diligent he was in not neglecting to read as he was trauelling in his iourney, and especially sitting in his coach. Let them heare and marke this example, who can∣not be perswaded to do this at home in their houses, but thinke the reading of these things to be superfluous, bicause they either liue in marriage, or be appointed to warfare, or haue care of children, seruants and other affaires, and there∣fore thinke that the reading of the holie Scriptures doth not appertaine vnto them. Behold this Eunuch, &c. A little after. WHerupon he did not speake those things, which now manie men doo, saieng, I doo not vnderstand those things that be written, and I cannot attaine to the profound déepenesse of the Scriptures. Whie should I in vaine take
paines and trouble my selfe, I read and haue none to direct me? That Eunuch did thinke no such thing, being in toong a Barbarian, but in mind a Philosopher. But rather he thought he should not be neglected but helped with grace from aboue, if he did his owne indeuour, and vsed studie and diligence. Therefore our gratious Lord séeing his desire, did not forsake him, neither did let him want his helpe, but straightwaies sent a teacher vnto him. A little after. YOu sée what great profit the diligent reading of the holy Scriptures bringeth. A little after. LEt vs not therefore, I beséech you, neglect the reading of the Scriptures. But whether we vnderstand the things therein contained or vnderstand them not, neuerthelesse let vs be earnest in reading: for continuall meditation doth not a little confirme the memorie: neither seldome doth it come to passe, that that which we reading could not to day find out, to morrow reading the same ouer againe, we doo quickly and plentifullie perceiue it, God of his mercie secreatly inspiring it into our minds. Chrysostom in his preface vpon the Epistle to the Romanes. BVt this gréeueth me and euen tormenteth me, and ma∣keth me to mourne, that all men doo not know this man (Paul) as they ought to doo: but manie be so ignorant of him, that they doo not well know the number of his Epi∣stles. And this commeth not by the fault of ignorance, but bicause it liketh them not continuallie to talke with this blessed man. A little after. ANd you if you would giue your selues to reading with chéerefulnesse and attentiuenesse, you should haue néed
of no other teacher. For the word of Christ is true, when he saith: séeke and you shall find, knocke and it shall be opened vnto you. A little after. HEnce innumerable euils haue sprong, in that men be ignorant of the Scriptures. Hence hath come that great plague of heresies, hence procéedeth dissolutnesse of life and vnprofitable labours. For as they that be depriued of this outward light, cannot walke rightlie: so they that looke not to the beames of the holie Scripture must néeds often and much offend in that they walke in farre woorse darknesse, the which that it happen not to vs, let vs open our eies to the brightnesse of the Apostles words: For his toong in cléere∣nesse excéeded the sunne, and in the deliuerance of doctrine he excelled all others. Infinit such other earnest exhortations for all men to read the holie Scriptures might be alledged out of Saint Chrysostom, who of all other was most earnest and ve∣hement in this point: but these shall suffice, both to stirre vp the godlie to this holie and fruitfull exercise: and to conuince the vanitie of our Rhemists, and their foolish ca∣uillations,In their Preface. who saie that he spake these things not as a tea∣cher in schoole, making exact and generall rules to be ob∣serued in all places and times, but as a pulpit man, agrée∣able to that audience, and his peoples default, who were delicat, dull, worldlie, & much giuen to dice, cards, stage plaies, and theaters, &c. What vaine cauils these be, let the Christian reader indifferentlie iudge. And séeing all the children of Adam through the corruption of their sin∣full nature, be subiect to the like vanities, vices, and ma∣ladies as that people of Constantinople were, they stand in néed of the same remedies, and preseruatiues of rea∣ding, and knowing the holie Scriptures, which Chryso∣stom as a good Phisition prescribed. And for the further testifieng of this truth, and conuincing of the vanitie and follie of our Rhemists, I will ad a few moo places out of the other ancient and godlie fathers of Christs Church,
by the which the Christian reader may discerne who be their true children and faithfull successors, we or the Pa∣pists. The Canons ascribed by the Papists to the Apostles, Canon. 84. . that is, Let all of you both Clerks and lay men haue the reuerend and holie Bible. Irenaeus lib. 2. cap. 46. SEing all the Scriptures both propheticall and apostolical be plain and without ambiguitie, and may alike be heard of all men. Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 12. THe ignorance of the Scriptures, and of Gods dispositi∣on, hath brought them into all these errors. Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 66. REad diligently the Gospell which is giuen vnto vs by the Apostles, and read diligently the Prophets, and you shall find all the actions, doctrine, and passion of our Lord preached in them. Tertullianus de baptismo. DOmini sermo non debet abscondi ab vllo. that is, The word of God ought not to be hid from any. Tertullianus apolog. aduers. gentes, cap. 39. WE assemble togither to heare the holie Scriptures, as the qualitie of the present times inforceth vs, ei∣ther to forewarne, or to call to memorie any thing. Surely with those holie words we féed our faith, we lift vp our hope, we confirme our confidence, yet neuertheles we confirme the discipline of holie precepts by vrgent exhortations. A little after. THey talke so, as they that know that God doth heare them. After washing and candles brought in, euerie one is prouoked out of the holie Scriptures, as he can to sing foorth vnto God, &c.
Cyprianus de duplici martyrio. IN like maner in other temptations obiect vnto the temp∣tor the buckler of the Scriptures, in the which God speaketh vnto thée no lesse faithfully, than if he spake vnto thée mouth to mouth. A little after. SObrietie with earnest praier, and continuall meditation of the Scriptures is a most safe defence of the hart. For al holy Scripture giuen by diuine inspiration is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct and to instruct in righteousnes, that the man of God may be perfect, and instructed to euerie good worke. Out of it therefore we must gather sentences, which we may alwaies haue at hand and in readines, that by them we may beat downe the serpent lifting vp his head against vs. For there is no disease of the soule, wherunto the holie Scripture doth not minister a present remedie. Hence we must get examples of godly men, especially of Christ, wherewith euerie one may either incourage, or comfort himselfe. Origines in Leuiticum. Homil. 9. DOest thou thinke who comest scarcely vpon the holie daies vnto the Church, and neither art attenti  to heare the word of God, nor indeuorest to kéepe his commandements, that the lot of the Lord can come vpon thée? Yet we wish, that by hearing these things you would be diligent not onely in the Church to heare the word of God, but also to be exercised therein in your houses, and to meditate both day and night in the law of the Lord, for there also is Christ, yea and he is euerie where to them that séeke him. A little after. IF the diuine reading be in thine hands, & the commande∣ments of God before thine eies, then thou shalt be found ready to cast away those things that pertain to the diuels lot.
In the same homily after. THe nourishments of the soule are diuine reading, con∣tinuall praier, the word of doctrine, with this food it is fed, becommeth healthie, and getteth victorie. Theodoretus de curatione Graecarum affectionum. Lib. 5. WE doo manifestly shew you the great power of the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets. For the whole face of the earth which is vnder the Sunne, is full of such words. And the Hebrew books be tran∣slated, not onely into the Gréeke, but also into the Romane, Aegyptian, Persian, Indian, Armenian, Scithian, and Sla∣uoi, and in a word, into all toongs which the nations vse vnto this day. And a little after. YOu may euery where sée our doctrines to be vnder∣stood not onely of them, which be the teachers of the Church, and instructors of the people, but also of Tay∣lers, Smithes, weauers, and all artificers: Yea also of all women, not them only which be learned, but also victual∣lers, puddingmakers, hand maids and seruants. Neither those men onely which dwell in cities, but also husbandmen, doo well vnderstand the same. One may find ditchers, and heardmen, and planters of vines disputing of the trinitie and of the creation of all things, and hauing better knowledge of the nature of man, than Plato and Aristotle had. Saint Hierom in his preface vpon Esay to a woman called Eustochium. IF according to the Apostle Paul, Christ be the power of God, and the wisedome of God: and he that knoweth not the Scriptures, knoweth not the power and wisedome of God, then the ignorance of the Scriptures is the ignorance of Christ. Saint Hierom ad Iulianum. WE flie vnto the grauitie of the holy Scriptures, where is the true medicine of our wounds, and the sure remedies of our griefes.
Saint Hierom vpon the Epist. to Tit. cap. 1. THis place maketh against them who giuing themselues to idlenes, and sléepe, thinke it a sinne if they read the Scriptures, and doo contemne them as pratlers and vnprofi∣table who meditate day and night in the Law of God. Saint Hierom in his Epitaphie of a woman called Fabiola. O good Iesus, with what feruencie, with what earnest study did she giue hir selfe to the diuine books of the Scriptures? And as desirous to satisfie an hunger, she did run through the Prophets, Gospels, and Psalmes, pro∣pounding questions and hiding the same being answered in the chest of hir hart. Saint Hierom in his Epitaphie of a woman called Paula. PAula could say the Scriptures without Booke, and she enforced me, that she and hir daughter might read ouer the old and new Testament hearing me expound it. Saint Hierom to a woman called Celantia. IT is a great helpe vnto righteousnes to fill thy mind with the holy Scriptures, and alwaies to meditate in hart, that which thou desirest to execute in déed. In the same place. LEt therefore the holy Scriptures be alwaies in thy hands, and continually meditated vpon in thy mind. Saint Hierom to Gaudentius touching the educa∣tion of his yoong daughter called Pacatula. WHen the ignorant and toothles girle commeth to be seuen yéeres old, and beginneth to be bashfull, to know what she ought to kéepe in silence, and to doubt what to speake, let hir learne without booke the Psalter, and vntil she come to ripe age, let hir make the books of Solomon, the Gospels, Apostels, and Prophets the treasure of hir hart. Saint Hierom to a woman called Laeta concer∣ning the bringing vp of hir daughter. LEt hir first learne the Psalter, & with those holy Psalms let hir withdraw hir selfe from light songes. Let hir be
instructed in the prouerbs of Solomon, for the leading of hir life. By the books of the Preacher let hir accustome to tread vnder féete the things of this world. In Iob let hir follow examples of vertue and patience. Thence let hir goe into the Gospels and neuer lay them out of hir hand. Let hir with the whole desire of hir hart as it were drinke in the Actes of the Apostles and the Epistles. And when she hath inriched the storehouse of hir hart with these riches, let hir commit to memory the Prophets, the fiue books of Moses, the books of the Kings and the Chronicles, with the volumes of Esdras and Hester. Saint Hierom in cap. 3. to the Coloss. vpon these words of the Apostle. Let the words of Christ dwell in you plentifullie. HEre is shewed that lay men ought to haue the word of Christ not sparingly, but plentifully, and to teach and admonish one an other. Saint Augustine lib. 3. de doctr. Christia. cap. 1. THe man that feareth God, diligently séeketh his will in the holy Scriptures. Saint Augustine in Psal. 33. conc. 2. REad ye the Scriptures: Therefore God would haue thē to be written, that we might be comforted by them. Saint Augustine in Psal. 64. OVr father hath sent from heauen Epistles vnto vs, God hath giuen the Scriptures vnto vs, by the which Epi∣stles a desire to come vnto him should be wrought in vs. Saint Augustine de verbis domini secun∣dum Iohan. serm. 45. YOu séeke me and shall not find me. Why? Bicause you search not the scriptures, which doo beare witnes of me. S. Augustine lib. de vtilitate credendi ad Honoratum. Cap. 6. WHatsoeuer, beléeue me, is in those holie Scriptures, it is déepe and diuine: for truth and discipline most méet both to refresh and reforme our soules is wholy contai∣ned in them. And surelie they be so tempered that anie man may as it were draw out of them that which may be suffici∣ent
for him, if so be he come to read them deuoutlie and god∣lie, as true religion requireth. The Author of the booke vnder the name of S. Augustine de salutaribus documentis. Cap. 38. GReat confusion belongeth to the soules of laie mē, which say, what dooth it pertaine to me to heare or learne by reading the bookes of Scriptures, or to run vnto Priests and Churches of saints? When I am a clergie man, I will doo those things which clergie men should doo. Bernardus ad sororem de modo bene viuendi. Cap. 50. MOst déere sister, if thou wilt alwaies be with God, al∣waies praie, and alwaies read. The reading of the holie Scriptures is verie necessarie for vs. For by reading we learne what we should doo, what we should be∣ware of, and whither we should go. Herevpon it is said, Thy word is a light vnto my feete. By reading our iudgement and vnderstanding is increased: Reading instructeth & pre∣pareth vs to praier and to good works: Reading frameth vs both to actiue and contemplatiue life. Therefore it is said in the Psalme: Blessed is the man that shall meditate in the law of the Lord day and night. Reading and praier be wea∣pons wherewith the diuell is vanquished, and instruments whereby eternall blessednesse is obtained. By praier & rea∣ding vices be forsaken, and vertues be norished in our soules. Therfore beloued sister in Christ, vse much to read and day∣lie to meditate in the law. Reading with-holdeth our life from error, draweth a man from the vanitie of the world, by reading our vnderstanding & iudgement doo increase. For Reading teacheth thée what thou shouldest doo, admonisheth thée what to auoid, and sheweth thée whither thou shouldest go: thou doost greatly profit when thou readest, if thou doo the things which thou readest. Iosephus in his second booke against Appion, of the Iewes. EVerie wéeke we assemble to heare the Law: Euerie one of vs being asked of the Law, can answere as easilie and readilie as his owne name. For we learning them
wholie from our tender yéeres, and yoong age, haue them as it were imprinted and grauen in our minds. Erasmus Roterod. in paraclesi. I Could wish that all women did read the Gospell and Paules Epistles: and I would that they were translated into all languages of all nations: that they might be read and knowne not onelie of Scottish and Irish men, but also of Turkes and Saracens. That the good Christian Reader may the better prooue and discerne the spirits, which be of God, and which not: I haue thought good to set down a few sayings of Popish writers, which let him compare with the former sayings, of the holie Scriptures and faithfull fathers, and consider how they agrée therewith. Doctor Standish in a booke intituled A discourse wherein is deba∣ted, whether it be expedient that the Scripture should be in English for all men to read that will, Printed at London by Robert Ealie 1554. writeth thus. WHereby we may easilie learne that all people should not haue the Scriptures in their owne handlings at their pleasure, as they haue had these dosen yéeres past,Cap. 6. probat. 1. to their vtter spirituall destruction. Againe. THat which yée haue heard (saith he) in secret places shall be preached on the tops of the houses:Ibid. probat. 2. See how this a∣greeth with that Deut. 6.9. he said not it shall be written in your Churches (as it hath béene Iewish∣lie vsed on late here in England) nor written in Bibles to be read of euerie one in his mother toong, and set vp for that purpose in euerie Church. Againe. I Cannot then but maruell that men to their owne confu∣sion are so desirous to haue the Scripture in their mother toong.Ibid. Againe. THrough the damnable libertie of hauing it in the vulgar toong, haue not all holy mysteries béene dispised?Ibid. probat. 3. Haue
they not thereby vtterly condemned all that hath not béene expressed in the letter of their English Bibles? Againe. Ibid.WHerefore away with the English damnable tran∣slation, and let them learne the mysteries of God reuerently by hart:Blasphemie. and learne to giue as much credit to that which is not expressed, as to that which is expressed in Scrip∣ture: knowing that in thrée points the authoritie of the Church is aboue the authoritie of the Scripture: one is in fortifieng verities not written, to be necessarie to saluati∣on, &c. Againe. Probat. 9. Compare this with the saieng of Theodoretus before. This did the An∣tichristian Ro∣mish Synagog.THe vniuersall Church of Christ did neuer allow nor ap∣prooue the Scripture to be in the vulgar toong, weighing the manifold inconueniences that haue issued therof: but euer from time to time among other errors did tread that downe and suppresse it. Againe. Probat. 28.IT is the occasion of many heresies, to haue the Scripture in the vulgar toong. A little after. ANd yet then séeing the rude ignorant sort be euer prone peruersly to wrest the Scriptures, we must thinke that to haue the Scripture in English is to minister occasion to the common sort to fall into errors. Againe. Probat. 30.LIke as God appointed the old Law to be written in stone,Ier. 31. tables, or books: so did he appoint (as Ieremie witnesseth) the new to be written onely in the hart of man. Why should the writing in books then be so highly regar∣ded?Marke this blas∣phemie. But this carnall, this fleshly regarding by no meanes can be so well extenuate or rather quite taken away, as by taking the Scripture foorth of the vulgar toong, and foorth of the handling of the lewd ignorant. Againe. In the conclu∣sion.ANd finally, séeing that by no meanes so soone as by the Scriptures in English, heresies do both spring daily, and be also maintained, wherin should good men be more dili∣gent than in the extirpation thereof?
These saiengs out of that beastly book of that doltish doctor I haue the more largely laid down, that the Christian Rea∣der may sée what doctrine in Quéene Maries daies was pub∣lished and allowed for Catholike. Wherevnto I will ad a saying of an other papist. Alphonsus de Castro the Spanish frier writeth thus:Aduersus haeres. lib. 1. cap. 13. Tertia demum haeresium parens & origo, &c.The third parent and beginning of heresies is, the translating of the holie Scriptures into the vulgar toong, by meanes whereof it commeth to passe, that they be read of all men with respect or difference of persons. Hitherto the papists. Iohn 3.20.Euerie man that doth euill, hateth the light, neither com∣meth to the light least his déeds should be reprooued. But he that doth truth, commeth to the light, that his déeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought according to God. Tertullianus lib. de Trinitate. SEd enim Scriptura diuina haereticorum & fraudes & furta fa∣cilè conuincit & detegit. that is, But the holie Scripture doth easely conuince, and discouer the deceits, and robberies of heretikes. Theophylactus in Luc. cap. 16. NVnc nihil tam vtile est, vt Scripturarum diligens scrutatio, &c. that is, Now there is nothing so profitable as the diligent searching of the Scriptures, for the diuell also can falsely and in shew cause the dead to rise, that he may seduce the foolish, sowing from hel doctrines agréeable to his malice. But nothing can deceiue them which do well and diligently search the Scriptures. For they be the candell and light, which shining the théefe is taken and made manifest. There∣fore we must beléeue the Scriptures, and not apparitions from the dead. FINIS.
