A238 R11814 12930698 95653
AN ACCOUNT of the Award of Execution of Death against Sr. Thomas Armstrong, Who received Sentence of Death at the Kings-Bench-Bar at WESTMINSTER to be Drawn, Hang'd and Quarter'd. On the 14th. of this Instant June 1684. upon the motion of Mr. Attorney General; Forasmuch as the said Sr. Thomas stood attainted of High-Treason by Out-lawry, for Conspiring and contriving the Death of the King and the Antient Established Government of this Kingdom to subvert, &c. Sr. THomas Armstrong, a person wonderfully noted for his many clandestine exploits, and one that stands deeply indebted to his Majesties reitterated Cle∣mency, having notwithstanding ungratefully Conpred the Death of that Prince who often saved his, when obnoctious to Justice, He with divers others when the last horrid Conspira∣cie was revealed and manifested to the world upon Notice of his being impeached fled the Land: And thereupon he together with Divers of his Accomplices were proclaimed Traytors, and 500 l. as a reward, offered to any that could apprehend him and bring him to Justice. But such was his fortune, that lurk∣ing in the Provinces of the united Neither-Lands, tho great search ws made, & often Notice of his haunts given, yet could be not be taken till within a few days; when as Notice was given to the Honourable Thomas Chidley, his Majesties Embassador Resident in Holland, that the Prisoner, together with divers o∣ther Conspirators, against the life of the King, were met at a certain place, in or near Leyden; whereupon, and according to his Duty, he obtained an Order from the States by virtue of a Treaty to seize 'em, but they as 'tis supposed having notice of what was intended fled, but being hardly pursued the Prisoner was apprehended and claped on Board a Vessel prepared for that purpose, which brought him for England, where arriving and being interogated to many particulars, he appeared very
answers, seeming highly to insist upon his In∣  after some Examination relating to his active and  owledge of the horrid Conspiracie against the Life of , and his Royal Brother, and to subvert the Govern∣ment: He was by a Warrant, sign'd by one of the Right Hon∣ourable Secretarys of State committed to Newgate, and there continued till the 14th. Instant, when by Order he was brought to the Kings-Bench-Bar, where it was moved against him by Mr. Attorney that seeing he stood Attainted of High-Treason, &c. by Out-lawry, that the Court by Virtue thereof, would assign a day for his Execution, whereupon his Commitment was read and he asked what he could say for himself, seeing he stood at∣tained of High-Treason by Out-lawry, upon an Indictment found by the Juriors in London, why Sentence of Death should not be awarded according to Law, to which he replyed after having made some Allegations of Innocence, that be could not help what Prosecution had been made against him, by reason he was not present to defend it, but that he was now present with∣in a Year and a Day, and desired that the former Proceedings might be waved, and that he might take his Tryal, or words to this purpose, urging the Statute in that Case, and desiring it might be read which was allowed, but it appeared in the Letter thereof quite contrary to his purpose, for that as he now stood there by Compulsion, he ought Voluntarily to have surrender∣ed himself, which the Court told him they believed he had no intent to do, yet he urged further that he might have Coun∣cil assigned him but was told it could not be allowed to any man in his condition. Then he instanced Holloway how that he was put to his choice to acquiesce with his Attainder, or take his Tryal, but had answer that it was the Kings pleasur, & that if his Majesty pleased he might grant him the like favour, or pardon him, but it was not in the power of the Court. Then the Right Honourable the Lord Chief Justice, demanded of Capt. Richardson which were the usual days of Execution, who made reply that Wednesdays and Fridays were commonly the days, whereupon after a patient hearing of what the Prisoner had to say and all convenient Liberty of Speech allowed him. The Court Awarded his Execution to be on Friday the 20th. Instant: ordering a Rule of Court for that purpose; whereupon he was guarded back to Newgate. And thus Reader have I given you the Substance of the Proceedings to the award of Execution, &c. London Printed, by E. M. 1684.
