A3143 12645159 65108
Of Episcopacy. THREE EPISTLES OF PETER MOULIN Doctor and Professor of Divinity. Answered By the Right Reverend Father in God Lancelot Andrews, Late Lord Bishop of Winchester. Translated for the benefit of the Publike. S. Clemens in Epist. ad Corinth. 1. Our Apostles understood by our Lord Iesus Christ, that there would be contention about the name of Episcopacy. Printed in the Yeer. 1647.
To the most Reverend Prelate, the Lord Bishop of Winchester, Peter Moulin wisheth all health and hap∣piness. THat Honorable man, your Pre∣decessor, was taken hence, not without great damage both to the Church and Common∣wealth. The King lost a most wise Counseller, and the Church a faithfull Pastor; but I a Patron and a friend; who, though he was most carefull and desi∣rous of my good yet, oblig'd me more by his Virtues, then his benefits. I have his Letters by me, which he wrote to me when he was sick, and his recovery was almost desperate; the very sight wherof doth exceedingly af∣flict me. But yet my grief was not a little eas'd, when I heard that you succeeded in his room, whose learning I long since admir'd, and of whose good affection I had great expe∣rience,
when I was with you. Indeed, his most judicious Majestie did not stick long up∣on his choice. You were even then design'd his Successor, in the judgment of all who knew the wisdome of the King. May it, I be∣seech God, prove happy and fortunate to your self, to the Church, and Kingdom. May He grant you, with increase of Honor, increase of Virtue, and a fresh and lively old age: That his most Gracious Majestie may long enjoy you for his Counseller, and the Church daily reap more and more fruits of your industry and vi∣gilance. I wrote a Book touching the Calling of Pastors, wherin some passages greiv'd the soul of your most wise King, as if they were averse to the Office of Episcopacy. But, indeed, on the other side, our Countrymen complain not a little, that I vndertook the cause of Bishops; and condemnd Aerius, who, in a matter an∣ciently, and universally receivd, durst op∣pose himself against the Practise of the Ca∣tholik Church. And they take it in ill part, that I said, that it was generally receivd in the Church, even from the first successors of the Apostles, that, among the Presbyters of a City, some one should have the preeminence and
be call'd the Bishop, But, though there be many things in my Book, which the King set a dash of his dislike upon, which, as all things els, he observed wisely and with an incredi∣ble sharpness of wit, yet, Three things there are, which specially offend Him. The First is, that, I said, that the Names of Bishop and Presbyter are promiscuously ta∣ken, in the New Testament, for one and the same. The Second, that, I affirm'd, that there is  but one and the same Order of Presbyter, and Bishop. The Third, and that the greatest, is, that I  think the , the Priority or Superiority of Bishops, not to be of Divine Right, nor a point of Faith, but to be a thing wherein the Primitive Church vsed her liberty and pru∣dence, when she judged the Preeminence of One to be fitter for the mantaining of Order and conserving of Peace, and that Vnity may well be kept whole and intire between Churches, though they differ upon that point. I confess, these things were wrote by me: which, lest they be drawn to a wrong sense, or be taken in the worser part, take, I pray,
breifly my meaning in them. I said, indeed, that the Names of Bishop and Presbyter were taken for all one in the New Testament: But I thought not that the Dignity of the Bishop was less'ned thereby, since I spake only of the Name, not of the Office only: and I have (beside clear places of Scripture) the consent not only of Hierom the Presbyter, but also of the most famous Bishops of the Ancient Church, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Theodoret, who took it not as a wrong to them, or that any thing was aba∣ted of their honor, if it were beleeved that the Names of Bishop and Presbyter were at first used in the same sense. That the Order, indeed, of Bishop and Pres∣byter was one and the same, that I said: For so did the Ancient Church ever think; and the Church of Rome thinks so, to this day: al∣though there be in that Church an incredible difference betwixt the pomp of the Bishops, and the meaness of the Priests. Thence it is that in the Roman Pontifical there is set down the Consecration of Bishops, but not the Ordi∣nation of them. Indeed, Order is one thing, a Degree another: for men of one and the same Order may differ in Degree and Dignity; even
as among Bishops the Degree of Archbishops is the more eminent. Howbeit, that this Episcopal Degree and Prerogative is by Ecclesiastical, not by Divine Right, I confess it was said by me. For beside that to speak otherwise then I thought, had not been the part of an vpright honest man, you, according to your wonted goodness, will easily judg, that a French man, living vnder the Polity of the French Church, could not speak otherwise, but he must incur the cen∣sure of our Synods, and vnder the danger () of degrading, be forced to a recan∣tation. For to think that our Churches do err in points of Faith, and in that which is of Di∣vine Right were, questionles, to brand them with the note of Heresy, and to shake the con∣science of many weak ones. Truly, I came very vnwillingly to the wri∣ting of this Book, but our Church requiring it, and lately enforcing me, for to stop the insolency of our Adversaries, who in this point insult over vs out of all temper, and speak of vs as of so many doltish mushrums, newly sprung out of the earth, and as of a company of base fellows who by force and tumult had got the Pulpit. But, howsoever,
I think, I have kept such a temper, that, in defending our own, I have not struck at your government; nor by immoderate affe∣ction to a part have inclined, more then was meet, to either side. Nor did I ever mention the Bishops of England with out due honor. These things I thought fit to write to you, Great Sir, by whom I chiefly desire my papers may be approved. I had sent my Book to you before now, but that I was told by divers you vnderstood not French. Now I send it, be∣cause; since you enjoy a more frequent and neerer presence of His Majestie, I doubt not but He may have some speech with you about it, and use you as an umpire in the cause. And I shal most willingly stand to your iudgment; well knowing that the most learned are ever the most can did; and hoping that you wil not lauce too deep whatever may be salved with a fair interpretation. So think of me, as of a man with whom the Authority of Antiquity shalbe ever in great esteem; and who shall think my self sufficiently arm'd against al opposite judgments, if you shal not vtterly disapprove what I have writ. God preserve you, Great Prelate. Farewell. Paris. Nones of Sept. 1618. Your Honors most devoted Peter Moulin.
The Bishops Answer. I Had wrote these in the begining of March, and was about to send them presently; when, lo, the indisposition of the King, in point of health, made me lay them by, and hindred my sending of them. This sickness, contracted first by grief, for the death of his most dear Consort, our most Gracious Queen, and the neglect of all care of his body upon that greif, ended at last in a diseas; a dis∣eas, indeed, so intricat and doubtfull, that the Physi∣tians themselves were at a stand what the event would be. Wherby I forgat that I wrote, and so omitted to send to you. For all I had to do was to fall to my pray∣ers, with many moe, who were sore perplexed, as then in jeopardy, for a most Gracious King. But God lookd up∣on us, and restord Him to us, & in Him us to our selves. And now, being returnd to my self, I return to you, what I confess, I have bin too long indebted to you in; so that, as a bad debtor, I was fain to be calld vpon, by Mon∣sieur Beaulieu, in your name. You will accept of this my too just excuse, kindly, as you are wont; and promise your self, from me, what good offices one friend can do another. Now concerning your Book. You write that some pas∣sages therin greivd the Kings Soul. And no wonder. For his soul is tender, and very sensible of any thing in that kind that bites or stings. For, out of His Piety to God, He makes it not the least of His cares to tender the Peace and Order of His Church here. And therfore, in
His great wisdom, He presently discernd, whether these Three points tended. I. The name of Bishop is not distinct from that of Presbyter. II. The Order is not distinct, that is, not the Thing it self. III. And so the whole [matter] is not any thing of Di∣vine Right. What could they, who lately made all the stirrs among us, mutter more, possibly? Then, that 1. the Name is taken confusedly. that 2. the Thing is not distinct. 3. Finally, that it is a Human invention: being setled by man may be unsetled, and so stands or falls at the plea∣sure of the Commonwealth. These Dictats are too well known to the King: He hath been long usd to them: They have long since on all hands been rounded in His ears. He knows that there are still among us such, as will from your writings presently take a new occasion, perhaps, not to pluck up this Order of ours, that for so many ages hath taken root but, surely, to defame and calumniat it. And this so much the rather, because, at one and the same time, not by agreement, I beleeve, but yet as though vpon a compact, lo, one Bucer, a fellow not hurt, nor medled with by any, in a very unseasonable time, set forth a Book in Latin, as it were, of the same argument. What King, that studies the Peace, not only of His own Church, but, which He desireth, and would purchase at a dear rate, even of the whole Christian world, would not these things trouble? Wherfore, if the King set a dash of dislike upon those passages, take it not ill: I dare say, He had rather set many asterisks of com∣mendation, then one dash of dislike, specially upon what is your. This, surely, is the Kings mind; and is (as it ought to be) the mind and sense of vs all. Wherin I appeal to
your own equity. You were for manteining of Your Chur∣ches Government, and the repressing of your adversaries insolency: should you not do it, you should incurr the censure of your Synod, and be forced either to recant, or fear to be degraded. In this We pardon you, and demand the like pardon from you; that it may be lawfull for us also to defend our Government, as becometh upright honest men. For we likewise have froward adversa∣ries; and there are consciences, too, among us, which we may not suffer to be shaken or undermind, as though they liv'd under another form of Church Government, then was from the begining, even from the very times of the Apostles. And we are ready, if need be, and occasion shall serve, to make this good to the whole Church. How I wish therfore, that you had not so much as touchd upon our Church Government. For who put you upon it? You might have turnd your weapons against those enemys (you speak of) and never have jerkt at vs. Theres no such complication of ours with yours, but that you might easily have pass'd by ours with silence, And A faithfull silence hath its sure reward. Or, if you were so set upon it, that you must needs be intermedling with Ours, how I wish you had first im∣parted your mind to the King: and, whilst the coast was cleer, had seasonably taken His advice in that you had to say of His affairs: (for Ours He accounts His.) You your self know (and, indeed, who knows not since He hath wrote so much, so admirably?) that, as He is most able in respect of his other endowments of Wit and Learning, so also, in respect of his acuteness and solidity of judgment, he is equal to the best, or rather goes before them. No man living hath in our Churches affairs a clearer insight, a readier dispatch, then he. He him∣self, in any point, but specially in what concerns his own
Church could have answerd you best: and have set you the bounds, so far to go, but not beyond. Wherfore, if hereafter you shall go about any thing in the like kind, pray remember this my advice, which proceeds from a very good will to you; I knowing that the King is well affected to you; that he hath deserved well of you, (nor will you deny it,) and, I hope, will for the future de∣serve better. Concerning those Three points, if you demand (as you do) what I think, I shall give you here this ingenuous answer; That the Names of Bishop and Presbyter are ta∣ken promiscuously in Holy Scriptures: that at first, there was not so great force in the Words, I shal easily grant you. Nor did his Majestie regard so much, what you said, as to what purpose; as what others would catch from thence; who, both in other parts, & here among us, too, are not rightly affected to this our order: that these things were spoke to this purpose, as if the Names being pro∣miscuous, the Things themselves were so also. For to what end is it, of what concernment, to speak of Words taken confusedly, when the Things are distinct. No man, lightly, carps at the Name, but he that wisheth not very well to the Thing also. 1. And yet nothing here hath befallen Bishops, which hath not befallen those other Orders also. For, in those very places, in those very Authors whom you name, it is said in like manner also of Deacons. S Chrysost in ed Philip c. 1. Even a Bishop is called a Deacon: wherupon S. Paul, writing to Timothy, said to him, though a Bishop, Fullfill thy Deaconry. From thence you may gather, that the Names of Bishop and Deacon are taken for the same. Nay, the very Apostles themselves call themselves sometimes Presbyters, sometimes Dea∣cons, and so their whole Office a Deaconry; and yet is not Deacon or Presbyter the same that Apostle. Why therfore
did you not add that too, that it might appear that the other suffered as much as Bishops: and that, in the begin∣ing, not only the names of Bishops, but of other Orders also were taken, in like manner, promiscuously; wheras the Things, the Offices themselves were distinct. 2. Wheras, then, in those very places, where the Fathers speak so, [That then they communicated in Names] they presently apply a remedy, and give this item, that the Things themselves are otherwise. And instantly add [Afterward the proper name was given to each; of Bishop to a Bishop, of Presbyter to a Presbyter.] By the rule of speech then, who would urge the common name, when the proper had taken place? For no body would now call a King, a Tyrant; or a Souldier, [Latro∣nem] as of old they were wont, a Robber: neither, sure, would they call a Presbyter, a Bishop; as when S. Hierom wrote, had he called himself Bishop, and S. Augustine Presbyter, you know, he would have been laughed at for his pains. 3. Add further, that in those very places wherin the Fathers speak so, before they speak, they are forced [] to object by way of exception concerning the use of names, and to premise some what that should put the thing out of question. S. Chrysostom; What mean∣eth this? were there then more Bishops of one & the same city? by no means. No, not then when S. Paul wrote. Theodo∣ret; It could not be, that many Bishops should be Pastors of one City. S. Hierom; There could not be many Bishops in one City. S. Ambrose; God appointed several Bishops over several Citys. So that they do cleerly shew, the Offices were then distinct, when they make the inference touching the name. I collect then; how ere it was for the names, at first; Be it they then neglected the Propriety of speech, yet that even then, there was but one Bishop, but one Pa∣stor
in one City. And this holdeth among us, even at this day; but doth it so among you? Thus if you had pre∣facd touching the Thing it self, and had afterward in∣ferr'd touching the names, (though to what end is it to make any stir about the name, when we are agreed on the thing?) that they were (a little while) taken one for another; and had not spoken so loosly concern∣ing the promiscuous use of the names, his Majestie would not, I beleeve, have set his dash of dislike upon that passage. The next is touching the Order. Where, I pray, con∣sider, whether they be to be called One and the same Or∣der, whose Offices are not one and the same. But that they are not the same Offices, even they who less favour the Episcopal Order do confess, in that they ever except Ordi∣nation. Again, whether they be to be called One and the same Order, wherin there is not One and the same, but a new and distinct Imposition of hands. For, that in all Anti∣quity there was Imposition of hands upon Bishops, no man, I think, will deny. And, whether the Antient Church were of this opinion, let Isidore be the witness, who Etym. 7. 12. in plain words calls it the Order of Bishoprick. To the Schole, indeed, if you referr it, they do not agree among themselves. Your Altisiodorensis, our Ma∣jor, and others are for the distinction of the Order. But they who are most against it, though they will not grant it a Sacrament of Orders (the whole force wherof they bound within the Eucharist) yet an Order they grant, since an Order is nothing else, but a Power to a special Act, (as, namely, to Ordain,) which is competible to Bishops only. For what a thing were this, if that, from whence Ordination, and so all other Orders pro∣ceed, should it self not be an Order? For we pass not for the Church of Rome, or the Pon∣tifical.
If they please themselves with the name of Conse∣cration, let them enjoy it. Even the Church of Rome it self did anciently speak otherwise. For instance; The Church of Rome, (saith Tertullian De Praescrip 32.) gives out that Cle∣ment was ordained by S. Peter. Otherwise also the Fa∣thers, (even they, whom you allege,) even S. Hierom, De Script. 2. who affirms, that S. Iames, the brother of our Lord, was presently after the Passion of our Saviour ordained Bishop. And of Timothy; In 1. ad Tim 4. Timothy had the gift of Prophecy, toge∣ther with his Ordination to Episcopacy. S. Ambrose; In 1. ad Tim. 3. For unlawfull it was, and might not be, that the Inferior should ordain the superior; (to wit, a Presbyter a Bishop.) S. Chry∣sostom; In Philip 1. For Presbyters could not have ordained the Bi∣shop. For the Latin word, Ordination, is agreable to the Greek, , and is often rendred by it: nor is any word more frequent, where mention is of making Bi∣shops, then that of . Theodoret; Oecum in Praef. Ep. ad Tit. Titus was or∣dained by S. Paul Bishop of Creet. But, you say, an Order is one thing, a Degree another. Yet you know that, in Holy Scriptures, these words are taken one for another, no less then those of Bishop and Presbyter: where the Deaconry is called, , a Degree; 1. Tim. 3. 13. which, notwithstanding, you will not, I know, deny to be an Order. You know also that it is so among the Fathers; among whom you may often read that a Dea∣con, or Presbyter may, , fall from his Degree, and be degraded, no less then a Bishop. Indeed, every Or∣der is a Degree; but not every Degree an Order. But both are in Episcopacy; though in one respect an Order, in an∣other a Degree. A Degree, as it hath a superiority even without any power; an Order, as it hath a power to a special act. For, were it a Degree only, it had been enough to have used the word [] the superlative, which denotes a Degree superior to that of [] Presbyter,
the Comparative, neither would there have been need to fetch in a new word [] a Bishop, meerly to design a Degree. For as touching Archbishops tis quite another reason: They are not indued with a power to any special act: For even they, if they were not Bishops before, receive their Ordination from Bishops: And, as they are Archbishops, they are not necessary to the Ordination of Bishops: for, by the Fourth Canon of the Council of Nice, Three Bishops together have power to ordain a Bishop. But we very well know, that the Apostles, and the Se∣venty two Disciples were Two Orders, and those distinct. And this, likewise, we know, that every where among the Fathers, Bishops and Presbyters are taken to be after their example: That Bishops succeeded the Apostles; and Presbyters the Seventy two. That these Two Orders were by our Lord appointed in those two. Cyprian; Epist. 65 ad Rogat. Deacons must remember that our Lord chose the Apostles, that is, Bi∣shops and Prelates: But the Apostles, after the Ascension of our Lord appointed Deacons for themselves, as Ministers of their Episcopacy, and of the Church. Nay, S. Hierom; Epist. ad Mael. ae Err. Mont. Epist. ad Evig. 1. c. With us Bishops hold the place of the Apostles. All [Bishops] are successors of the Apostles. And that is a famous place in him; in him; and S. Augustine, too, upon the 44. Psalm. In stead of thy Fathers thou shalt have children: i.e. in stead of Apostles, Bishops. S. Ambros, in 1. Corinth. 12. 28. God hath set in the Church [Caput Apostolos] first Apo∣stles. Now the Apostles are Bishops: the Apostle S. Peter gi∣ving us assurance of it; And his Bishoprick let another take. And a little after. Are all Apostles? He saith right: for in one Church but one Bishop. And in Ephes. 4. The Apostles are the Bishops. From hence we have a fair passage to the last point: Whether this Order be by Divine Right. Very glad I was to hear it from you, That the Authority of Antiquity
should be ever in great esteem with you. I love you for that word: Nor will it be the least of your praises, if your deeds make your words good. For my part it hath been my opinion ever, I was ever of that mind. But, or I am deceiv'd in the whole story of Antiquity, or the Apostolical men, i. e. the Disciples of the Apostles, or (as Eusebius calls them) , they that conversed with them, both they who are not mentioned in Holy Scripture (as Polycarpus and Ignatius,) and they who are expresly mentioned (as Timothy, Titus, Clemens,) were Bishops, while the Apostles were alive; and were consti∣tuted and ordained by the Apostles themselves. S. Hierom. de Srip. 17. Polycarp by S. John. Tertul. de Prasc. 32 Clemens by S. Peter. Oecum in Prafat. Titi. Titus and S. Hier. de Scri. Timothy by S. Paul. I give you these witnesses. Concerning Poly∣carp: 3.3 Irenaeus; de Praese 32. Tertullian; 3.35. Eusebius; de scrip 17. Hierom. Concerning Ignatius: 3.3. Euse∣bius and de scrip. 16. Hierom. Concerning Timothy: 3.4 Eusebius, de scrip 9. Hierom, Praesat in 1. Tim Ambrose, Phil. 1 Chrysostom, Haeres. 75. Epiphanius. Concerning Titus; 3 4 Eusebius, Praef in Tit. Ambrose, apud Oecum Praef in Ti. Theo∣doret. Concerning Clement: de scrip 32. Tertullian, 3. 14. Eusebius, de scrip 15 Hierom. Not to speak of Euseb. 3. 4 ex Di∣onys Corinth. & 4. 23. & Hier. de scrip. 19. Linus, (z) Dionysius, Euseb. 3. 35 ex Ig∣natio Onesimus, Theodoret in Philip. 1. 2. & 1 Tim 3. E∣paphroditus, Origen in 16 ad Ro∣man Caius, Calv. Institut. Archippus; concerning whom we have the like testimonies of the Fa∣thers. And not of these alone: even S. Mark the Evangelist, and that while the Apostles lived, who saw it; for S. Mark dyed in the Euseb. 2 24. Eighth year of Nero, full Five years before S. Peter and S. Paul were crown'd with martyrdom. And not He alone, S. Iames also the Apostle. Wit∣ness for S. Mark, de scrip & Praef in S. Matth & S. Mar. Hierom: for S. Iames, 2. 1. Eusebius (out of Clement and Hegesippus)
de Script c. 2. Hierome. in. 15 Chrysostom. in Gal 1. 2. Ambrose Haeres 66. Epiphanius. con∣a Crescentium. 2.37 Augustine. Could any then take it ill, that you said, That Episco∣pacy was received, in the Church, from the very next times to the Apostles? you said too little: you might have said more, and, if you had, Antiquity would have born you out; that it was received from the Apostles themselves: and that they, the Apostles themselves, were constituted in the Episcopal Order. There was nothing in that passage of yours that any could be offended with, unless, hap∣ly, that in stead of [was called the Bishop] you should have said, was the Bishop. For we do not contend, about the Name; all the controversy is about the Thing. This was done, or we must give one general dash through all the Ecclesiastical Historians. And when was it done? After the Ascension of our Lord: saith Eusebius. l. 2 c. 1. l. 3. c 5. Presently upon the Passion of our Lord; so S. Hierom. de script. 2. Done, by whom? They were placed in the Office of Episcopacy by the Apostles; de Praes. 32. Tertullian. By the Apostles; so Epiphanius. By the Ministers of our Lord; so l. 3. c. 35 Euse∣bius, Ordeined by the Apostles; so de script. 2. S. Hierom. Con∣stituted by the Apostles; in 2. ad Gal. so S. Ambrose. Will any man then deny, that S. Iames, S. Mark, Titus, Clemens, were Bishops by Apostolical Right? Was any thing done by the Apostles, which was not by Apostolical Right? By Apostolical, i. e. as I interpret it, by Divine. For nothing was done by the Apostles, that the Holy Ghost, the Divine Spirit did not dictate to them. Sure (if by the Apostles) by the same Right, which those Seven were by, Acts. 6. whom, I am sure, you your self will grant to be by Divine Right: Deacons the Holy Scripture doth no where call them; that is only a word of the Church. I hope, what the Apostles did, they did by Divine Right: and
that it cannot be denyed, but their Deeds (of which we are certain) not only their Words, or Writings, are of Divine Right. And not only those things of which S. Paul wrote to the Corinthians, 1. Corin. 14 but those other also which He set in order at His being at Corinth, (if they were known to us what they were,) were by the same right to wit, by Divine, all of them; both these and they from the Holy Spirit, all. And yet, though they be by Divine Right, we do not say these things belong to Faith. They belong to the Agenda or Practice of the Church; to the Credenda, or points of Faith, tis but improper to re∣fer them. Tis very strange therfore which you say, That your Countrymen openly complain of you, both that you vndertook the cause of Bishops; bylike, your Country-men are ene∣mies to Bishops; would not have their cause pleaded, but are desirous it should be lost: as also, that you condemned Aerius, who was antiently condemned in Asia by Epi∣phanius; in Europe by Philastrius; in Africa, by S. Augu∣stine; whose name, all the world over, is in the Black-Book of Hereticks; nor undeservedly, seeing, He durst op∣pose himself (as you your self confess) to the Consent and Practice of the Catholik Church. You should rather complain of them, who for this complain of you. As for that where you would not have your papers to be ript up to the quick, I know no body here that doth it. Should any, he would have somewhat to stick upon in the very Title; take which word you will, that of Pastor, or that of Calling. They are both novelties; the word Pa∣stor, (I'm sure, in this sense,) and Calling, too; and not of any Age, but this last, nor of all that. For, I pray, who of the Antients ever spake so? among whom you shall scarce find the word Pastor used, but when they speak of Bishops:1. S. Pet. 2 2. which form of speech S. Peter taught them,
when he joined Pastor and Bishop in our Saviour. Nor shall you ever read, that they, by that word, pointed out such as, either in City or Country, had the care of some few persons distinguished by Parishes: For that the Presbyters (Vrban, or Rural) were by the Bishop designed to that imployment. Who, indeed, at the be∣gining, were of the Bishops family, and did live, as you very well know, of the Sportula [i. e. of the Oblations of the Church] before the distinction of Parishes came up. And the word Calling (in the sense you take it) is al∣together as unknown. In stead whereof they used the words Ordination or Constitution. And the very name of Minister is of the same stamp: which they would never have understood to be spoken of any but a Deacon: as it is derived, indeed, from, no other fountain but, the Greek,  But we must par∣don you: you must speak the language of your Church, which hath no Bishops; another kind of Presbyters, [Elders they call them,] another kind of Deacons; and, I add, ano∣ther kind of Calling, then ever the Antient Church ac∣knowledged. I, for my part, in my best wishes for your Church, and so for all the Reformed do wish this, (that you may keep constant in the other points of Faith, but for Government and Order that God would vouchsafe to you no other but that which He hath vouchsafed Vs, i. e. by Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons. Such as those we read of in the Histories of the Church, and in the Coun∣cils, and the Antient Fathers: unto whom (or self-con∣ceit shrewdly deceives me, or) most like are Our: most like, I say, in their Order, not in their Worth; but would to God in their Worth also. And that no Policy, no form of Government in any Church whatsoever cometh neerer the sense of scripture, or the manner and usage of the An∣tient Church, then this which flourisheth among us.
These I intrust to you, that, if you please, they may be with you. But know withall, that I have ever been, both by Nature and Choice, addicted to Peace. And my Age now requires it of me, who ere long must be packing: but cheifly living under a King, whose Word is that of our Saviour; Blessed are the Peacemakers. And, I assure you, I shall never incline to any immoderate or harsh counsels: but shall qualifie, as much as I may, your writings, with a fair interpretation. For neither can we bragg of our happiness, more then antiently S. Augustine did, whose saying it was; What we teach is one thing; what we are fain to tolerate, another.
To the most Reverend Father, the Lord Bishop of Winchester. MOst Reverend Prelate. I sent unto you my Book concerning the Calling of Pastors: and with it some Letters, wherin I ende∣vour'd to satisfie you touching some points, wherin I seem'd to your most Gra∣cious King too ill affected to the Order of Epis∣copacy. Which Letters if you have received, I doubt not but you will judge of me, as of a man who both thinketh and speaketh hono∣rably of your Order. I am not so proudly arro∣gant as to oppose my self to all Antiquity; and to reject that as a thing faulty and wicked, which hath been received in the Church from the very next Age to the Apostles. I was e∣ver of this mind, that concord might be kept whole and intire between Churches, living howere under a different form of Ecclesiastical Government: so that Christ be preached, as he is set forth in the Gospel, & the Christian Faith remain safe and sound. But, among the rest of your Order, I ever highlyest esteemed you, for
many causes, which I had rather acquaint o∣thers, then yourself withall. As a witness of which my affection I send you this new Book, which the command of the Church, whom I serve, and the impudent insulting of a Court-Iesuite forced from me. I desire that you would be a means to pacifie the Kings anger against me: That He would consider with Himself, and weigh it in an equal ballance, that there can be no place, in the French Church, for a Pastor that should teach the Pri∣macy of Bishops to be of Divine Right; without which there could be no salvation; without which the Church could not stand. To affirm this, were, nothing els but, to damn all our Churches to the pit of Hell, & to pronounce the sentence of condemnation upon my own Flock. Which should I do, you your self would account me a sensless ungracious fellow, and worthy to be spit upon by all. But enough of this: For an overlabored Defence, specially to an understanding man, and in a clear and manifest point, is altogether needless. God preserve you, and prosper your endeavours, that they may redound to the edification of the Church. Farewell. Paris. XVI. Calends of Decemb. 1618. Your Honors most devoted Peter Moulin.
The Bishops Answer to the Second Epistle. THe Post was not yet gone, he staied here a day or two, but he had these letters, here inclosed, sealed up as they are; when, lo, I received your Se∣cond, by the hands of S. William Bee∣cher, Agent for the King, lately come from you. I presently recalled my former, yet opened them not, but, as they were, inclo∣sed them in these. For I would not so trespass as to com∣mit the same fault again; but rather make amends for my former tardiness with the quickness of this Answer. You shall therfore with my First receive these Second; together with my thanks for both: but [] the First Second, as it were; to wit, in these Second Letters my First thanks now, and in the First my Second, (as it falls out.) Thanks, I say, both for that your Book, for∣merly sent; and this Later, shortly, as I hope, to be sent. For S. William Beecher will deny either that it was bound (when he came thence) or els brought to him; and in that consideration he came the later to me: but he bad me look for it, for that I should not look in vain. As for pacifying the Kings anger against you, beleeve me, you need not much trouble your self. There is nothing in Him, which needs pacifying: there are ways wherby you may more and more gain him, and make him yours: and it would be worth your labour, if you do it. And do it you may, if you take that course, which
you cannot learn better of any man living, then of him∣self. As for me, I gladly acknowledg that you are more moderate toward us, then most of your men common∣ly are: and, the more you convers with Antiquity, will be daily more and more: nay, I add, and much more would be, if your Church would give you leave; and I would to God, it would. It should seem that shee hath transfer'd the faults of Persons upon Things; and, for some abuse, hath taken away the lawful use: a fault which you should by little and little unlearn Her. You, while you follow and sway with it, follow not the bent of your own mind and iudgment; for Iiudg of your affe∣ction by your pen; which was so well inclin'd toward us, that it had wrote (and, I think, not against your mind) that Our Order of Bishops was a thing received in the Church even from the time of the Apostles. And indeed your pen had wrote very right: Mary, you blotted out [of the Apostles] and, in leiu of it, put in [next to the Apostles.] But this, I beleeve, you did in favour of your Church. And, indeed, that was very true, which you put in [next to the Apostles] but that not a whit less true, which you blotted out. For that Order was not only from the Age next to the Apostles, but even from the very Age of the Apostles; or els all Antiquity de∣ceives us, and ther's not a Church-History left worth credit. That all Antiquity is for us, you your self deny not; and whether We must yeeld more to any present Church, then to all Antiquity, judg you. If I know you well, the more free and ingenuous I am in writing thus to you, you will love me the better: and so shall I you, if you deal as freely with me in it. Hear me then I pray. This is not enough for us, if a man do not reject Our Church Government, as a thing faulty or sinfull, for this is it We stand upon, that it
may be clear and confessed by all, that the Government of our Church is such, as cometh most neer to the form and manner of the Antient Church, or (as you grant) that, next to the Apostles, or (as you had once wrote, and we contend for't) of the Apostolick Church. And, that you are of the same judgment with us, I doubt not. If then, by your Churches leave, you would once speak out, you should do us a curtesie; if you may not, no discurtesie, if for the future you would let Our affairs alone. For, that way you are in, it will scarce be pos∣sible for you, both to please your own, and not to displease us. And yet, though Our Government be by Divine Right, it follows not, either that there is no salvation, or that a Church cannot stand, without it. He must needs be stone-blind, that sees not Churches standing without it: He must needs be made of iron, and hard hearted, that denys them salvation. We are not made of that metal, we are none of those Ironsides; We put a wide difference be∣twixt them. Somewhat may be wanting, that is of Di∣vine Right, (at least in the external Government) and yet Salvation may be had. So that you shall not need to damn them to the pit of Hell, or pronounce the sentence of condemnation upon your flock. This is not to damn any thing, to preferr a better thing before it: This is not to damn your Church, to recall it to an∣other form, that all Antiquity was better pleased with, i. e. to Our: but this, when God shall grant the opportunity, and your estate may bear it. If we do but agree upon this point, in all the rest we shall not fall out. But yet we wish not a con∣cord, that is but pieced and patched up, but an intire, absolute agreement, without any piecing and patching: which, we doubt not but, you like∣wise wish with us.
If any thing remain, I remit you to my former: (for we are here, now, full of business.) These I re∣commend to your favorable acceptance: and so I commend you in mine, and desire you to recommend me in your prayers to God. Farewell. London. Decemb. 12. 1618.
To the most Reverend and most worthy Prelate, the Lord Bishop of Winchester. GReat Sir. I received your Letters, full both of choice stuff, and of the testimony of your good affection to me. For although you seem to be a little more moved then ordinary, yet that great sweetness, which you temper your reproofs with, puts me in hope that your goodwill is not lessned toward me, and that you will readily accept of this my satisfa∣ction. It is to my great profit and honor to be taught by you; nor am I so sensless as to contend with a man of so great learning and worth. Neither indeed did I write to that end, that you should write to me again: for it is abundantly sufficient for me, if you take my Letters in good part. Nor are my wri∣tings of any such value, that they should be∣get you any trouble, or take you off from
your more weighty affairs. If therfore any thing was written by me amiss, I am much indebted to that my error, which hath drawn from you so learned and accurate Letters, that no gold can value, and weigh a∣gainst them; which I shal keep by me, while I live, as a most pretious  and threasure. Nevertheless, because you seem to me not to have reached my meaning in some pas∣sages of my former Letters, you will pardon me, if I endeavour in these to explain my mind a little more fully. I said that the Names of Presbyter and Bi∣shop are taken in the New Testament for one and the same. That the Order of Bishop and Presbyter is  the same. That the difference between Bishop and  Presbyter is but of Ecclesiastical, not of Divine Right. These things you wish had not been said by me. And you bring many Arguments to the contrary, indeed, learnedly and accu∣rately, but wherof a good part toucheth not me. Breifly of each. You deny not but the Names of Presbyter and Bishop are promiscuously taken in the New
Testament. But, you say, to what purpose this? Forsooth, you think that I tacitly in∣sinuate therby, that the Things likewise are promiscuous. For no man, likely, carps at the Name; but he that is ill affected to the Thing. And you add, that the Fathers, in those very places, wherin they teach that the Names are taken in the same sense, do presently apply a remedy, and add, that this afterward was o∣therwise, and that the Names, as well as the Offices, were and are distinct. Here it is easie for me to prove to you that I had no purpose to abuse the passivity of the Names, therby to confound the Fun∣ctions. For there I presently apply the same remedy, which, you truly say, was applyed by the Fathers. For I subjoin:Libri de Mu∣nere Pastorali. p 20 & . Presently after the times of the Apostles, or even in their times, as the Ecclesiastical History beareth witness, it was decreed, that in one City, One of the other Presbyters should be call'd the Bishop, who for avoyding of confusion, which groweth oftimes by equality, should have Preeminence among his Collegues. And this form of Government was every where received by all Churches. These very words were added by me there, which do abundantly wipe off that suspition.
Could I possibly wish ill to  Order, wher∣of I never spake without honor? as very well knowing that the Reformation of the Church of England, and the ejection of Popery, next to God and your Princes, is chiefly to be ascribed to the learning and industry of your Bishops: some of whom, being crowned with Martyrdom, sealed the Gospel with their blood. Whose writings we keep by us, whose acts and zeal we remember, as no way infe∣rior to the zeal of the most eminent Ser∣vants of God, whom either France or Germany brought forth. Whosoever shall deny this, must needs be either senslesly wicked, or (as envying Gods glory, or foolishly besotted) not see at high noon. I desire therfore this suspition may be wipid off from me: special∣ly, when I take notice that even Calvin and Beza, whom they usually pretend to, as a∣bettors of their peevishness, wrote many Letters to the Prelates of England; and in∣treated them as the faithfull servants of God; as men that deserved well of the Church. Nor am I such a boldface, as to pass sentence up∣on those Lights of the Antient Church, Igna∣tius, Polycarp, Cyprian, Augustine, Chrysostom, Basil, the Two Gregories Nissen and Nazian∣zen,
all of them Bishops; as upon men wrong∣fully made, or usurpers of an unlawfull of∣fice. The reverend Antiquity of those First Ages shall ever be in greater esteem with me, then the novel device of any whosoever. I come to the Second part of your censure. I said that there is but One Order of Bishop and Presbyter. You contrary-wise are of opi∣nion that the Order of Bishops is another and diverse from that of Presbyters: and to that purpose bring many testimonies from the Fathers; who speak of the Ordination of Bi∣shops: neither do I oppose; for the Antient's speak so, indeed. And although the Roman Pontifical absteins from that word, yet the An∣tient Bishops of Rome did use it. Leo. then in his 87. Epistle, which is to the Bishops of the Province of Vienna, commandeth, I that a Bi∣shop, who is not rightly ordained, he displa∣ced and, in the same Epistle, he often useth the same word. Now between an Order and a Degree you make this difference; that a Degree denotes only a Superiority; but an Order is a power to a special Act: That ther∣fore every Order is a Degree; but not every Degree an Order. Very well. For though many do not observe this difference of
words, yet it is best to use proper terms; that things which differ in substance, be distingui∣shed in names, too. But these do not pre∣judice me at all. For you should have consi∣dered with your self, whom I have to deal with. I dispute against the Pontificians, who make Seven Orders; Door keepers, Readers, Ex∣orcists, Acolyths, Subdeacons, Deacons, Presby∣ters: but the Order or character of Bishops they will by no means have to be diverse from that of Presbyters. Could I, disputing with them, use other words, then such as are re∣ceiv'd by them? Could I deal with them a∣bout the Order of Bishops, which they ac∣knowledg not? Should I have inveigh'd a∣gainst them for not making the Order of Bi∣shops distinct from that of Presbyters, when our own Churches make it not? He that should do this, should not so much contest with the Church of Rome, as with our own. Then to what purpose is it to insist so much upon the distinction of Words? since every Order is, by S. Paul, call'd a Degree.1. Tim. 3.13. Nor can a Bishop be depriv'd of his Orders, but he must be degra∣ded, and fall from his Degree. I pray, weigh my words well:Lib. de Mu∣nere Pasto∣rum pag. 144. Every Bishop is a Presbyter, and a Priest of the Body of Christ; and of these
the Church of Rome makes but one Order. It plainly appears that I do not in these words affirm, what ought to be beleeved, but what is the sense of the Church of Rome. But heer somewhat falls in, which may be∣get a doubt. It is confess'd by all, that every Bishop is a Presbyter: but a Presbyter is not a Deacon. Hence it comes to pass, that there is another manner of difference betwixt a Bi∣shop and a Presbyter, then betwixt a Presbyter and a Deacon. Since therfore a Presbyter differs in Order from a Deacon, it seems to follow that a Bishop differs not in Order from a Presbyter. Nor is it without some doubt, that you say, that Order is a power to a special Act. For a power to a special Act is given to many without Order; as to them who are extraordi∣narily delegated to the performance of some special actions. Then you deny that Archbi∣shops are another Order from Bishops: And yet an Archbishop hath a power to some special a∣ctions; as namely, to call a Synod, and to do other offices, which are not lawfull for Bi∣shops; and which are not permitted to Arch∣bishops themselves under the Papacy, but when they have received the Archiopiscopal
Pall from the Pope. You, out of your great wisdom, will consider, whether it be appa∣rent by these, that the power to a special A¦ction may be conferr'd, even by a Degree, with∣out a Diversity of Order. The Third point is still behind: to wit, that I said, that Episcopacy is by the most Antient Ecclesiastical, but yet not by Divine Right. You on the other side resolve and man∣tein that it is by Divine Right: and to that purpose produce many examples of Bishops, S. Mark; Timothy; Titus; Clemens; Polycarp; S. Iames, Bishop of Hierusalem; all who re∣ceived the Order of Episcopacy from the Apo∣stles themselves. And you quote a great num∣ber of Fathers, who affirm as much. (Learn∣edly all, and according to the truth of the Primitive Historys.) But what then? Why, say you, if Bishops were constituted by the Apostles, plain it is that the Order of Episcopa∣cy is by Apostolical, and so consequently by Di∣vine Right. This indeed is to make your self master of the whole strength of the cause. But that Axiom of yours [All things that are of Apostolical Right are likewise of Divine] seemes to me (by your good leave) to be liable to some exceptions. Many things were
ordered about Ecclesiastical Policy, which even the Church of England acknowledgeth not to be of Divine Right, by not observing the same. S. Paul in 1. Timoth. v. would have Dea∣conesses appointed in the Church: But this fashion was long ago out of date. The same S. Paul 1. Corinth. XIV. would that, at the same Hour, in the same Assembly, Three or Four should prophecy, i. e. as S. Ambrose un∣derstands it, Interpret the Word of God; and that the others should judg of what was spoken: which custome is long since ceased. The Apostles command, touching absti∣nence from things strangled and blood, was for many Ages observed by the Antient Church: witness the Apologetie of Tertullian, chap. IX. the Council of Gangra, Canon, II. and the Trullan, Canon LXVII. and there is frequent mention of the same point in the Councils of Worms and Orleance. yet S. Au∣gustine, in his XXXII. Book against Faustus, chap. XIII. saith that Observing hereof was generally neglected by the Christians; and that they who were posses'd with that scruple were laugh'd at by others. You have, not the Apostles alone, but even, that precept of Christ himself, Touching shaking off the dust of
the feet, against the refusers of the Gospel. If any should now go about to lay the foundation of Christian Religion, among the Tartars or Sinenses, were he bound to observe that Rite against the refractory? Such things as apper∣tain to Salvation and to Faith were ordered by the Apostles, by a Divine Inspiration; but in the rest they did often use their own pru∣dence; as S. Paul intimates, 1. Corinth. 7.25. Nor are you ignorant, so oft as examples are brought of Bishops placed by the Apo∣stles, in a higher degree above Presbyters, what is commonly answered: viz. that they had not that preeminence, as Bishops, but as E∣vangelists: of whose superiority above Pastors somewhat you may have in S. Chrysostom, on the IV. to the Ephesians. Which reply of what strength it is, I had rather stand to your iudgment, then any mans. Indeed S. Ambrose, on that same place, makes Evan∣gelists inferior to Bishops, and without Seas. Yet, however you shall call Titus, Timothy, and S. Mark, whether Bishops or Evangelists, it is clear they had Bishops their successors and heirs of their preeminence. You determine therfore that our Churches do offend against the Divine Right; yet so,
as you exclude them not from hope of sal∣vation: but do think, that, in our Church Go∣vernment, men may attain to Salvation: for this you brought in, in your Second Letter, that you might deal the kindlier with us. But in your larger, you liken us, in this point, to Aerius; who, you say, was deservedly, upon this ground, by the Antients put in the black Book of Hereticks. Herein, Great Sir, I ap∣peal to your equity. Think with your self, what streits you drive me to. For, if I should have spoke, as you conceive it, I could not but necessarily accuse our Church of Heresie; and so doing, be forced , to be pack∣ing, to leave my station here, and to provide for my self as I could. Nor could I say that the Primacy of Bishops is by Divine Right but I should brand our Churches, (which have spilt so much blood for Christ) with Heresie. For, questionless, to be obstinately set against such things, as are of Divine Right, and pe∣remptorily to gainsay what God commands, is downright Heresie, whether it concern Faith or Discipline. Besides that I should have overthrown that Principle, wherwith cheifly our Religion defends her self against Popery, viz. That what things are by Divine Right are
sufficiently and evidently contein'd in the Holy Scriptures. I hear what you will reply. That it had been safer and better for me, to have been si∣lent in these points, then itch to be writing so unseasonably. Because therby it comes to pass that I must necessarily offend our own Church, or your; nay, haply, both. And to tell you truth, I had rather have been silent: for very unwillingly I sett my mind to write; nor did I write, but upon command. Arnoldus the Iesuite, the Kings Confessor, publikely and in the pulpit, before His Majestie, inveigh'd against the Confession of our Church, and further in a pestilent book revil'd it, wherin he mightily insults over us, in this question, and odiously seeks to overthrow our Churches Government: This book coming to be sold all over France, through the high ways and streets, at the voice of a Cryer, did greatly scandalize many. Nay, before this, the Pulpits, the Markets, the Court, the Streets, and the very Barbers shops, rang with this question. This is the field wherin wanton witts sport themselves daily. How earnestly my Book was look'd for, which should stop that insolency, it doth thence
appear, that, in Four months space, it was nine times printed. I could not therfore shun this task. Nor was it possible to write exact∣ly of that Argument, but I must begin with the signification of the words, Bishop and Presbyter; and treat of the Original of the Of∣fice. But here I took occasion to speak ho∣norably of the Bishops of England.* * * I deriv'd the dignity of Bishops, from the very infancy of the Church. I condemn'd Aerius. I said that S. Iames himself was Bishop of Hierusa∣lem: from whom in a long course, the suc∣cession of Bishops of that City is deduced. Only this one thing was wanting, viz. that I did not say that our Church was heretical, and did trample the Divine Right under her feet; which, indeed, I neither could nor ought to do; yea, had I done it, you your self would have noted that want of pru∣dence in me. This may serve for the Three chief points: To which you further add this  or co∣rollary; namely, your iudgment touching the Title of my book, [which I wrote for France,] Of the Calling of Pastors. These words, you say, are novell, and never used by any of the Antients in this sense. I acknow∣ledg,
indeed, that the word Calling is unusual among the Antients, nor taken in that sense. But we Frenchmen speak otherwise: for as many as have wrote of that Argument, either Our, or Papists use this word: which, with us, signifies somewhat more then Ordi∣nation; for it is taken for the Office it self. If I had wrote in Latin, I should have given this Title, of the Office and Ordination of Pastors. Neither would you have all Presbyters and Ministers of the Word of God, to be called by the name of Pastors. For this word, you say, be∣longs only to Bishops, (and that the Antients spake so.) If this be true, Worthy Sir, the Churches in France, Germany, Lowcountrys and Helvetia, are flocks without a Pastor. But S. Paul, Acts the xx commandeth the Presby∣ters of Ephesus, pascere, i. e. to be Pastors of the Church. v. 17. & 28. And S. Peter, in his 1. Epist. 5. ch. 1. 2. v. The Presbyters, who are among you, I exhort, — Pascite, feed the flock of God, which is among you, taking the over-sight therof, not by constraint but willingly; not for filthy lucre: which exhortation to diligence, and shunning filthy lucre, no doubt, belongs also to the inferior Presbyters. Now to think that they ought not be called Pastors, whom
God commands Pascere, to feed the flock, I cannot persuade my self. But, if the Word of God be Pabulum, the food of Souls, I see not why he should not be call'd a Pastor, who doth administer this food. S. Paul in the fourth to the Ephesians, verse, 11. makes an enumeration of Ec∣clesiastical Offices: God gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pa∣stors and Teachers. If Presbyters who la∣bour in the Word, whom we Frenchmen call Ministers, be not understood under the name of Pastors, I see not what place they can have in this enumeration of the Apostle. S. Augustine, in his 59. Epistle, saith, that Pastors and Doctors, here, are the same. The same thinketh S. Hierom, upon this place of S. Paul. Vincentius Lirinensis, ex∣pounding this place, maketh no mention of Pastors, but comprehends them vnder Doctors, whom he calls Treatisers, who certainly were a different thing from Bi∣shops. But that Bishops only are Doctors, I never yet read any where. S. Ambrose is so far from thinking the name of Pastors to belong only to Bishops, that he even calls Readers, Pastors. Readers, saith he, are,
and may be Pastors, who fatten the souls of their Auditors with Reading. The term Pa∣stor is usual among the Prophets: Prophet Isaiah. 56. 11. Prophet Ieremiah. 10. 21. and 22. 22. and 23. 1. 2. Prophet Eze∣chiel. 34. 2. and Prophet Zachariah. 10. 3. Which places whosoever shall weigh in the even ballance of judgment, he shall find, that under the name of Pastors were rec∣kon'd not only the cheif Priests, or the heads of the Levites but all the Prophets and Levites, upon whom the Office of teaching lay. But the following matter, and my earnest desire to satisfie you, hath carried me beyond my bounds. I have too too much abus'd your leasure. Yet shall not this my pains be ill bestowed, if you shall take notice hereby, how much I e∣steem you, how desirous I am of peace, how glad I would be that all the Refor∣med Churches, who are united by one Faith, were also united by one and the same bond of Ecclesiastical Government. I beseech you, Sir, accept in good part this my ingenu∣ous liberty, which truly shall never de∣tract from that observance and honor,
which, I shall ever profess before the world, I ow unto you. God preserve You, and grant You a fresh and lively old age, with the increase of all honor and hap∣piness. Farewell. Dated Paris. Your Honors most devoted in all observance. Peter Moulin.
The Bishops Answer to the Third Epistle. I Never could learn this trick of saw∣ing, or (which is all one) of tossing replys. No, not, when my years were fitter for it. But now old age, which of it self is a diseas, and yet never cometh without diseases at∣tending it, plucks me by the ear, and bids me get me out of this cockpit, and rank my self with them, whose whole business is Prayer. Neverthe∣less, because in this skirmishing, it hath happen'd to us both alike, viz, that we have not reach'd one anothers meaning, I shall, not unwillingly, more fully and plain∣ly expound my mind to you, as you did your to me. That which I first meet withall is but a slight mat∣ter; for I do not understand at all, how I was any whit more mov'd then ordinary. Neither do I remember ought of yours, that mov'd me more then ordinary; nay that mov'd me at all; but only that you said, that some passages of yours had griev'd the Kings soul. That word [greiv'd] greiv'd me somwhat, I con∣fess, and mov'd me more then ordinary: Besides, no∣thing that I remember. His Majestie had made three dashes upon your Book. Touching them you would know of me, what my mind was, what I thought. I answered, as was truth, where the King had made them, they ought to be made. The first place, noted by the King, was that, concern∣ing the passivity of the words, (as you speak.) I said it
was justly noted. Here you did not reach my mean∣ing; for you take it for all one, as if I had said that you therby did tacitly insinuate, I know not what. But that came not into my thoughts. I did not say, what you did therby insinuate, but what others would snatch at from thence. For, questionless, snatch at they will, as if you did insinuate, though you did not, as men are, and stand affected. I, for my part, do not deny, that those words are taken for one and the same; and so far you are right. This I deny, that those things which are right may all of them, safely, by any man, at any time, be committed to writing. For you must consider, not so much what you might mean there, as what others would snatch from thence. Our writings must be regulated by that of the Apostle, Not what is lawfull, but what is expedient. See you, whether this controversie be seasonable at this time; and whether it were advisedly done by you; and whether it be not expedient, , to cut off occasions from them, who earnestly snatch at all occa∣sions of setting novelties afoot. Perhaps, I fear what is safe enough, but I fear though, lest, an occasion being taken from hence, those stirrs unhappily break out a∣gain, which seemed wholy to be made up among us. Nor was I ever of that opinion, I never wrote it, that afterward it was otherwise done. That was not done o∣therwise afterward, which was done by the Apostles themselves. It is S. Chrysostoms: were there many Bishops in one City? by no means. It is S. Hieroms: For in one City there could not be many Bishops. It is Theodorets: It could not be, that there should be many Pastors in one City. Of what time are these to be understood? When were there not? When could there not be those many Pastors in one City? What, when S. Chrysostom, S. Hierom Theodoret lived? doubtless, when the Apostle wrote that to the Philippians. I could
not possibly say then, that that was done afterward, which they said was done, even when the Apostle lived and wrote. I said, that the remedy was there applyed by the Fathers. You say that the same was applyed by you. Applyed, I grant; but truly, neither the same, nor in the same place. For, 1. their [] their preventive caution was premised before they spake. Your [] yours is but a playster layd on, after the wound is made. 2. What you say by way of disjunction, viz. either immediatly after the time of the Apostles, or even in their time, that would not they have said so; but, as truth was, without any disjunction, without the former part. That it was done, in the very time of the Apostles, and by themselves. 3. Then, no where do they say, that any constitution was made about it. Nor do I think you will ever read of any such [ or] constitution, in any History. We read, indeed, in the Acts, that the Order of Deacons was constituted by them: of Presbyters, of Bishops, there was no constitution: for Bishops were formerly instituted by Christ in the Apostles; and Presbyters in the Seventy Two. 4. Nor only, that any was called Bishop, but that he was a Bishop. For there were no Titular Bishops then: they had their Name from their Office: they were called what they were; they were, what they were called. 5. Nor that should be only with preeminence, but that should be invested with power: power, I say, of Imposition of hands, of commanding, of receiving informa∣tions, of reproving. 6. Nor only to take away Confusion, which is con∣trary to Order, but also to take away Schism, which is con∣trary to Vnity. Nor for these two only, but also for all
other ends, for which, we said, that power was given. You see that the Fathers had another gates remedy for this disease: and that those speeches of yours, It was constituted; That should be called; should have the preemi∣nence; are too narrow; and I add, by your leave, too weak and dilute; nor the same with those, which are the ingredients of that medicine, which the Fathers made. But yet I have a mind here to put the question; If Confusion commonly growes from Equality, how comes it to pass, that there is no need of this remedy among you? Again; if it be true, that this Form of Government was received every where by all Churches; that, which was every where receiv'd by all, why doth not your Ghurch re∣ceive? why doth She only run counter to all the Churches, which then were every where? For that is a most true word, you said, and deserv'd an asterisk of commenda∣tion, That all Churches everywhere receiv'd this Form of Government. Nor were there ever, before this Age, any Churches, which were governed by any other, then by Bishops. Wherfore there was no cause at all, that you should go about to wipe off that suspition, (for I had none of you,) that you were not well affected to our Order. I shall never be induced to beleeve it; for I cannot but give credit to you, affirming it in your Letters, that your Countrymen complain of you, for favoring and wishing so well vnto it. Indeed, that you wish well, I doubt not at all; but ther∣to I am more perswaded by your word, then by your ar∣guments. For here you slip from the Order to the Persons of Bi∣shops: of whose Learning, Industrie, Martyrdom, you speak much and excellently. But there were, as you
know, of old, men that hated the Tyrant, but not his Tyranny: and why not now, men that love Bishops, but not the Government by Bishops. Pass by the men ther∣fore; it matters not for them; speak of the Order it self. For Calvin himself, and Beza, if they wrote to our Pre∣lates, know, that they wrote likewise to them, whom you call peevish: and that their Letters, which these pretend for their peevishness, are produced by them; and thus they oft reply, To what purpose do I hear Calvins Words, when I see his Deeds? For the Order it self, if it be such as you would have it seem, the Bishops of England cannot make it better, nor of Spain worse. I advis'd you not to transferr the faults of Persons upon Things; and to un∣learn your Church that custom. As for those Antients, whom you worthily call the Light of the Church, and who themselves were Bishops, though you say much, yet you say not enough. For this is not enough, That you would not give sentence against them; That they were not wrongfully made; That they did not usurp an unlawfull Office: These are but terms of di∣minution, Not give sentence against; Not wrongfully made; not usurpers of an unlawfull Office; speak out, speak as the truth is, That they were lawfully made; (lawfully, if ever any) and did exercise a most lawfull Office: That our, at this day, are to be made after their example: That the same Office is to be exercised by all Ours: These speak home to the Order, are nothing to the Men. But, whatever become of those passages, I cannot but commend your conclusion there; nor shall I stick to set an asterisk of approbation upon it: I would to God that might put an end to the whole controversie betwixt us. It is this: The venerable Antiquity of those first Ages shall be ever in greater esteem with me then the new upstart device of any whosoever. O would to God, that Antiquity
might be more and more in esteem with you with all: for if Antiquity might prevail, if these new upstart devices were discarded, then, sure, the Cause of this Order could not be in danger. The Second dash of dislike set by His Majestie, and very justly, was at that place, where you contend that the Order of Bishop and Presbyter is one and the same. I have shew'd that it is not the same. Both, 1. Because the Offices are not the same. For a Pres∣byter doth not Ordain; no, not in S. Hieroms iudgment. As also, 2. Because there is not the same Imposition of hands, but a new one in a Bishop. Again, 3. Because, among the Fathers, Isidore clearly calls it the Order of Bishops. And lastly, 4. Because those Two Orders were distin∣guished by Christ in the Apostles, and the Seventy Two. Here you produce to us the Title of the Pontifical; which is concerning Consecration, not Ordination. I shew'd that the Antient Bishops, even of Rome it self, spake o∣therwise; otherwise the later Popes. Among the Anti∣ent, that the word Ordination was most usual, and most approved. You appeal to the Schole. I acquainted you, in what sense the Schole calls them the same, or not the same. The same in reference to the Body of Christ; upon which they terminat their Seven Orders: About the Body of Christ a Presbyter doth as much as a Bishop. You your self say as much: Of these in respect of the Body of Christ, the Church of Rome makes but one Order. Not the same; if you respect the power to a special Act, viz. of Ordination, which is peculiar to a Bishop. This is not mine, as you imagin'd, but the definition of Orders, all the Schole over. Nor yet that difference, which afterward you put upon me: both of them are from the Schole; both definition and differ∣ence.
These things, if you would speak Scholastically, were not to be deny'd by you, who appeal'd to the Schole. But to what purpose do you say, that you deal with or, that you dispute against the Pontificians, who will not have the Order of Bishops distinct from that of Presbyters? And yet presently you subjoin: Ought I to inveigh against them, (viz. the Pontificians) because they do not make the Or∣der of Bishops distinct from that of Presbyters, when Our Churches do not make it neither? He that should do this, should not so much contest with the Church of Rome, as with our own. You dispute therfore against them, but yet you will not inveigh against them: you dispute against the Pontificians, and yet you allege their Pontifical. You di∣spute against them, yet your own Churches do the self same thing. Nor yet will you affirm, what ought to be beleev'd, but what the Church of Rome thinketh: which thinketh the very same that your Church doth; and your Church, I beleeve, you would have to be beleev'd. You do not therfore contest with the Pontificians; for, I trow you have no mind to contest with your own. 'Twere a∣gainst your Religion so to do. Nevertheless your Church, as you confess, doth the same thing in this point that the Roman doth. You say it is best to use proper terms, that the things which differ in substance be distinguished in Name: and yet in the same page, afterward, as if you were som∣what angry, you ask, To what end is it, to stick so much up∣on the distinction of Words? To what end then is it, to make proper words, which are made proper for no other end, but for distinction? If this be to no end, it is better, trust me, neither to use proper words, nor to make any words at all proper; for we must use the better, both you, and we.
Notwithstanding this, why do you reject the distin∣ction of words, here? Because, every Order (you say) is a Degree. What then? Since every Degree is not an Order, if we will use proper words. Deaconry, in S. Paul, is a Degree; and the same is an Order with all men. But Arch∣deaconship is a new Degree, and yet no Order. Nor can a Bishop be outed of his Order, but he must be degraded (say you) or fall from his Order. Yea, but he may be degra∣ded, though he be not outed of his Order; for of his Order he can no way be outed. For after (that, which they call) Degradation, there remaineth a power to the Acts of his Order: the use of which power may be inhibited; the power it self cannot be taken away. But here some scruples arise in your mind. The First is: that every Bishop is a Presbyter: very true that, and confest by all. But a Presbyter, you say, is not a Deacon. Among you, haply, he is not, according to your novell device: But with that Reverend Antiquity (which you speak of) he is: Nay, then, a Bishop himself is a Deacon: Read S. Chrysostom, Even a Bishop was call'd a Deacon; wherupon S. Paul, writing to Timothy, said, Fulfill thy Deaconry; to him, being a Bishop. Whence also it is, that many Bishops now adays write, to my Fellow-Presbyter, to my Fellow-Deacon. Read S. Ambrose, on the 4. to the Ephesians. For all Orders are in a Bishop; because he is the first Priest, i. e. the Prince of Priests. And, on the 1. to the Corinth: 12. Though Apostles be Prophets too; for the first Degree hath all other vnder it. I may truly therefore in∣ferr the contrary; Seing a Bishop differs not from a Pres∣byter, by any other way of difference, then a Presbyter doth from a Deacon; But a Presbyter differs from a Deacon in his Order; therfore it is agreable, that a Bishop differ from a Presbyter in his Order. This ever seem'd agreable to the consent of Antiquity. I wonder that these things scap'd
you; for I dare not suspect, that what are so obvious to all are unknown to you. But the Deaconry, in use a∣mong you, deceived you; a meer stranger it, I speak it boldly, to all Antiquity (with whom Deacons were ever one part of the Clergy.) The Second scruple. That Order is a power to a special Act, I say not of myself; the whole Schole saith so; it is the definition of Order received in the Scholes: speak you, if you have another; for I remember not that I have any where read of any other. Your scruple here ariseth from them, who (say you) are extraordinarily delegated to the performance of certain Acts. I rejoin: What have they who are delegated without Order, to do with Order? The very word Order requireth that this be understood of ordinary power. The Third Scruple. An Archbishop hath a power to a special Act. What Act? To call a Synod. I eas you of this scruple also. This Act is not special to an Archbishop: for a Bishop exerciseth the same Act: He doth as much call a Synod in his Diocess, as the other doth in his Pro∣vince. Though, if we will speak truly, the calling of Synods is a special Act to neither of them, but is by Delegation from the Prince; by whose Laws there is special provi∣sion against unlawful Assemblys. You, in your wisdom, see, that nothing appears here, why either by a Degree any Power may be conferd, or by an Order may not be conferd. The Third dash of dislike was upon your denying Episco∣pacy  to be of Divine Right. you grant it to be of Apostoli∣cal. But that serves not you to make it be of Divine Right. No, not among us, who do not observe certain things which were appointed by the Apostles. For, 1. not Widows. I read of no command there for the appointing of Widows: but for Ephesus, and those
Churches, which had Widows, there is a command touching their Age. The institution of Widows, was left free to every Church. For none were to mantein Widows, unless they would; and, indeed, they could not be manteined among the poorer. Not, 2. that Custom for three or four to prophecy at one hour. But that Custom was, cleerly, extraordinary; and the extraordinary gifts ceasing, that ceased too. Not, 3. to abstein from things strangled, & blood. Yea, but that was temporary, not appointed by the Apostles, with any other intention, then, to be in force, during the non-burial of the Synagoge; the Synagoge once bu∣ried, to be free, to observe or not. So your first instance was, not necessary; your second, not ordinary; your third, temporary, not perpetual. These do not make a Divine Right. But, that the Precepts of the Apostles may not be of Divine Right, you will not have that of Christ, touching shaking off the dust of their feet, to be so, neither. But, in truth, this is no Precept; but, if a Precept, of Divine Right. For, I hope, you will not say that Christ commanded this, using his Prudence, without Divine inspiration. No man ever understood that, , according to the Letter; and that upon this ground; because it was sometime observed, sometime altered, sometime quite omitted: not according to the Letter, I say, but, , according to the mind of the speaker. Whose mind was, that such were to be given for desperate, whether with or without using the Ceremony. But, be more sparing, I pray, of that point, of the Apostles oftimes using their prudence. For it cannot be said or writ without great danger, that the Apostles in some things had Divine Inspiration, in the rest did often use their own prudence; and that in their writings which are ex∣tant.
For even that very place, where  is, ac∣cording to my judgment, you know, is concluded with [] But I think also that I have the Spirit of God. so that his very , his judgment had the dictate therof, from the Spirit of God. As for that place, which you quote, if it were not written by Di∣vine inspiration, but by humane prudence, we are to score it for Apocryphal. How then? are we for making an In∣dex, and for Expurging the New Testament? For sepa∣rate we must the pretious from the vile. What were di∣ctated by humane prudence will never stand in conjun∣ction with those which were by Divine inspiration. But, although there be weight enough to confirm this cause, from the Right and maner of the Apostles, yet, you may remember, that I deriv'd this distinction of Orders higher, viz. from Christ our Saviour in the Apo∣stles, and Seventy-Two Disciples. That it is every where among the Fathers, and clearly confessed by them, that Bishops succeeded the Apostles, and Presbyters the seventy Two. I cited Cyprian; But Deacons must remember, how our Lord chose Apostles, i. e. Bishops and Prelates; but the Apostles, after the Ascension of our Lord, appointed to themselves Deacons, as ministers of their Episcopacy, and of the Church. That those Seven were instituted, Acts VI. by the Apostles; but no Presbyters, but after the example of the Seventy Two; nor Bishops, but after their own pattern. This Order therfore hath the strength and sinews therof, not only from the Apostles, but even from our Saviour himself. Would you have me fetch it yet higher? even out of the Old Testament, and there from the Divine Law it self? S. Hierom doth: And that we may know that the Apostoli∣cal traditions were taken out of the Old Testament; what Aaron, and his Sons, and the Levites were in the Temple,
that do Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons challeng to themselves in the Church. S. Ambrose doth, in both those places, 1. Corinth. 12. and Ephes. 4. speaking of the Iews. Whose tradition, saith he, hath passed over to us. I omitt Aaron; lest you should reject him, as a Type of Christ. Over his Sons, the Priests, was there not in their several families . i. e. a Prelate; or, as is said Num 4 16 Neh 11 9 P. Isai. 60 17. elswhere,  i. e. a Bishop. Over the Gersonites. Num. 3. 24. Over the Kohathites. vers. 30. Over the Merarites. verse 35. Was not Eleazar there, even while his Father was alive, , as if you would say, Prelate of Prelates. verse 32. Who is elsewhere called  as if you would say, Archbishop. There are therefore in the Law, , i. e. Prelats or Bishops, Priests, and Levites: In the Gospel, The Apostles, the Seventy Two, and those Se∣ven, Acts VI. In the Apostles practise, which was taken from those Two [the Law and Gospel] Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons. But do not, do not think, that this was by A∣postolical Right alone; if there be in the Gospel, if in the Law, any Divine Right, this Government is not without example in both, it is founded on both. Either then there is no Divine Right in the form of Church Govern∣ment, and then wellfare Amsterdam, where so many hu∣mane prudences as there are, so many forms of Govern∣ment shall be set up. Or, if there be any Divine Right, it is in Those Three, it is for us. And now to your skirmishes of lighter consideration. That I know, what useth to be answered, by the Vul∣gar, concerning Timothy and Titus. Add this too, that I know, that many things are ill answered by the Vul∣gar. But what is answered by the Vulgar? that they were Evangelists. Who affirms this? either the Vulgar, or they that, out of some mans novel device, have
spread these doubtfull speeches among the Vulgar. For none of the Antients ever spake so; no History can wit∣ness it. But History doth witness, that Timothy and Titus were Bishops. Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Hierom, Theodoret say it. That they were Evangelists no man ever said, wrote, or dream'd, before our Age. This Vulgar answer is a Vulgar forgery. Therfore, whether Evangelists were superior or in∣ferior to Bishops, it's nothing to us; since these, by no means, were Evangelists. Who saith so? S. Chrysostom. But I am to mind you, that he corrects what he had spoken, with some diffidence, there, concerning Evan∣gelists. For that nothing can be collected out of that place, Ephes. 4. concerning the Priority of any. But we may fetch it from another Epistle. 1. Corinth. 12. 28. where we have,  first, second, third: But Evangelists appear not there. Besides that they, whom you, with the Vulgar, would have to be count∣ed Evangelists (Timothy, and Titus) are from thence placed among the Pastors, , in∣trusted with the care of their several Provinces, and in ge∣neral of all, but not among Evangelists. Aquila and Pri∣scilla are to him Evangelists: that I cannot but wonder, what you meant to mention that place. For, from that place of S. Paul. 2. Timoth. 4. 5. if you will hear S. Chrysostom, you shall assoon make Timothy but a Dea∣con, from the fulfilling [] of the Deaconship, as an Evangelist, from the work of an Evangelist. Do not you therfore make such a disjunction, either Bi∣shop, or Evangelist. Evangelists they were never reputed by any, but some, I know not who, two or three days ago, whom any upstart device pleaseth better, then reverend Antiquity. Do we give credit to Antiquity? They were Bishops, they had Bishops their successors,
their heirs both in Superiority and Power. You demand then, Whether your Churches sin a∣gainst the Divine Right? I did not say it; this only I said, that your Churches wanted somewhat that is of Divine Right: wanted, but not by your fault, but by the iniquity of the times. For that your France had not your Kings so propitious at the reforming of your Church, as our England had: in the interim, when God shall vouchsafe you better times, even this, which now you want, will, by his grace, be sup∣plyed. But, in the mean while, the Name of Bishop, which we find so frequent in the Scriptures, ought not to have been abolish'd by you. Though to what pur∣pose is it to abolish the Name, and to retein the Thing? (For even you retein the Thing, without the Title; and they Two, whom you named, while they lived, what were they, but Bishops in Deed, though not in Name) seing, as he in the Poet saith excellently, there is scarce any man that would wish . To be a Tyrant, and not to tyrannize. That Aerius was put in the black book of Hereticks (and worthily) whosoever shall beleeve Epiphanius, Phi∣lastrius, or S. Augustine, must needs confess. And you that condemn Aerius, upon what consideration do you condemn him? What, because he oppos'd himself to the consent of the Catholike Church? He that is of the same opinion doth not he also oppose himself? and is to be condemn'd upon the same consideration? But, if there be any error, so it be not with obstinacy of mind, though he think as Aerius did, his cause will be far from what the cause of Aerius was. Do not you therfore betake yourself to those tragical expressi∣ons
of damning to the pit of Hell, of giving sentence of damnation against your Church, as against her that treads un∣der foot the Divine Right. Ther's no necessity of that. Weigh only calmly what is spoken. To vote that a thing were so, is not to devote, if it be not. A wish is no sentence of damnation. To want somewhat that is of Divine Right, is not to tread under foot the Di∣vine Right. Let but obstinacy and perversness be wan∣ting, it will be no heresy. And, if it be heresy, (being about a point of Discipline) it will not be among those, which S. Peter calls , damnable he∣resies. But far be it from me that I should drive you to any streits. For neither would I have you hold your peace, being so provoked by the Iesuit. Nay, but write, by al means write: but yet, when you write, so mantein your own, that you pinch not upon, I say not, other mens matters which belong not to you; yes, which somewhat con∣cern you: (for our affairs are not meer strangers to you.) And, see, heer's a larg field for you, wherin you may shew the sharpness of your, wit, (which indeed is excellent.) But do not, do not hope that you can , play on both sides. Your own will complain of you; Ours need no such defence; So you will loose the thanks of either side. But, although these things be evidently enough con∣teined in Holy Scriptures, to any whose eye is single, yet is not that Principle so, as you have laid it. For, not what belong to Divine Right, but what belong to Faith, and Good manners [are evidently enough conteined.] But these are not adaequate to Divine Right. Howbeit, you might well, you might have wrote (as you speak) exactly, had you begun, not where the words were promiscuous, but, where the Things being
always distinct, the signification of the words began like∣wise to be distinct. It was possible for you to have ab∣steined from words aequivocal, confused, and promiscu∣ously taken; nor did any necessity enforce you to be∣gin there. You might also have balk'd all occasion of diverting to us. Your design was touching Bishops: you were to treat of them, and of the Office it self. Of the Bishops of Eng∣land to what purpose? Doth England make that lawfull, which out of England is unlawfull? The abuses of men, wherever they are, must be taxed: the office it self, in what country soever, is the same; of it self, in it self, by it self lawfull: Nor, if the Bishops be not good, is the Of∣fice of Bishops not good: Yea but let the Office of Bi∣shops be, let Them be no Bishops, unless they make good their Name. But here, I know, the King would set an asterisk of approbation. When you derive Episcopacy from the very infancy of the Church. When you acknowledg S. Iames to be Bishop of Hierusalem; and a long succession of Bishops, there, deriu'd from him. When now again you condemn Aerius.* * * See, you have Three asterisks for the Three dashes. For these things are most true; and according to the judgment of the Antients, even of Irenaeus, who leads the train of the Antients. The true profession is the doctrine of the Apostles; and the antient state of the Church, through the while world, is according to the succession of Bishops, to whom They deliver'd that Church, which is in every place; which hath reached even unto us. Somwhat I added, afterward, concerning the novel, upstart name of Calling: and so of Pastors; (as they are now in use with you.) Touching that of Calling, you do not deny but that it is vnusual: you used, I suppose a , the figure of extenution; for it is so unusual, that it
is not at all. Calling, indeed, is sometime used for the Of∣fice; for Ordination, never. But neither do you deny what I observed touching that word, Pastors. Nor do you produce any, either among those Antients, or the later Writers, before our Age, that was so call'd, viz. a Pastor, who was not, indeed, a Bishop. Only, I know not how, you heap up many things together, but all beside the matter: that you seem not in them neither to have reach'd my meaning. For, what if I grant all that you allege? That your flocks are not without a Pastor; (as it seemeth good to you to stile him:) That all you say out of S. Paul, S. Peter, the Prophets is true: What are these to me? who only say that the Antients spake thus; that that other name is not from Antiquity. I recall you therfore to this; That, among the Antient Christians in former ages, you shew me out of their writings, where the word Pastor was ever used, and they spake not of the Bishop: or, that it was used (as with you it is) of a Parish Priest. Prevail thus far with your self, as to shew this; for, unless you do this, you do nothing to the purpose. But yet see, of what force those things are, that you brought there. For S. Paul doth not say there, that Presbyters [did pas ere] were Pastors: this He saith, Wherein the Holy Ghost hath made you Bishops [pascere] to feed [to be Pastors over] the Church of God. Saint Paul's Pastor therfore is a Bishop. And, lest you should think that the name Bishop is to be taken, there, appel∣latively (as if you would say, Such as haue the Cure of) not properly; behold, the Syriack Interpreter himself reteins the Greek word ; when the Syriack wants not a word of her own, by which to express, [Such as haue the Cure of.] And so also S. Peters Pastor. 1. Epist. 5. chap. 2. v.
For I wholy doubt, whether that place, of S. Peter, belong to inferior Presbyters. For He addeth there (as you know) , being Bishops over them: so that He also conjoins [] being Bishops, with [] being Pastors. That word indeed I stand not upon. That which follows there [not Lording it over the Clergy] doth plainly evince, that they, to whom S. Peter wrote this, had , power and authority over the Clergy: otherwise, that  that Domineering and Lording over them could not possibly be apply'd to them. Wherfor S. Peters Pastor must needs be a Bishop. And who indeed can doubt of this, seing the conjunction of those two words took the first rise from S. Peter. For, wheras you inferr that the Word of God is [Pa∣bulum] food: that therfore they, who administer this food, do [pascere] feed: I shall easily grant you, that feed they do, that is, , but not therefore , whence cometh , as you know, 1. e. Pastor; who, over and above the food of the Word, administer somewhat else be∣side. But what you bring from that place to the E∣phesians, chap. 4. are either uncertain; For 1. One will have Pastors and Doctors to be all one. 2. Ano∣ther maketh no mention of Pastors. 3. A Third think∣eth that Readers are Pastors. I shall speak of them all. 1. To S. Augustine, Pastor and Doctor are no other∣wise the same, then Order and Degree were, to us, a little before. Every Order a Degree, but not every Degree an Order: so every Pastor is a Doctor, but not every Doctor a Pastor. Who saith this? Saint Hierom.
2. Of him, who makes no mention, there, of Pastors, nor will I make mention. The Monks are bet∣ter inclin'd, commonly, to Treatisers, then to Bishops. 3. For S. Ambrose, who understood Bishops in A∣postles; Presbyters in Prophets; Deacons in Evangelists; no wonder, if at last he fell upon Readers, when he had none beside them, to whom, after those Three, he might referr them. Thus, say I, either vncertain they are: or, when they are Certain they make against you. By name, S. Chrysostom; Who defineth Pastors to be they, to whom was committed () the generality of the people. Are your so? And he adds who were such, as Timothy, saith he, and Titus; who were both Bishops in S. Chrysostoms account: and, I beleeve, in your account, they were more then Presbyters, labour∣ing in the Word. Yet remains what you glanc'd at, out of the Pro∣phets. Which places if any do accurately consider, he shall find, that not only the high Priests, but also the Prophets and Levites, upon whom the Office of teaching lay, were called by the name of Pastors. Doubtless, he shall. Add moreover; he shall find Princes in the State, and Ma∣gistrates often, nay oftner, a great deal, to be call∣ed by the name of Pastors, then all them put toge∣ther, whom you set down. And yet we do not call Princes by the name of Pastors. Nor do I think that at Geneva he is call'd a Pastor who is the chief Magistrate. The Pastors therfore in the Prophets reach not home to this. Tell me, who of the Antients ever spake so; otherwise we are beside the cushion. Lastly, that seem'd to me a wondrous strange op∣position. Indeed it is not by the Antients; but we Frenchmen speak so. For, must the Antients speak as
the French; or the French as the Antient Christians? And you run upon the same rock again, afterward. The Presbyters who labour in the Word, whom we French∣men call Ministers. For it's strange, how it became lawfull for Frenchmen, to put upon a Presbyter that name, which never any among the Antients used, but for a Deacon. I speak not this otherwise, but that even among us too, that bad fashion is taken up, of calling them Ministers, and Pastors too. But these words were brought in by them, who best relish any upstart fashion; but against their mind who reve∣rence Antiquity; and, as they may, disclaim these usages. For we suffer, as I said, many things, which we teach not; and bear with that which we cannot take away. But he, that but bears with a thing, loves it not, though he loves to bear with it. And now you have an Answer to your Letters, so far as my occasions give me leave. For I have not the happiness of much leasure. But although I read none of yours unwillingly, yet I read no passage more willingly, then that last, wherin you pro∣fess, How desirous you are of peace, how glad you should be that all the Reformed Churches, who are united by one Faith, were united by one and the same bond of Ecclesiastical Government. Which is like∣wise my earnest and hearty prayer: and I daily begg it humbly of God, that they may be united in the same Form of Church Policy, by the bond of Ec∣clesiastical Government; but that same which derives its pedegree from the very infancy of the Church; from which, the Reverend Antiquity of the First Ages; which whosoever opposeth, opposeth himself to all Antiquity; which Saint James the Apostle began in the Church
of Hierusalem, from whom the succession of Bishops in a long course descended; which condemned Aerius, for daring to oppose himself against the Consent and Practise of the Catholik Church; which all Churches every where received. I come at last to give you thanks. For, the Book, you promis'd me, shortly after I had sent you my former Letters, was deliver'd to me. I do heer both acknowledg and thank you, that you were pleased to inlarg and inrich my Library with your Two Books. And I intreat you, begg of God for me, that the remainder of my life, which is to come, may be, rather good, then long. For as a Play so our Life, it skills not how long, but how good, how well acted. In like maner, I, wishing all hap∣piness to you, (and in that I put this, That the Reverend Antiquity of the First Ages may be in higher esteem with you, then the upstart novell device of any whosoever,) do freely promise you my help and assistance in any thing, that may, heer, concern your interest. You will pardon me, if I have spoke somwhat more freely; assuring yourself, that, though I am of a quite different judgment in some points, yet my charity, and brotherly affection toward you, is not chang'd awhit; nor by the grace of God) shall ever be. FINIS.
S. Ignatius in Epistola ad Magnesianos. . As our Lord doth nothing without his Father; so neither do ye without the Bishop; neither Pres∣byter, Deacon, nor Layman. Let nothing seem rea∣sonable to you, against his liking: For whatsoever is so, is against the Law, and offensive to God.
