A3886 R9858 11670100 48033
ARTICLES Stipulated and Required FROM OLD NICK, BY The Duke of L— A Person of great QUALITY IN FRANCE, When he Resigned and made himself over TO THE DEVIL. Translated from the FRENCH. LONDON: Printed in the YEAR 1680.
ARTICLES Stipulated and required from Old NICK, &c. MEeting in French with this strange and won∣derful Contract made with the Devil, I re∣solved to Translate it, to shew the world the Wickedness of Man, when he is given up to Pride and Ambition. The ARTICLES are as followeth I. That thou shalt give me down upon the nail, One Hundred Thousand Livres in ready Money, and one Thousand Livres every first Tuesday of the several Months in the Year.
II. That the gold and Silver thou deliverest to me, shall be currant, and of the standing value; and that it shall turn to the profit of my self, and of all those (whether Men or Women) to whom I shall give it, either upon the account of business, or as Gifts and Gratuities. III. That come from whence it will, it be coyned by the hands of men; and that it pass and be currant in what Countrey soever I shall have occasion to be. IV. That thou shalt give me power to finde and carry away Treasures, and to dispose of 'em as I shall think fit; without being obliged to go upon the place. V. That thou shalt carry me whithersoever I have a minde to go, and that thou shalt preserve me in good and perfect health, during the space of 49 Years: And if in the mean time I fall sick, thou shalt provide Medicines for my Cure. VI. That the Years be according to the Account of France, that is to say, that they consist of twelve Months, the Month of thirty and thirty one Days, and the Days of twenty four Hours; to commence this present  day of  in the Year 1675. and so forth to continue until the same day of the same Month, in the Year 1725. And that then thou shalt suffer me to dye without scandal, and accor∣ding to the course of Nature.
VII. That thou shalt cause me to be beloved of the King, the Nobility and Gentry, and generally of all both great and small, of the one as well as other Sex. VIII. That if it happen that the King (notwithstan∣ding his Majesties gracious Favour towards me) shall deny me any thing that may tend to my in∣terest or Promotion, by the suggestion of any Favourite or Favourites that intend to vie with me, or if I shall have any inclination of favour a party contrary to the will of my King, That then I shall be furnished with all the Abilities and good dispositions, all the means and opportunities that lie in thy power, for overturning the Government, and shaking the State into confusion; and that with the love and ap∣plause of the People, and without the privacy of all, but onely of my prime Agents, whom thou shalt in∣spire, and fitly qualifie for bringing about such Revo∣iutions: That in such a Plot I may be suspected by none, but by those who (to their sorrow) shall not be able to prevent me, (which will render my malice of sweeter gusto.) And that when all things are brought into the confusion thou most delightest in, that then thou shalt assist me to fish in troubled waters, and to bring off the Prize that others may strive for. X. That thou shalt learn me the Art of Poysoning. XI. That thou shalt carry me into what Country I shall desire, and make me understand the Language and Huomour of the place, so as to speak and act without an Interpreter.
XII. That thou shalt preserve me from all sorts of Acci∣dents that might befal me; and likewise from all forts of Fire-arms, as Bombs, Canon, Mortar-pieces, Grana∣does, Musquets, Fire-locks, Pistols, and all other sorts whatsoever; as also from the Sword, Dagger, Pike, Quarter-staff, and all kind of Arms in general, rendring me every way invulnerable. XIII. That I shall triumph over the Enemies of the Pub∣lick, and my own private concerns. XIV. That thou shalt give me a Ring, which whensoever put on any one of my singers, shall render me Invisible. XV. That whatsoever question I ask, thou shalt always give me a true and faithful Answer; and that as often as I shall call thee, thou shalt appear in a decent and gentle shape. XVI. That when I play at any Game, I shall always come off a winner. XVII. That thou shalt give me notice of all Plots and Contrivances against me, and afford me means to pre∣vent the same. XVIII. That if in any place I be set upon, thou shalt always be the first that comes to my assistance. XIX. That thou shalt give me Wit to talk pertinently on all subjects, and confidence to tell lies when I think it convenient.
XX. That thou shalt hinder me from being Robbed, either by my Servants at home, or others abroad, in any place whatsoever. XXI. That thou shalt give me the Universal Medicine, and tell me the Dose that is to be taken of it. XXII. That thou shalt hinder all persons, of what Sex or Quality soever, from touching this present Covenant, whether it be to read, or carry it away. XXIII. That thou shalt allow me to exercise the Duties of a good Christian, that I may be free from scandal, and under the wings of the Church procure its overthrow. XXIV. That I shall engage all sorts of persons, both of the one and other Sex, without any contradiction or re∣luctancy. XXV. That thou shalt enable me not to disappoint any Female, who shall trust to my performances. XXVI. That thou shalt teach me all Languages and Sciences in twice twenty four hours. XXVII. That thou shalt preserve me from all Courts of Ju∣stice, whether Regal, Papal, or subordinate. XXVIII. That I shall be dextrous at all such bodily Exerci∣ses I shall name to thee.
XXIX.That thou shalt give me the Herb that helpeth Memory, and that it be useful to my self and all Men and Women to whom I shall give it. XXX. That if thou fail in the performance of any the least thing contained in this present Covenant, that then it shall be void and of no effect, as if the same had never been made or agreed upon. FINIS.
