A871 11906904 50727
THREE LETTERS FROM The Lord General MONCK, Commander in Chief of the Forces in Scotland, and one of the Commissioners by Act of Par∣liament for the Government of the Army of this Commonwealth.VIZ. To Mr. SPEAKER, To the Lord FLEETWOOD, To the Lord LAMBERT. EDINBURGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts Close, over against the Trone Church, Anno Dom. 1659.
To the SPEAKER. Right Honourable, HAving received notice, that there was a Force put upon the Parliament on the twelfth of this Instant, I have sent this Messenger to your Lordship, to know whether that force; doth continue; for I am resolved by the Grace and Assistance of GOD, as a true English-man, to stand to and assert the Liberty and Authority of PARLIAMENT; And the Army here (praised be God) is very couragious and unanimous, and I doubt not but to give a good accompt of this Action to You. I have, according to your Act of the 11th. instant, being constituted a Commis∣sioner for the Government of the Army,
put out such persons as would not act ac∣cording to your Commission: I do call GOD to witness, That the Asserting of a Commonwealth is the only intent of my heart, and I desire, if posible, to avoid the shedding of Blood, and therefore intreat You, that there may be a good under∣standing between Parliament and Army; But if they will not obey Your Com∣mands, I will not desert You, accord∣ing to my Duty and Promise. Which is all at present from Your humble and faithful Servant, GEORGE MONCK. Edinburgh, Octob. 20. 1659.
To the Lord FLEET WOOD. Right Honourable, I Have sent this Messenger to your Lord∣ship, to let you know that we have re∣ceived notice, that a part of the Army have put force upon the Parliament, which they so lately called together, and owned with the greatest Testimonies of Obedience and Re∣pentance for their former Apostacie from them; I hope your Lordship will not abet an Action of such a dangerous and destru∣ctive Consequence; I know that you love the Liberty and Peace of England so well, That you will use your best Care, that At∣tempts of this nature be suppressed. I do therefore humbly intreat you that the Parli∣ament may be speedily restored to that Free∣dom, which they enjoyed on the eleventh of this Instant, Otherwise I am resolved, by the Assistance of God, with this Army un∣der my Command to Declare for them, and to
prosecute this just Cause to the last drop of my bloud; I blesse the Lord, that the Officers here are very unanimous: and for such, whose hearts fail them, or which will not act according to their Commissions from the Parliament, I having Authority as one of the Seven Commissioners appointed by Act of Parliament, Do constitute such as chear∣full for this Good Old Cause, till the Parlia∣ments pleasure be further known; And I do plainly assure your Lordship, that I was ne∣ver better satisfied in the justice of any gagement than in this: You cannot but that God hath already shewed glorious in it, and determined the this side, against Arbitrary power of ing Money without the Peoples consent first had, and the management of the Militia by any other then the Parliament. I desire your Lordship not to be deluded by the specious pretences of any ambitions persons whatso∣ever, and do not bring all the bloud that will
be shed upon your own head; My Lord, Consider how you will answer to the dreadful God for the ruine of three Nations, for to serve a lust, or to gratifie a passion: For my particular, I am ashamed of these Confusions and Changes that we have made, that we are now become a scorn and a reproach to our ve∣ry friends, and designed to Ruine by all our Neighbours. I take God to witnesse, that I have no further ends then the establishing of Parliamentary Authority, and those good Lawes that our Ancestors have purchased with so much bloud, the setling the Nations in a free Commonwealth, and the defence of Godlinesse and godly men, though of different Iudgement; And I take my self so far obli∣ged, being in the Parliaments Service, to stand, though alone, in this Quarrell, And doubt not but your Lordship, having the fear of God in your heart, will carefully consider of this matter: Which is all at present from Your Excellencies humble servant, GEORGE MONCK. Edinb. Octob. 20. 1659.
To the Lord Lambert. Right Honourable, HAving notice, that a part of the Army under the Parliaments Command, have, contrary to their duty, put force upon them; I have therefore sent this Messenger to your Lordship, to intreat you to be an Instrument of Peace and a good understanding between Parliament and Ar∣my: for, if they shall continue this Force, I am resolved, with the assistance of God, and that part of the Army under my Command, to stand by them, and assert their lawful Authority. For, Sir, the Nation of ENGLAND will not endure any Arbitrary Power, neither will any true Eng∣lish-man in the Army, so that such a Design will be ruinous and destructive; Therefore I do earnestly intreat you, that we may not be a scorn to all the world, and a Prey to our Enemies, that the Par∣liament may be speedily restored to their Free∣dom which they enjoyed on the 11. of this in∣stant. Which is all at present from Your Lordships humble servant, GEORGE MONCK. Edinburgh, Octob. 20. 1659.
