C2907 15578784 103873
ARTICLES OF PEACE Between his Sacred Majesty, Charles the II. KING OF GREAT Brittain, France and Ireland, &c. AND THE CITY and KINGDOM OF ALGIERS; Concluded by Thomas Allen Esq Admiral of His said Majesty of Great Brit∣tain's Ships in the Mediterranean Seas, &c. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Mabb, dwelling on St. Paul's Wharff, 1664.
Preface. IT is not needfull to say much concerning the late Agreement betwixt his Sacred Ma∣jesty Charles the Second, King of Great Brittain, France, and Ireland, &c. And the City and Kingdom of Algier; (The Aricles whereof are in these following Papers, Word forword Exhibited;) For certainly that Man is very little read in the World, who sees not how much this Peace imports the Be∣nefit and Security of the English Commerce, and no less the Honour of the English Nation; especially considering the start it has given us of our Powerfull Neighbours, who are still labouring under Great Trouble, Charge and Dif∣ficulty, with those People: And the Accord is yet more Glorious, if We observe the Time wherein it was made; That is to say, It was made at a Time, when the English lay patiently exposed to all the Inconveniences, which either the Fables, or the Councils of Holland could give them; Menaced in the very Channel by an open Force, and deserted in the Mediterranean after such a manner, that We are loth to make use of a Word, answerable to the Qua∣lity of the Action: The Hollanders having first invited
us into a Conjunct Engagement with them, and after∣ward not only quitting the Place by Stealth and Surprize, But invading at the same time our Rights in Guine: And yet so it is at last, That notwithstanding All These Practises, and Disappointments, We have now liv'd to see the Hol∣landers swallow their own Resolutions, by with-drawing their Shipping, and contenting themselves with the blind Passage of the North, rather then adventuring to give His Royal Highness the Lord High Admiral of Eng∣land, the Un-mannerly provocation of pressing through the Channel. And we have likewise liv'd to enjoy the fruits of that Peace which others have in vain attempted; and not only so, but to see our selves acquitted of the guilt of the late War, by a Solemn Declaration of the Government it self of Algier, and the Breach charg'd upon the Tumults and Disorders of their own Subjects: They Themselves not sticking Publickly to avow, That an Agreement with England was to them so Necessary, That they were not able to maintain an Entercourse and Correspondence with∣out it. This being the Summe and State of that Affair, gives sufficiently to understand how great a Care His Majesty hath of the Reputation and Welfare of his People, and of the True Interest of the English Crown and Nation: And it is our further happiness that the Orders and Di∣rections of so Wise and Gracious a Prince are Commit∣ted into the hands of suitable Officers and Ministers, as hath been manifested throughout the whole Course and Con∣duct of this Transaction.
ARTICLES OF PEACE Between his Sacred Majesty, Charles the II. KING of Great Brittain, France, and Ireland, &c. And the City and King∣dome of Algiers, Concluded by Thomas Allen Esq Admiral of His said Majesty of Great Brittain's Ships in the Mediterranean Seas, according to In∣structions received on that behalf from his Royal Highness the Duke of York, and Albany, Earle of Ul∣ster, Lord High Admiral of England and Ireland, &c. Constable of the Castle of Dover, Lord Warden of the Cinque-Ports, and Governour of Portsmouth, &c. Being the same Articles Concluded by Sir John Lawson, Kt. on the 23. of April, 1662. And after∣wards more Solemnly Confirm'd on the 10. of November following, and since Ratified by the Grand Signior. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Mabb, dwelling on St. Paul's Wharff, 1664.
Articles of Peace between his Sa∣cred Majesty, CHARLES THE II. King of Great Brittain, France, and Ireland, &c. and the City and Kingdom of Algiers, Concluded by Thomas Allen Esquire, Ad∣miral of his said Majesty of Great Brittain's Ships in the Mediterranean Seas, &c. I. THat from this day, and for ever for∣ward, there be a Good and Firme Peace between his Sacred Majesty the King of Great Brittain, &c. and the Bassa, Duan, and Gover∣nours of Algiers, and the Domini∣ons thereunto belonging; And the Ships, Subjects, and People on either Party, shall not do or offer any Offence or Injury to each other, but Treat one another with all possible Respect and
Friendship; And any Ships belonging to the King of Great Brittain, &c. Or any of his Majesties Subjects may freely come to the Port of Algiers, and Buy and and Sell as in former Times; And also unto any other Port that belongs to the Government of Algiers, paying the Custome of 10 per Cent, as in former Times; And no Man within the Jurisdiction of Al∣giers shall give the Subjects of his said Majesty, a bad word, or a bad deed, or a bad action. II. That all Ships, as well those belonging to his Sa∣cred Majesty, the King of Great Brittain, &c. and any of his Majesties Subjects, as those belonging to Algiers, shall freely pass the Seas, and Traffique with∣out any search, hinderance, or molestation whatso∣ever. III. That all Subjects of the King of Great Brittain, &c. now Slaves in Algiers, or any of the Territories there∣of, be set at Liberty, and delivered upon paying the Price they were first sold for in the Market; And for the time to come, no Subjects of his Majesties be bought or sold, or made Slaves of in Algiers, or its Territories. IV. That if any Ship of Tunis, Tripoli, or Sally, or any other, do bring any Ship, Men, or Goods belonging to any of the Subjects of his Majesty, the King of
Great Brittain, &c. into Algiers, or any of the Ports thereunto belonging, the Governours there shall not permit them to be sold within the said Territories. V. That any Merchant of the Subjects of the King of Great Brittain, &c. dying in Algiers, or its Territo∣ries, his Goods, or Money shall not be seized by the Bassa, Aga, or any other Minister, but remain with the English Consul. VI That the English Consul that lives in Algiers be al∣lowed a Place to Pray in, and no Man to do him, or any of his said Majesties Subjects any Wrong or In∣jury in word or deed whatsoever. VII. That in case any of his said Majesties Subjects should happen to strike a Turk, or a Moore, if he be taken, let him be punished, but if he escape, nothing shall be said to the English Consul, or any other of his said Majesties Subjects upon that accompt. VIII. That if any Ships of War of his said Majesties, shall come into Algiers, or other the Ports of that Go∣vernment, with any Prize, they may sell and dispose of it at their own pleasure, without being molested by any, and that they be not oblig'd to pay Customes in any sort; And if the said Ships of War shall want
Provision, Victuals, or any other Things, they may freely buy it at the Rate in the Market. IX That any Ships belonging to the Subjects of his Majesty, the King of Great Brittain, &c. coming into Algiers, or any of the Ports in its Territories, shall for such Goods as they sell, pay the dues ac∣cording to Custome, and the Goods they sell not, they shall freely carry on board without paying Du∣ties for the same. X. That no Ship-wrack belonging to his said Majesty, or any of his Subjects on the Coast belonging to Al∣giers, shall become Prize, and that neither the Goods be forfeited, nor the Men made Slaves, but that the People of Algiers shall do their best Endeavours, to save them and their goods. XI. That the Consul, or any other Subject of his Sacred Majesty, be not bound to pay the Debts of any other English Man unless he become Surety. XII. That no Subject of the King of Great Brittain, &c. in matter of difference shall be liable unto any other Judgement, but that of the Duan.
XIII. That the Subjects of his said Majesty in difference among themselves shall be subject to no determina∣tion, but that of the Consul. XIV. That no Merchant, nor other Subject of his said Majesties being a Passenger, in or unto any Port shall be molested, or medled with. And for the better practising of the Second Article, according to the true intent and meaning thereof, It is Agreed, that the Algiers Ships of War meeting any Merchant Ships, belonging to the Subjects of the King of Great Brittain, &c. not being in any of the Seas appertaining to his Majesties Dominions, have liberty to send one single Boat with but two Sitters, more then the common crew of Rowers; and no more to enter the said Merchant Ship but the two Sitters, without the express leave of the Commander of the said Merchant Ship; That upon producing unto them a Pass under the Hand and Seal of the Lord High Admiral of England, the said Boat do presently de∣part, and the Merchant Ship to proceed on his Voy∣age and although the Commander of the said Mer∣chant Ship produce no Pass from the Lord High Ad∣miral of England; yet if the Major part of the Ships Company be Subjects to the King of Great Brit∣tain, &c. the said Boat shall presently depart, and the Merchant Ship proceed freely, and so though there be Strangers, and their Goods on board, they
shall be free, both they and their Goods; And any Ship of his Majesty, the King of Great Brittain, &c. meeting with any Ships of Algiers, if the Com∣mander shall produce a Pass firm'd by the Chief Go∣vernours of Algiers, and the Major part of the Ships Company be Turks, Moores or Slaves, then the Algier Ship to proceed freely, and though there be Strangers and their Goods on board, they shall be free, both they and their goods. That presently after the Signing and Sealing these Articles by the Governours, or Chief Authority of the City and Kingdom of Algiers, all Injuries and Damages sustained on their part shall be quite taken off and forgotten, and this Peace shall be in full Force and Virtue. And for all Damages and De∣predations that shall be afterwards done and com∣mitted by either side before notice can be given of this Peace, there shall be full Satisfaction made, and whatsoever remains in kind be restored. That if any Grievances happen on either side, it shall not be Lawfull to break the Peace till Satisfa∣ction be denyed. Signed and Sealed in the Presence of the Great God, Octob. 30. 1664.
This following Article Added, 30. October 1664. THat the English Consul, upon any Breach or Difference between his most Excellent Majesty, the King of Great Brittain, &c. and the Governours of Al∣giers shall have Free Liberty when he plea∣seth to depart to his Own, or any other Country; And that the English Consul shall be permitted to chuse his own Druggerman, and that when the Consul departs, he shall carry with him all his Servants and Goods whatsoever, without the least Interruption, or Hinderance; And further, that he may freely go on board of any Ships in the Road, and have the liberty of the Coun∣try.
The Translate of a Certificate Subsigned by the Governours of Algiers, acknowledg∣ing the Breach of the late Peace betwixt his Majesty of Great Brittain, &c. and the said Governours to have been the Act of their own Subjects. THese are to Certifie that We who have hereunder Subsign∣ed, do acknowledge that the Breach of the Peace between His most Excellent Majesty, the King of Great Brittain, France, and Ire∣land, &c. And Ʋs of Algiers, was Committed by Our Subjects; for which We have Drowned One, Ba∣nished Another, some Others fled to Escape our Justice, and divers have been Imprisoned to give Sa∣tisfaction in part to His said most Excellent Majesty. Signed and Sealed  the 30. of October 1664.
