C4627 10861922 46148
A COLLECTION OF Several POEMS and VERSES, Composed upon Various OCCASIONS, By Mr. WILLIAM CLELAND, Lieutenant Collonel to my LORD ANGUS's Regiment. Printed in the year M. DC. XCVII.
A COLLECTION OF Several POEMS and VERSES, &c. An ADITION to the Lines of Hollow my Fancie; Writen by him the last Year he was at the Colledge, not then fully 18 ears of Age. IN conceit like Phaeton I`ll mount Phoebus Chair; Having ne`re a Hat on, All my Hair`s a burning, In my journeying, Hurrying through the Air, Fain would I hear his fiery Horses neighing; And see how they on foamy Bitts are playing; All the Stars and Planets I will be surveying; Hollow my Fncie, whither wilt thou go? O from what ground of Natue▪ Doth the Pelican, That self devouring creature, Prove so froward,
And untoward, Her Vitals for to restrain! And why the subtile Fox, while in death▪ wounds is lying▪ Doth not lament his pangs, by howling and by crying▪ And why the milk white Swan doth sing when she's a dying Hollow my Fancie, whither wil ? Fain would I conclude this, at least make an Essay, What fimilitude is, Why Fowls of a feather, Do ock▪ and fly together, and Lamb know Beasts of prey; How Natutes Alcbymists, these small labor ous creature Acknowledge still a Prince in ordering thei matter And suffers none to live, who slothing los their Feature Hollow m Fancie, whither wili thou go? I'm rapt with admiration, when I do ruminate, Men of one Occupation, How each one calls him brother, Yet each invieth other and yet still intimate; Yea I admire to ee, some Natives farther sundred Then Aipodes to us, is it not to be wondred In Myriads ye'll find of one mind scarce a hundred Hollow, &c.
What multitude of Notions,▪ doth perturb my Pate, Considering the motions, How Heavens they are preserved,▪ Ad this World served, in Moisture, Light, and Heat: f one Spirit sits the outmost ircle turning,▪ Or if one turns another, continuing in jour∣neying, f Rapids circles motion, be that which they call burning; Hollow my Faneie, whther wilt tho go? Fain also would I prove this, by considering, What that which you call Love is, Whither it be a Folly, Or a Melanchoy, ot some Heroick thing: in would I have it proved, by one whom Love hath wounded, nd fully upon one, their desire hath founded, hat nothing else could please them, tho the World were rounded▪ Hollow m Fancie, whither wilt thou go? To know this Worlds Center, Height, Depth, Breadth, and Length, Fain would I adventure, To search the hid Attractions, Of Magnetick actions, and Adamantick strength:
Fainwould I know if in some losty Mountain▪ Where the Moon sojourns, if there be Trees or Fountain, If there be Beasts of prey, or yet fields to hunt in, Hollow m Fanie, whither wilt thou go? Fain would I have it tried, by Experiments, By none can be denied, If in this bulk of Nature,▪ There be voids Ies or greater▪ or all remains compleat: Fain would I know if Beasts have any Reason▪ If Falcons killing Eagles, do commit  Treason If fear of Winters want, makes Swallows fly the Season Hollow, &c. Hollow my Fancie, hollow, stay thou at home with me,▪ I can thee no loger follow, Thou hast betray`d me. And beway`d me, it is too much for thee: Say, say at home with me, leave off th lofty soaring Stay thou at home with me, and on th Boks be poing For he that goes Aboad, layes little up in storing Tho`s welcom home my Fancie, welcome ho to FINIS.
A Mock POEM, Upon the EXPEDITION Of the Highland-host: Who came to destroy the Western Shires, in Winter 1678. WHen Saturn shakes his rostie feathers; When Russia Garments are rough leathers; When Dutch Dames over Stoves do chatter; When Mn drv-shoo`d travere the water: When Popish parti invocats, Both Saints, and Angels, when their pas, While they want Weights of Air and Earth, May be repa'd with water's birth: E`re Trouts begin to move their finnes, While Fans give place to black dog skines;
Which at that time as some supposes, Are fittest farr for Ladies noses. Which tho their natural Sent be brusk, They`re help with Cas dirt, and with Musk: Because that Ss  endeavours, To take their Marks from evil hours. It was not long from tha ime, when The chfe and tossed Western▪men, Were dissipat at Pictland fells, By Devils, Drummonds, and Dlzells. When Veals for Rariies are sold, And when young Ladies▪ catcheh cold▪ This season sure works strange Effects, Uon their naked breasts and necks. But pardon me, it is ill breeding, To touch the Modes of Ladies Cleeding,▪ Hence I`ll not do the like again, Tho they wear nothing but their skin. Comets raign`d above the City, Preachers prison`d without pitty; Some knu up or wearing Gunes, Wine was druken out in Tunes. Next with blasphemic and rude speeches, New coin`d scutvies vex the Leidges. Ladies Heckl'd, and Lords Horn`d, Some for lending Money scorn`d: Men fin`d for preventing murders, Princes owning Bishops Orders: Curats wearing by their Gowns, Old Frenh Taylours ruling Towns.
Tho it be so, ye need thik ought o`t, They best deserv`d, who dearest ought it▪ Self Defenders termed Rebels, Proclamations, grievous Libels▪ Majors turning Hang mens mates, Sentries watching  gares. Lawyers words, their Writs bewraying, Councils Acts, their Oaths betraying▪ Bods imposed, prisons mended, Men suspect who nev`r offended. London Letters all revolving, Placuit each Querie solving. Councils Acts amounting to, What ever Parliaments could do.▪ Lords and Souldiers Sundays work, To robb the people of the Ark▪ Commons chas`d from Pleughs and Harrow, Gentry charged with Laborrows; While none appeareth for to swear, That they their goods or bodies ear. Yet the Gentry must enact them, Or else they'll horn them, & then take them. Plundering and Desolations, Men imprison'd for Relations; Horse in hazard of Thieves holls, Because they were not learn`d when Foals, To answer, and to tell whose aught them, It. seems they wanted Art who taught them. Gentlemen o Good Account. Might not think it an affront,
To sit with Lousie Rogues together, Yea stand and serve their Foot-mens Brother, New made Earls, and some that Are judged, nihil signifiat, With a pack of Redshank-Squires; Eating up the Western-shires, Plundering without restraint Even persons known for innocent; Stewes and Masses nothing checked, Nought but  rebuked; Women of their shame bereaft, It's feard a Highland brood be left, Who afterward may starve for want, While thus they make the Victual scant; Clergies Acts, and Cannon Law, Put on cartes for horse to draw▪ Cables towes, Ligure chists, Manackles for thumbs and fists, Powder, Lead, Spads, and Shovels, To cover the dead with turffes and muiles▪ And to cast up some sheughs and Ditches, Steel capes, Armour and Buff Breetches; Cords for wreaking peoples throats Germans for contriving plots. Durks to stop in Musquets end, Pray, What may all this portend? With all such other Provinent, As was to Greece by Xerxes sent. And if ye please all such provision▪ A was for Godfey s Expedition:
But here my fancie`s at a stance, Are weto have a Warr with France Yet I`m inclined to relate, What things concerning Church and Stae▪ Was gravely by the Squire narrate, Before the Host when they were met. What was the cause o such conventions? What was their aim and their intentions? VVhat was that grievous Proclamation, That did affront the King and Nation? We need not stay to tell the place, Where they were charg`d to met his Grace: Because their slight was from the North, It was near to the River Forth. I must commend their Trust and Faith, For in an instant, as some saith: They met together all misguided, With Drift, and Rain, toss'd blash and blyned. But to discrive them Right surpasses, The Art of nine Parnassus Lasses; Or ucan, Virgil, or of Hora Of Ovid, Homer, or of Flors, Yea sure such sights might have inclin'd, A Man to naueat at Mankind; Some might have judg'd they were the creatures▪ Call`d Selfies, whole customes and featues, Paracelsus doth discry, In his Ocult Philosophy, Or Faunes, or Brownies, if ye will, Or Satvres, come from Atlas Hill
Or that the three tongu`d Tyke wa sleeping, Who hath the Stygian Door a keeping: Their head, their neck, their leggs and thighs, Ae influenced by the Skies. Without a clout to interrupt them, They need not strip thē when they whip them; Nor loose their Doublet, when they're hang`d, If they be miss`d, it`s sure they`re wrong'd, This keep their bodies from corruptions, From fistuls, tumours and eruptions; Unless they come to Towns perhaps, They must not miss their bit of claps. They are so gent, they will not want it, The Men who knows them best will grant it. Their Durks hang down between their leggs, Where they made many slopes and geggs; By rubbing on their naked side, And wambling from side to side. But those who were their chief Commanders, As such who bore the pirnie Standarts; Who led the Van, and drove the Rear: Were right well mounted of their Gear: With Brogues, Trues, and pirnie Plaides, With good blew Bonnets on their Heads: Which on the one side had a flipe, Adorn'd with a Tobacco pipe. With Durk, and Snap-work, and Snuff-mill, A bagg which they with Onions fill, And as their strick Observers say, A Tpe Horn fill`d with Usquebay.
A flasht out Coat beneath her plaides, A Targe of timber, nails and hides; With a long two handed Sword, As good's the Countrey can affoord Had they not need of bulk and bones, Who fights with all these Arms at once, It`s marvelous how in such weather, Ov`r hill and hop they came together, How in such stormes they came so farr, The reason is, they're smeat`d with Tar. Which doth defend them heel and neck, Just as it doth their Sheep protect; But least ye doubt that this is true, They`re just the colour of tar`d Wool: Nought like Religion they retain, Of moral Honestie they`re clean. In nothing they`re accounted sharp, Except in Bag-pipe, and in Harpe. For a milobliging word, She`ll durk her neighbour ov`r the boord. And then she'll flee like fire from flint. She'll scarcely ward the second dint; If any ask her of her thrift, Foresooth her nain sell lives by thife. When this thrice savage Crew was met, And in their Ranks and Order set; Then straight before them came the Squire, Like to Aeneas in attire. And in his hand he had a Lance, Which some said he had us'd in France,
Some said he learn`d his warlike Fates, With Grand Signleor beside the Straights. Some in Russia, some in Polland, Some in Flanders, some in Holland; Some in Denmark, some in Spain, Some with Gustavus of Swedden. When with Scots Lads he did daunt, Each Prince that did about him Vaunt, But others, who were better read, Said he storm`d Cities in his bed: He walk'd in State, tho somewhat wide, Ye know what makes some Gallants stride. He stood upright, tho shoulders slopt, Tho brans and leggs krain'd and clop, Tho bumm and belly were best boulked. They all admir`d who on him looked. But here I scruple to rehearse, Or put that blank into my Verse; Which in his throat some old wound makes, Occasioned by some mistakes: When in his Lodging he did bide, It`s said he call`d one oft a side. To ask of beatten Buttons prices, Of Silver work or strange divises: Tho she be some what old and teugh, She`s a Scots Woman hough enough; If of his Counteance ye ask, It would be a difficult task, For a Phisoganist to tell, Which of three doeth most excel;
Bacbus, Venus, Mars, to wit, Foresooth it were a kittle put: But some there are, who think it be, A just Commixion of the three. Others who know his old projections, Says wars is least in his affections; While with such Grace and State he stood, All the bulk of Highland Brood, Admir`d their chance and their mishap, When that he did not lift his Cape, While he was speaking to the Laird, Had it not been for the Life-guard, She would have durkt him, when she saw, He keeped so the Laird in aw: The whole Crew stair`d him in the face, Some asked if it was his Grace; And other some who knew nothing. Did ask if he could be Sir King; On every hand they did enquire, Till they were told it was the Squire. He was afflicted with a cough, Which vexed him right sore, although He crub`d it as much as he could, And got good Syrups when he would; Yet it brake out with such a force, As mar`d the Ranks o Highland horse; When he had cought and cleans`d his throat And from his mouth the phlegme had put, He paus`d a little, then he spake, And then drew forth the Councils Act:
Which is not safe for to insert, It`s known whose pockets made him smart▪ E`re to his eading he began, He cry`d keep quiet every man, Because they did not understand, He hosted and lift up his hand, And made signs they might hold still, Till he declar`d his Graces will; For all the pains that he had taken, Yet instantly he was mistaken, For these ignoramus fellows, Thought he desir`d to hear their bollows; With one consent they raised a cry: Which echoed: from Sky to Sky, That so the Clouds did  and , Then presently ell snow land drift: The Squire this dumped stood amused, And glour`d as if he were confused, While they redoubled their cryes, While hai and snow did blind his eyes, His wounded neck was nipt with froast, He looked like some wight or ghoast: Some thought that he might have expired, Had it not been they partly tired: And partly stoped when rebuked, By her ain Laird, yea some were knocked. The Squire , gapt, and drew his breath, Like a Game Cock, then cursing, sayeth, I wish I never may do good, If I do like this Highland Brood.
When all their tumults were appeased, The Squire himself was somewhat eased: He read the Order, Act, and Bond, Tho much difficultie he found, His Judgement being somewhat Jumbl`d, His brains with shouts and yelloughs tumbled: He rested till he was composed, Till brains, tongue, breath, were well disposed; In Oratrie to shew his Worth, Like Catilina or Jugurth: When he had rested to content, He ros and gave a complement, But short as Souldiers use to do, And then brevi manu he falls too; And sayes, it`s like ye`ll ask the cause Which at this time together draws: Such multitudes in Winter frosts, An unfit time to levie hosts; Might this not all have been foreborn, Till y had till`d and sawen your Corn: Then would ye come in Troups, and Fleets, ike Tartars or like Moscovites; And done whatever he had pleased, Attila`s title would received: Tho I might all these knots un loose, With it`s thought fil, and so to close, et I will all you doubts disjoint, nd answer unto every point. It`s known what mischief in times past, Southern shires, and in the West:
What to Haugh-head and hill-side fleetings, Rebellious and seditious meetings. Which by the Council is declared, By wholesome Laws, and well prepared, To be Seditions sole foundation And this is all their Occupation: They rail the Clergie and the State, And hurts their Fame at a strange rate, They say it`s Alamode the Year, For Noblemen the Horns to wear. And that the most part are too readie▪ To wait upon their Neighbours Ladie, They rail on Courtly Lady`s carriage As if they did not honour Marriage: Since they are turn`d so highly rude, It`s known to whom they do allude, As if that Word were not▪ within, The compass of their Bible`s skin; There should not be an evil speaker, Of peoples Prince, but what the Mecke, Are they of that, they never heedlit, As if they never heard nor read it: They say we`r murderers of the Saints▪ Court Parasites, gross Sycophants; That Prelats are related, sure, Unto the Babylonish Whore; Yea they`r alledging that his Grace, Must to his Ladies wit give place; Then this will follow, I suppose, She drags the whole ware by the Nose.
It`s frequently among them told, That Lawyers Rules, are Leidges Gold: And for a Proof, they cite a Process, Of Melvil with the Earl of Rothess: And of his Grace, with th' Earl of Twidsdale, And some of lat, with Will of Clidsdale. Tho now he`s hectored by ilk, Even from his Grace, to Castle milk; And that`s but Just, for he before, Catch`d his own Friends in that same bore: `s known he would have interdited, But he was sorc`d with shame to quite it: Now he`s rewarded for such pranks, VVhen he would pass, it`s told he Janks: or information they prevail, VVith those who made the last appeal; hey have contriv`d rebellious Books: hose paper well might serve the Cooks, o sing their Poultrie I dare swear, thousand or three hundered Year: s Napthali, of much reputed, y Hang-man, that was refuted: hink his yre he had deserved, he his Answerer had served; the same rate he serv`d the first, e sham`d us all, he never durst: d Apologetick Relation, d Gilbert Burnet`s Refuration, hich he durst never yet red argue, found it easier to argue
With Ladies, and Ill tell you too, He hath some other thing to do; For he hath left Pindarick Rhime, In writing Meoirs, spends his time. Damascus Altar, and Lex Rex, And thousands more the people vex, Got from Buchannan, now he`s gone, Let Papists curse him, for I`m none; I never so could love their wayes, As keeps Lent`s Nights▪ farr less its Dayes. To answer all their Books we tyred, We intercommun`d them▪ and fired; Yet I`m afraid for all our pains, That their Seditious Seed remains, With other Pamphlets stuff d with Lies, Like Mitchels Ghosts and Tragedies, And Answers to Oyas Covenanters, Where they like Witches and Inchanters, Even things to come presume to tell, And placeth chief Rulers in Hell; Tormenting Belzebub with fear, Least some of them usurp his chair: And other some pervert his laws, And Arbitrarly judge each cause: Yet I am fixed in Opinion, He`s absolute in his Dominion; Neither will he yield his place, When both comes there that`s term`d his Gr Now to uch meetings runs in flocks, Men with Hats, Swords and Cloacks:
Yea, some with great Cocks on their Hats, Pearl`d Sleeves, and Lac'd Gravats, Behaving well in every Gesture, Nea in Ridding Gear and Vesture. If they imagine ought to do, They`ll have their Hulster Pistols to. Ye are informed what a sture, Innes got at Lilsly Mure; And Sharps Lifeguard, how they in Fife, Were in the hazard of their Life; Where all the Guard did flee or smart, By of their Number a third part: Yea, surely they might been devouted, Had it not been they were secured, By such a Man as Master Bruce, Who yet for fear did keep his house: Tho Silver Plate, Sharps Guard did plunder, With Horse and Cloaths, I think no wonder, For a pack of Tinkler Fellows, Will steal tho they should get the Gallows. And at their Meetings as some say, They'r still in Armes in Galloway: And now with Hume, tho he be wicked, They bell the Cat, and him have tricked: There ye may see as hansome Men, As I when drest by her ye kenn; Tho Men should come in such a case, would not valu`d a Traes Ace. But wives with clubs and cudgels, save us, would affright an Old Gustavus:
They give Communions and Baptizes, And convocats with their surmises, The Leidges without Law and Order; They haunt the Inland and the Border: Yea, they`l perform a private Marriage, Who would connive at such a Carriage? But thir last words did raise his passion, He hoasted, as it was his fashion, He coaghed neat to Expiration, As he had got the last Citation From grim Death, the king of Terrours; He griev`d when he thought on their errous. He made signs for his Ligure Coat, And Balsome to anoint his Thcoat; For some good Drink to wash his Mouth, For he was like to choak for drowth: He got of Beer a full bowl Glass, Which got bad Passage at his Hasse▪ His Throat was so to excess dry▪ It spung`d it up e`re it got by: He got the other drink, and sayeth, Have at ye yet if I had Breath. When that his Heart and Wind-pipes settles, He rose as he had sit on Nettles: He hasted to tell out the rest o`t, To handl' hotly is the best o`t. He had his passion overcome, And gave a great silentium, Placing his hands on both his haunches, Gave in his Speech in several branches.
And sayes, I would be well content, Because there`s some thats ignorant To tell ye of supream , From which flows honour and preferment: On which our properties are founded, Our Laws and Liberties are grounded, As sole power for decyding Questions, And putting stops to hot Contestions; But since it is a sacred thing, Not to speak rashly of a King. I'l tell ye when and where ye`le get it, Scholastickly and learn'dly treated; In the Trone Kirk when Annan prayes On Sabbaths, and on Holy dayes, If I mistake not, he ne`re misses When the Kings Majesty he blesses; What power how absolute and great, The King has over Church and State▪ Yet Presbyterians never stands, To violate the Kings Commands, Yea just as if they could defy him, His due Allegiance they deny him; His Grace who is so much concerned, To see the Kingdom right governed; To see each thing in order put, Each Law and Statute execute, To see that Schismaticks be checked, Least the True Clergie be neglected; His Grace I say will never sit With such Affronts, he`l ne`re permit;
That such irregular Practisers, Shold pass without some Catechisers. It nicks him hearer than his Life, Yea, nor his Conscence, or his Wife: I you assure he cannot bide it, He`l either end it, or decide it: Since to such Arrogance they`r mounted▪ He will not see the King afsronted: Yea, tho his Grace should endeavour, The patience of the Lord Strathmore, Who if he had been in such a ash, as If he had been so dasly rash, as He, who gave him the povocation, Even for thy Heart, or thy Foundation, Thou dae no offer to rescent it, Blood and Wounds might made`s tepent it: Tho in patience he exceed Socraes, and all we read: If the King's Credit be at stake, Some Course sfectual he must take. It`s like ye`ll say, there`s something lurking, That there`s some other thing a working: Some Powder pt, or strange Contriving, Within his Grace`s Brains is hiving: But I declare, I know nothing. Of his Iention or Design▪ Whatever some may vainly boast, They know what mov`d to call this Hoast: Yet doth his Grace it so conceal, That he`ll to no Man it reveal:
He keep`st so closs I cannot show it, He will not let the Angels know it, Yet I imagine, I may say it, Tho I tell you, ye`ll keep it quiet. His Grace`s Courtship is more pusl'd, Than Regal Credit`s mar`d or mus'd. If he had granted Libertie, As was propos`d to Presbytrie, The Clergies conjunct might have foil`d him, And as it was, almost urncoyl`d him: E`re of his Interest ought he ine, He`ll try the most severe designe; He will not plainly tell what led him, Says dev`l be in the breast it bred in; His Grace knows Presbytrie as well, As Besie doth the Privy Seal: He knows well how to loose their knots, For he was once on all their Plots, By Vowes and Bonds was tyed to them, He knew the better to undoe them: And if ye think this cannot true be, The Truth thereof I can let you see; It is no Fancie, nor no Fable, He was concern`d at the Green-table; Which I can grove, if that I need it, n Burnet`s new penn`d Race ye`ll read it. Now I have showen some Cause and Reason, That we are here, it`s suspect Treason; For all the relats, as we hear, Are in such a panick fear,
They know not how, nor where to creep to, They must be guarded when they sleep too: The wiser men I do repute them, For their own Guns are like to shoot them; Its hard to bide the hard reproaches, That some of them gets from their Coaches. As for the harshness of the Season, I can give a sufficient Reason, For these who`s duk't over Lug and Horn, In snow or Dubbs as soon as born; More boasterous Weather may endure, Than might their Horse and Nolt devout: This Season strongest Storms still yeelds, They'l not have power to keep the Fields: So we shall catch them by the Neck, If they`l not bow, we'le cause them break: As for your labour neyer regard. it, For ye to full shall be rewarded: Ye`le get more booty by your Durking, Than might surpais full two years working, For there are routh of Geese and Hens, As fat as ever flew on pens; Turkies, Sheep, Nolt and Horse, If ye be hindred take by force, Cloaths o Linning, Wolling, Silk, Butter Cheese, Bread and Milk, Beer and Ale, and good salt Beef, And all that may engadge a Thief: Armour, Money, and some Gold; We shall them raze from house and hold:
There's something yet I have forgotten, Which ye preferr to roast and sodden▪ Wine and wastels I date say, And that is south of Usequebay, Yea, there is Spanish Leaf enough, As good as ever was mill`d in snuff▪ I hope the`s many here to day Who with a mirtie heart will say, Now we have got a fair occasion, And fitt for to revenge our Lesione We have sustain`d, goe to and rise it Wee`ll not gett such if yee refuse it Tho there be some men that may blame her▪ Yet they`ll be far in wrong to shame her. I think the three great doubts be solved, And yee contented and resolved That yee may be the better hearted▪ I`ll start each doubt that may be started: Its like, that some may fall a shrinking And pussl`d be while they`r a thinking! That those who here Commanders are Are not well Verst in fates of ware, But thats a silly supposition, For we`l not meet with opposition, And if that were yet for commanding Doubt yet nought while I am a standing, A copper Guinzie for their Feed For I am a able hand indeed And if we had such expectations: One of his Graces near relations,
Give his assistance for a word▪ would, Who eat things pactice with his Sword could▪ In sixtie six he prov`d as stout as, And bold as any of the Rout was▪ He level`d equal, when he shot too, So that his Hoe luggs bullets got too▪ Was he not in a grievous peril, VVhen hot lead did his Horse luggs quarrel. It`s like ye`ll think if ye steal oo much, And with your Durks the people touch: If the Coury be to excess wrong`d, Ye`ll be knut up like Doggs, and hang`d: Tho there be many of the mind, That Hanging is good of your kind; The like of that should not demure you, It`s not be so, I shall assure you: Your Order is so vast and large, It will defend you like a Targe▪ And for xample, I`ll you tell, Of my Brother▪ Old Dalzel: How he caus`d shoot an Innocent, Because he would not speak, anent Things that he neither heard nor knew, Ye see he`s never question`d now. It`s like that some of you may spear, VVherefore his Grae is not come here: To start such doubts, is too like Treason, Yet I`ll presume to give a Reason: His Grace he canot stire a foot, He`s so oppressed with the Gout:
Altho his Gout were somewhat ased, Yet he might be Dilematized, As to his Lady▪ what were best, To leave her East, or bring her VVest; To leave her East, would not be Right, She`ll wearie in the VVinter Night, To bring her VVest, would mend but little, For Highland Lairds are very kittle. Altho his Grace do stay a home▪ Ye`ll say his Neighbour might have come: He`s not so closs ty`d to his VVie, But he behoov`d to wait on Fife: To press the Band, and them redact, To Order, by the Council`s Act; In which Sre, he as some relate, Behav`d himself at such a Rate, That by his Care, and Diligence, A Gentleman was at xpence: In Oratrie to rack invention, And shamefully lost his intention, For as it`s aid, he was put out, Because he could not solve a Doubt, His Countenance was somewhat broken, Because he knew no how to slocken: But here`s enough of this already, Because it doth concern a Lady: VVho, tho she aged be, and grown is, Hath made good use of what her own is: Ye need not doubt him, or he's Loyal, He`s grown without remisness Royal,
Which clear appears, and now is p out, Since Lesly Families are cast out, Tho these who were the chief Agentes: In sixty ix, ae now Repenters, And are discourted for reward, That`s nought hi Grace is our safe guard. And now I`le give you my advise, And look to it if ye be wise, Since that I hear that Rebels do Haunt about the High lands too, once their Dtrine their get rooting Then farewell Thift, the best of Booting, And this y see is very clear, Dayly experience makes it appear; For instance lately in the Borders Where there was noght but Theift and Mu∣ders Rapine, Cheating and Resetting▪ Slight of hand fortuns getting▪ Their designation as ye ken Was all along the taking men; Now Rebels prevails more with words Then Drawgouns, does with Guns and Sword▪ So that their bae preaching now, Makes the  keep the Cow, Better then Scots or English KINGS Could do by Kiling them with strings, Yea those who were the greatest Rogues Follows them ov'r hills and Boes, Crying for Prayers and for Preachi, For thy`l now har none others eaching▪
Charge you all, ye go not near them If once they you engage to hea them, There preaching easily preails; 'le pawn my Throat your trading fils, At this Discourse their tails all bobed They gave a gaunt and then they sobd, They threw there faces like Babowns They muttered and raied Sounds, It griev`d them to the very Heart To think that men and thie sould , And those last words inrg d them more Than all the Squire had said before. The Squire perceiv`d his Heart did dce For he had fall`n on this prchance, He did admire and praise the pih of`t And  and said, I hit the lit : When he saw the so much concern` He lokt as if he had Gorn`d▪ A Thousand Millions at a hoast The Whiggs he did at randome boas, When he had them to full abule And all indemniti refused He pau`d a litle, plac`d his hand Upon his mouth and o did stand, n imitation of great Jove While he did convocat the Drov Of Poets fancies▪ that he might ee that a Rogue got nought but right, When he had roll`d his bains about To see if he could ough find out,
That was mistaken or foregot, He found e had no loos`d a knot, VVich very necessar to loose is; He lifts his had, and mouh uncloses, Stood with such State and Reverence, As he had been a Court to fence, Her Nain sll shooke her naked Breech, For she was tyred with his speeches; She would rr rathr had a irrle, Of an Aquaviae Barrel, But he some patience extorted, By promissing that he should short it. And sayes, ye will make inquiry, For the Ground and Reaon why, The Primat, ho was still so eagare, To cleanse the Kirk with Sword and Dger▪ Is not come here to give his Blessing, Ye`ll wonder that he is a missig. He cannot come to distant places, He`s troubled with so many Cases Of Conscience, which he`s still dissecting, And Court Exorbitances checking▪ As whither the Liturgie hath se formes, For Sea-dangers, an reat Stormes: If , or VVitches, Deserves in La the Sharpest touches, If Men for Reason should be pn'd. VVithout informing of their mind: VVhither its best for Edinburgh Lasses, o aunt Conventicles, or Maes.
owes and Covenants obges His Majesie and all his Leidges, Whether or no the late rescinding, Did qe c off suh Oaths from binding f it were rigt, such Bonds were tor, f those did right who did conm To Prelates, who the other day Own`d publick Resolion, Way▪ Whether since that some Remonstrator▪ re gain'd by Ruls, Wiles and Fla▪ f their Indulgene and such things, ecures them uder Prelates Wi: Which Peace and Ease to them provides, With Stipends, Tyhes, with Manse and Glibes, f such like plots will break  strength, f we`le qui raze them at the length; Whether its best for Men and Ladds, o haunt  or Bawds▪ Whether or not  wa f bet▪ To put some Rebels to their Rest? After they had got a Remit: Whether or not i be most fit, o conceal Deaths of murder`d Babies? Whether or no the Clergie Rabbies, ay give Commissions to marrie ho private, one of which I carie; ut Gentlemen I cave your padon, Sweff of Love my Heart is hard on, ill by h featres I m confounded, I tink on her, my heart▪ woundd:
Then down he shrunk like one that faint, When deadly wounds the Leeches taint, When stocks that are half rotten lowes, They burn best, so doth dry broom kowes Her naine sell thought the speech was ended, Their cryes arose, the shouts ascended, Tho Epilogie and Perroration Did want that made no hesitation, With one consent they raised Applaudo, Till every hill resounded Laudo. When this was done their Ranks were broken, Some ran for drin their drought to slocken, Some for Sack to help their Esquire, For he was plunged in Desire: Pipes were playing, Drums were beating, Some sizeing from their fellows getting? Some were chasing hens and coks, Some were loosing horse from vocks, Some with snapwarks, some with bowes, Wre charging Reers of Toops and Ewes, Their stomacks so on edge were set, That all was Fish came in the net; Trumpts sounded, Skeens were glanceing, Some were Tonal Cowper danceing, Some cryed, here to her Laird and Lady; e to he Moher and her Daddie, And Sir King too, if the Laird please, Then up with Plaids and scarts her Thighs, There swarms of vermine, and sheep aids, Delights to lodge beneath the Plaids,
For they like not in froie VVeather To sit upon her open leather, Her nae sell lapp and clap her narse, More like a Mokie, nor like ars. Some were stealing, some were riveing: ome were Wives and La gieving, ome`s teeth for cold did chack and chatter, ome from plaids were wringing Water: ea, to be short, moe different postures▪ sewed on Hangings▪ Beds or Bolstures, oe various actings, modes and Stances, han`s read in Poems or omances; f some had seen this grand confusion, hey would have thought it a delusion, ome Tragedie of dismal Wights, r such like enchanted sighs. Heralitus if he had seen, e would have luther`d out his Een: he would gone dast. r elfe with laughing iven his chaft; ven such as might hav understood them, id think their senses did delude them. o leave them here I think its est, hey`re charg`d to march into the West, ow they behaved when come there, ow neither friend nor fo did sparc, hat plunder they away did bear, e partly afterwards shall hear▪ ecause some will be curious, o know how madly furious.
They prov`d against the publick flee, Which at Barn doors and midings meets, How each Rk by them abued, Wat be astly samles tricks they used; I hope to give a short narratio, Grounded on the Inforation, The heavy beer and sad complaint Which to the  was sent, By that poor and tossed shire▪ When the Committe sat at Ai: The man who was Commi, Was Grave Sag, Po`d and Moderat He gave a pect Information And Instapes for his Probion, It is the best we cn affoord. We'l strive to give it Word by Word We need not tell how he go throw, The swarmings of the Red sank Gre, Or what great hazard he was in too E're he the Town of Air could win to▪ It is  fo our intent, To tell that he was theither sent, That he got there and him behaved According as the counrey craved, When he aives, his bard he es, Put new sk tockings o his lies, nd put on shoes of Turkie Leather, As good as e`re tholl`d wind or Weather, He culd not walk on with his Boos, Because they did coak his Coots,
His hands and face he wash'd and dighted His lac`d Grava he caus`d be righted, His Knots and Ruff was right fine too, He caused bring a lass of Wine too, To keep his  from maing, For great mens look are very ▪ He  and owdered hs head too, And in his and he took a Red too, Went to the Gla and saw all fited Then went he o ad was admit He bow`d with hmble reverence▪ And saying,  pleas your EXELLENCE With patience to lend you Ear To our complaint and heavie bar, We`le be puted in a miss If we but ak of grievances, Its ue w are not gnorant, That ye by Order here are sent; And that ye are , Te Westren  to , We know his G does you allow, In several thing thats acted now Tho he be no sole Head and Rector, He`s like to turn a Lord Protectr, The last we ad, just us so , When he caus`d some subscrive the , I say the Tende, lk and shme on`, For I can neve keep  name on`; We thought his Gra would e`er given orders To commit rapi▪ Thiets and Murders
At that rate they're now committed, He never was so shallow witted, For truly, they more cruel catrie, Than ever Frenchmen under Marie, Or Spaniards under Ferdinando did, O French▪ when Duke of Guise commanded▪ Yea they more savage far than those were, Who with Kollkittoch and Montrose were, And sixtie times they`re worse than they Whom Turner led in Galloway, They durk our Tennents, shames our Wives And we're in hazard of our Lives, Tey plunde horse, and them they loaden▪ With Coverings, Blanket, sheets and Plaidin With Hooding gray, and worsted Stu, They sell our Tongs for locks of snuff. Tey take our Cultors and our soaks, And from our doors they pull the locks They leave us neither shoals nor paids, And takes away our Ion inlaids, They break our pleughs, ev`n when they` workin We dare not hinder them for duking; M Lords, they so harasse and wrong us: There`s scarce a pair o shoes among us▪ And for w bonnets they leave non, Tat they can get their Clauts upon If any dare refuse o give them, Thy Durk them, Srips them, & so leavs them They ipe for Arms; but all they find, Is arms with them, leaves nought behind,
s`t not a strange mistake in that, Our tankerds, and our Chamber Pot, And stool pans, should be thought Granads They take our Sadles and our Pades, hey stripe our Lecquies, ripes their Pouches, hey leave us neither Beds nor Couches, ea to be short they leave us nought, That can from place to place be brought, The Red Coats can tell them who spiers, When they with them fell by the eares VVhen that their boo they laid hold of, They had much more than I have told of, VVhere some gott wounds with sword and bal sorrie for`t th were so small, s if they could not Doe enugh, hey fall on poor mn at the pleugh, ecause they doe not understand, Their Language they`ll cut off their and, And for a proofe, I thinke I have it. Took out the hand and to them gave it Another Instance, I shall tell, n which the Irish they excell, VVhen they a poor man had Destroy`d Of meat cloathes money made him voide, They left him nought that they could take Except two horse and a corne stack, The stack they fir`d through very spyte But with the horse they would not quie, ill he some Money them did give, One half whereof they did receive,
To buy the other nought he had, Yet they so savage were and mad, While the poor man with heavie Looks, Was begging favour from these Ruikes, The horse most die without remead, They drove Lead Bullets through his head; An other instance I shall give yet, I shall be briefe and to you Leave it, When they by violence and force, Had plundered a poor mans horse, And Loaded him with his own gier, For they took more than they could bear, The poor man follow'd to releave him, Still begging that they bake would give him, But finding he could uot Prevaill, That his requests did nought avail, He slipt the branks from his horse head, For which they shot this poor man dead, Even Instantly without remorse▪ Because they could not grip the horse▪ His wife perceiv`d this Cruell deed, She clapt her hands and ran with speed, There she cry`d out as she thought good, The Bishops guiltie of this blood, The King himself can scarce be free, The Council, most of all the three, As well as these who did the fact, A vengeance come on the whole pack She pray`d, that God would charge allon them His, her`s▪ six childrens curse upon them
For giveing out such wicked Lawes, Against his people and his Cuse To gratifie the Whore of Rome, Long, Sad, and Heavie be their Doom. For all the  Rapes and Murders This Hells Crew does, are by their Orders. Tho they did neither rive nor steal, Their meat which is good Hens and Veal, The best of Bread, good Ale and Wine It ses them ill, shame on their kind; Would us destroy in a shore space, Its true, as I hold up my face, For they most have four times a day, And more at once,  clear to say, Then might  a great Coach Mare, For any half day in the Year; For sixty men or but few more The'l take up quarters for seven core, An shilling Starling we most grant, For each person that they want, And▪ six pence also they receive, For each Tail of them they have, And thus each day must be renew`d, That they take   wish they spw`d; Our Glasgow Provost its told to us With his new Acts will quite undo us That hagish headed Cawlie sure, Hath done to break us, to his power, It were an Almes-deed to hang us When we let such a Varlet wrong us,
Amongst the rest of their Trespasses They'r oft imployed in chaseing Lasses, It is too evident a token, Of this when Maidens bakes are broken Yea tho they touch them not at all, They`r like to starve for very cald For when they sit their plaids do hang by, Ye'l see from Navels down each thing fy, Such sights the Lasses cannot bide, So they mnst starve in a backside, And here ou instance I shall tell, Of what to one of rhem befell: This red shank from no good pretence, Pursued the Lass been to the spence And aiming at some naughtie deed, Pull'd up his plaid and ran with speed, She with a  in her hand, Advised him a back to stand, But he prefuming for to strugle, Occasioned a huble buble The story it is something od She Mith a Flesh▪eruik gripr his cod, So held and rag`d as made him squil And ay cry out the Deu`l the Deu`l, But getting of away he flees, VVhile blood was streading down his Thighs For severall dayes he keept his Bed And when got up he strid led From either hands they get small thanks VVho are the Authors of such panks.
VVas`t not a cunning plot and wittie, To make Killmarnoe two hours bootie, Must he not be a man of sense, And well deserves a recompense VVho fell upon that famous way, To make the Red shanks ready pay, At once to work that subtile ploy, Them to make up and us destroy. But here I'le stop, if these offend not, And only say behold the end o`t. They answered him we`l cleanse your Land If ye be clear to take the Band, He paus'd a little, drew his breath, And made a congie, then he saith: My Lords if we had got fair play, Ye had not came so soon this way, For we`r informed that ye found As great opposers to the Bond, In Clidsdale where you were before As ye do here, I do abhore, That Nations rulers should prove partial In this affair tho it be Mariiall, For Clidsdales bonders, as ye ken Are scarcely reckon`d amongst men, The umid Earle, Papist Haggs, An Ahiest Jew, to save his Baggs, And Fleeming too did prove a sot, Least he bad lost the Bishops Coat. Bedlay with Toworss and Wood▪hall, John Thomsons man, plague on them all,
There`s also other two or three, Which with Your Leave I must let be, Or else resolve to get me hence, Or spew before your Excellence: For, since I took them in my mouth, They have defil`d it so in Truth, That I was ne`re so sore agasting, To keep my Stomack from over▪ casting: We know their Overture propos`d, But that`s nought, since it was refus`d: It was repute a good Defence, Yet they lost both their Meat and Mene. I am not clear for such Politicks, Tho Statesmen, but for fear of Criticks. I`le say no more, this is the sum o`it, Let none do ill, that good may come o`it▪ We who with out Indulgince still bdes, When others runs to Muires and Hill sydes, Are first assaulted by Oppressours, Who are by fat the least : Even as so that which ye call Law, Your Lordships does the samen knaw. And this be all the good we get o`it We would not care tho we were quite o`it. We are inform`d we`re nought the better Of Some who lately wrote a Letter, Now let them drink as they have browen, if it be true, the worst`s their own. We cannot guess unto this time, What is our Fault, or what`s our Crime.
Nor any Reason to annoy us, ar lss, wherefore ye thus destroy us▪ he like is not upon Record, Nor read, that ever King or Lord, estroy`d their own, both Flock and Fleece, While harmless and living in peace, iving no provocaion, ot doing harm to any one; Had there been one in all the Land, That did oppose or yet gainstand, e might have pleaded some preence, n defence of your Violence, ut since there`s none, makes Ours alas, Be an unprecedented case, Which case is partly I conclude, ven by your Lordships understood, ho, there`s not told the thousand part, Of our afflictios and our smart, The whole no persons can express, Of all our Ruine and Distress, Altho that innocent we be, We`re plagued, & harassed as ye see, For innocence proves no defence, Against this Spait of violence, What can the great Turk order worse, Then murder, rob, and Conscience force▪ But there`s a Righteous Judge who see▪ Such who govern, and who yrannize, Who in his due time prepar`d, To give to each his own reward,
Before whose throne I hope ye, r, clear. Both great and small must all appear, Advise my Lords what than yee`ll say, For that which yee practise this day Tho we now suffer to out Loss, We hope the Lord will blesse our Cross▪ If yee have no reliefe to send us, Goe to, dispatch, eat up and end us They answer`d if yee`ll not conforme, Yee must resolve to byde the storme, His Grace hath sworn that every man, That is beswixt Bersheba and Dan, Must take the band or he`ll doe better, He`ll heat the furnace seven times hotter, At which, this good man was amaz`d, Lookt sternly upon all and gaz'd, Then made a small bow, turn`d his bake, And not one other word he spoake, VVhen he was gone they did admire, To finde the man so void of fear, So wise so grave and confident, So readie, and so eloquent, They Judg`d he was a man of Sence, That well could Defend Innocence, His countenance was very stay`d, He was not easily dismay`d▪ His personage did reptesent As much as any could be sent: In Politicks he was well seen▪ Yet Mahavile and Mazarine,
And all other Asickles he hates▪ He counts their Policies Deceits, Grand Oppressions, Tricks, Tyrannick, Countrey Plagueing, Plots, Satauicks, He was well ersed in Court Modes; In French Pavies, and new Com`d Nods; And finally, in all that can Make np a Compleat Prettie Man▪ NOW how the Red-Shanks ran away, How these behaved that did stay, How they the Halie Kirk Resorm`d, What Castles, and what Towns they storm`d, Whose Hens was slain, whose Geese murder`d▪ What great Designes by them was further`d And what great Credit to the King His Grace  by this designe: How Conventickles all were qu astit, And Schismaticks destroy`d and dasht: And how our nobles Journyed How their addresses did succeed, Art court how they did represent The countries Losse, and sad compla int, And what success therein they had, And whether it was good or bad, How they gott off and how things past, Which of ye sactions had the best, e`l hear when my Parnassus whinchie▪ Gets of Fount Cablin a pounchie, ud therewith sives her empty Tearses, And hatcht up with lumps of Verses. FINIS.
Upon the Lamentable, yet Gallant Glorious Death, of that singularly Pious, and eminently Faithfuly Servant, and truely Loyal Subjec of the King of Saints, fervently Zealous for the Interest of his Mas∣ters Glory, and otherwise univer sally well accomplished Gentleman Thomas Ker of Hayhope; Who wa cruelly murthered in a Rancounte with a Party. commanded by Co Struthers, near Crockome, a Villag upon the English Border. Anno 1678. COme all ye Hero's, come each Vertuous Each gen'rous Soul approah, come  mee Come let us meet with tears: This Fate allowes You lofty Heavens, contract your clowdy brow Turn Vapours into Tears, that we with you May mourn, and mourn again, since it is tru That he is torn from us by rapid Fate,
By so perfidious hands, at such a rate: Whom, if we well consider, we shall find Thar he his Equals have left few behind, But ah I shrink I could I surmont as far Parnassus mountain, as the highest Star, The Stgian lake: could I Devotion lay s open to Mens veiw as light of day. Could I describe true valour, true discretion: Could I on kindness put due Estimation; Then should rack my fancy, stretch my quill; That my Engine might correspond my will, Ye who with airy Quiddites vex your wit, ay by your trivials, here`s a Theme more fit: Of this brave Heroe let this doubt be tost; When deadly wounded when his blood was lost, How he, ev`n then most valourously behav`d, Shedding that blood which him of life bereav`d▪ Ye who about the Helicon resort, Leave off your canting in Romanik sort: Here is a Subject; here concern'd are ye; Pen Elegiacks; here`s a Tragedy: Here lyes a Heroe in humanly torn: Her lyes the Muses friend, who did adorn His Poems with a soaring stile: Here lyes Kindness abolish`d; here the Widow cryes; Here bowls his Kinsfolk; here his Friends hang down Their dumbled eyes, the Church doth faint and swon, For lack of him, who spent his time, his strength Into her quarrel, clos`d his day at length▪ Ye who write Annals, and all ye that treats,
Of high Exploits, and memorable Fates, Pray do not miss, record this signal Strife, It`s memorable; pen his Death and Life, That our Successors may in mourning, do What our Marmorean Hearts can not win to. When hollow silver, or pure brass doth raise The noise of War, and soundeth Heroes praie, Be not ungrate▪ Amongst the first allow To him a triple Quier; for it`s due. Ye who delight to entertain the Views Of groveling Mortals, by your specious Hews, Prepare your pencils; set some time a part; With twice thrice lively Colours help your Art Draw ye this Noble Hero on his Kees, Sending the latest Rayes of his fair Eyes Towards these Regions, where pure Spirits sing Thrice blessed Hallelujahs to their King; Spending his newest breath, in forming sounds, Not to lament the pangs of death, or wounds; But pos them foreward, while his Soul did sta Taking her last farewel of what was clay: Pray, draw in vive Characters (do not miss) These streās of blood, which frō that breast of hi Came trickling down, that these who chance to This Tragick Sight, may weep his Elegie. O Heavens! O Earth! O Floods! O roaring Sea Ye loty Mountains, Groves, and stately Trees; Ye rampant Lyons, and ye savage Bears, Ye cruel Tigers, all burst forth in Tears. Irradient Sun, fair Moon obcure your face,
Ye Minor Splendors, hold your Rayes a space: Ye soaring Eagles, that do mount on high, Conveen your subjects, raise a doleful cry, So that the Clouds alarmed by your Voice, May send you Tears to equalize our Noise. But ah I why erave we aid? since lifeless things Beggs our asistanee, numerous Tears doun srings Frō Heav`ns overcloued brows, on mous & es, Wich  posts them to he Floods and eas: Wich altogither mourning, oaring make, And make their Banks to sympathize and shke. The Clouds colliding raises hideous sounds, Whih from therocks, in mourful wisrebounds The statrs seem to disdain, to grant a smile, To dead, dull Mankind, till they mourn a while▪ The sun hides his fair face: The Moon`s ur`d The Earth`s astonish`d: Only we`re obdur`d▪ Let others pen his prais, who do soar, In thoughts sublime; I halt, aud say no more; But only thus abruptl will conclude, O hight of Kindness, Nature mild and good! O true Religions on! O Natios Lover! O soul sublimer, than rhese Heav`ns could covet! O Noble Ker! O Patern of Renown! We groan on Earth, thou wears a Heavenly Crown. FINIS.
EFFIGIES CLERICORUM OR A MOCK POEM On the CLERGIE when they met to Consult about taking the TEST In the Year 1681. When Reason wanteth Force, Shal`t be a Crime? Or make our Matters worse, To try a Ryme? By the foresaid Lieu: Col. CLELAND. Printed Anno DOM. MDCXCVII.
EFFIGIES CLERICORUM, &c. ABout the time when Coughs and Reheums Defluctions▪ cols▪ and  flgmes. mens Winde Pipes, throas and lungs, And  Glandules, hurts their tongues, About the ime when Shoot ut their feet, and ll a sleep, When Haly dayeen do inline To sacrifice the same by Wine, B riotig and suuous , Devouring butter wls nd beasts At such a rate, t its no crime, To say about the Gose mase time, Or when some English Las and Lsses, Are troubled wh Capiasses For not frequening hal Kik But meeting when the nights grow mirk, The old desease which still doth trouble, And keep the Nations in a hubble; Or when some Noblemen begins To judge o Dogs and Foxes skins. But sudden falls, and sudden rises, Fills Coffee Houses with rprises. A whelp may gape to snatch a bone, And after worrie thereupon. When Irish swearers pro & cn,
acknameras, and Pegmiton, Wih Eusts Cummin and the rest, f he blind Stenchels of that Nest Where shewing their alacity serving of his Majestie. But Willawinnle dull braind Foolls They could not play at Byas Bowls, With that dexterity an slight That men thought had fed Irish might, No, wonder I my consciences, Did scrce at Irish Evidences, For by St. Patrick of great Note, They swear a man into the plot, And by an other swear him out That all is true, ye need not doub: They need no contrediction ear, Who per eundem do not swear, Some mue the Court, could not discover Some two three Boots all England over, Who had not prostitute their fame, And cloath`d themselves with publik shame, When Provost Dick to please the Duke; As some sayes search the Statute Book, And err`d as much in Application As others did in xplanation▪ Some men must t experiments To prove the`re Knaves and Igorants, When some gives Nine Ps,  Crowns Grats, Sixpences, Shilling`s Ducadouns, To be absolv`d, fred ad protected,
When by the Haly Kk ejected. Some say its wrong men should do so, Others its right enough altho, Is Simonie, o sell such things, N plot it on the buyers brings. We do not think, them true ejections, And so may purchase our protections. Some say tho we were ne re so wise We must be sharers of the Vice Adhereing closse to the Contract Which we  make. Eah sober person sure concludes, A buyer up of tried goods, If ingly he make is paction▪ Incurres the hazrd o an action, Of cheatrie and`s a Rogue as he, Who makes the Sale so Simonie, Dirts bganers on both the hads Who Simonie right understands, Wod it not only they that grease A Bishop for a benefice But they who purchase priviledges Of Church for money, bond or pledges Commits this foulsome in discretion Whatever be some estimation:▪ Some are for bonds, Some are not willing, Uder the pain of fourty shilling To give a bond to serve the Devil, It Sotish ignorance, grosse evill To think Engadgers are made free,
For paying of a penalie. To pay a penaltie`s a checking, And punishment for bargain breaking. A bond with penalie appended, Was nev`r alternative pretended. And though it were, some cannot see, How it with Reason can agree, That Men engag`d to be Mass-hearers, Idolaters, or Surplice Wearers: Or else to pay a thousand pounds, For this they see no solid grounds; Since they who do revolve the pages, Of Sufferers in former Ages. And glours while they be like to faint, Can find no pithie Precident. Some do afsrt that foulsome facts, Are not the matter of Contracts: Though this dull and unstable birth▪ Which at this time possess the Earth, Seeks out raw shifts, and poor hen wiles, And with such trash themselves beguiles. Some think this case the matter clears, To such as foul engagements fears. Suppose a Man should make a paction, To perpetrat a vitious Action, Or pay a summ; but at the day, He hath no money for to pay▪ The action in it self is ill, But yet by the Superior`s will, It`s Leasome; Pray you what defence, What sound or probable preence,
Can this Man use, when he`s put to it, Either to pray, or else to do it? According as he hath contracted, Let any judge how he had acted. And so they do hold up their face, And sayes, since there can be Cace, That he for Conscience sake must break it, It was a foul abuse to make it▪ Who brayes in mortars Cheats and Fools, For their reward must wash their Tools, It's thought he is a Man discreet, Who in this World keeps his feet, And seeing he no good can do it, Can let it stand as he came to it. Left this be thought a long digression, It was when Scotish Lords of Session Layes by their Gowns, their Pates to please, When some do burn Popes Effigies. Whither it be by some mischance, Or by some Noxious Influence: Of things Etherial when they stray, Or meet in a menaceing way. In this I am not throughly seen: Consult Robin in Aberdeen, And Gadberry, who speaks of Warrs And Peace, by gazing on the Starts. And when that ye have well sought thrô them Ye`ll be as wise as they never knew them. Whither it be by some impression, The Comet left upon that Nation,
Or from some spitful Exhalations, From Surfet Excesse or Repalations, Or if it be from Kingdoms greening, Or Mall Contents, (ye know my meaning) Or if it come from these can Cheat, And among Cockle sow good Wheat, Or if it be from the Court evil, From Proserpina, Pope or Devil, Who vexes Land at such a Rate With the fowl fine of Venice State. Or from some underhand Engadgers; To be the Romen Trade`s Managers. From Bankrupt Lords, or Publick VVhores: Its hard to speak of higher Powers. Whither it be from Earth or Hell, Or from French Ait, I cannot tell, Or from St Omers, or Lovain, From Madrid or Sevil in Spaine, Or from Lisbon, or if it be From some Convent in Germanie. (I cannot think it be from Poland, Moscovia, Denmark, Pruss, or Holland) Or if it be some sad foretoken, That Church and Kingdom shall be broken, I`le not presume to manifest But Scotland`s troubled with a Test. I do not presently incline To scale its Nature or designe, To speake of Authors or Inventors, Opposers, Favourers, Consenters,
Or those, who tho they did not love it, Had nev`r the courage to disprove it, This might be counted pressure treasure; A wrangld word yet, I may use her, When I revising such fond actions, Use old Scots absolute contractions: To portrait Rogues in an Old stile, In new it were not worth my while, Since I`m perswaded not a few Have neatly limm`d them in the new▪ I hope it will be no offence, Or if no evil consequence; To make Relation of a Sort Of Clergie Men and their Deport. They being men of Publick Station, Concerned yearly with the Nation How some turns Stupid, others Storm`d, How some Refused, and yet conform`d, And how somes Conscience bounc`d and kickt When too sore thrumbled, nipt and prickt, How some had no restaint would take it Because Superior powers did make it, How some oppos`d it other doubted▪ And many sentiments about it, Which I intend if I have time And Genius for a daft Ratry me. No Muses help I will implore For I was nev`r at Lesbos shoar Neither did haunt Arcadian Glens Groves, mountains Watersides and Fens
My seet nev`r filed that brooky hill Where Ancient Poets drank their fill For their did haunt the Nymphs and Muses Which old Wives fables so much tuses There Pan kept sheep, and there it was Where, the red haird glyed wanton lass Did skilt through woods ov`r banks and braes▪ With her blind get: Who Poets sayes Could shoot as well as these that sees, Yea better then he had eyes. There the old Nun her Yaitn did windle, Which she had spun with Rock and Spindle, Here young Mercurius to teach thieves, Did trist his Bastards Brothers Bieves, But these who have the Thames and Humber The Tees and Tvne need not them cumber To go so farre to fetch a drink For I am verie apt to think There`s als much Vertue Sonce and Pith In Annan, or the Water of Nith; Which quietly slips by Drumfries, Als any Water in all Greece. For there and several other places About mill dams and green brae faces, Both Elrich, Elfs and Brownies stayed, And Green gown`d Farries daunc`d and played; When old John Knox, and other some Began to plott the Baggs of Rome They suddenly took to their heels. And did no more frequent these fields▪
But if Romes Pipes perhaps they hear, Sure for their Interest, they`ll compear Again, and play their old Hells Triks. But lest that I should seem Pollix, To paraphrase I'll make an end, And touch the matter I intend. On August last day as ye knaw, This Test obtain'd the force of Law; And all subscriptions were to carry, A date, before first January, And tho they`re several Men that say, The lack horn'd Devil bides his day. Yet Zeal Catholick prest the Test, Before it well got out of Nest; So like a Thiefs neck it did run, With shellie Lodging on its bun: Which strange depart both near and farr, Caus`d the poor Clergie, muse and jarr, And begg the favour of the Act, E`re they were forc`d the Test to take. VVhen the poor Men had done their best, It was applyed go take the Test. In this Quandarie it did please The Bishop of the Diocese, To call the Clergie all together, To weigh the matter and consider: He thought when all were met, they would Make of a bad Game what they could. When they were met, & doors were closed, And in their seats were well composed:
That there might not be much delaying, The Cavalier bade some be saying, Since no need was for his reciting The end and Reasons of their meeting. And he would tell what was his mind, When he their sentiments should find. When they began to point and gaze Up start brave Sophee with a frze, For he was big with some discanting Where Qua and Quod were nothing wanting, He moves his hands and then his sees, And causes browes with fat checks meet, And then to Heaven casts up his eyes, Like a Mass Prieft at Sacrifice, He bends his capon breast and belly He thought himself a Fellow jlly; With many moe such Atick motions Occasion'd by Chymerick notions, And after rites of Courtisie He thus began in Majestie: My Lord, our meeting at this place Is to decide a weighty case In which our Faith and Manners too Have much concernment and adoe But since in a more solemne way It doth concern our Loyalty To Higher Powers les  be rash Lest our good Name may get a dash, If we our Loyalty should stain I know not what we shall retain.
I`le not use much exordium But to the purpose I will come, I have considered the Test And scruples wherewith some are prest Objections, Doubts, and every thing, Which make some Brethren flsk and fling, Which done, I`m forced to suppose, There`s many`s sight as shorts their nose, Or else we would not thus miscarry, And be in such feiry ferry. I know it is the common cry, The Test doth Opposites imply. Then surely seeing it cannot Stand with it self in every jot: If King and Council do not mend it, No Soul can take it, or defend it. But pray be pleas`d to lend your ear, I hope to make the thing as clear, To any Man that hath a Head, As Ale and Potage, Milk and Bread: And make it pass the aitest Neck, Like Malago, or Cherry-Sack, I`m Man enough f't, do not doubt it, Attend and I shall fall about it, Consider first, the Test doth bring, In its last Part, no other thing, Then that wherewith we`re all content, At least we have giv`n our consent, Either in words Formaliter, Or practise Virtualiter:
VVhich well considered, cannot but Help well to loose this Gordian Knot. In the first Clause doth ly our stress, There`s rugged work I must confess, But let a good Logician Pause, And well consider why that Clause Is now enjoyn`d, and let him weigh VVhat Qua, and what Formalitie It cometh under, he may read, Consistence as clear as a Bead, And need not stumble or demurr, VVith Soul and Conscience to concurr. It is intended to secure Us, from the Babilonish VVhore, Old Heresies and Innovations, That rageth in our Neighbour Nations; And joyned to the other clause, To keep us subject to the Laws, To banish Niceties and Schisms, Preciseness and Fanaticisms. I hope there's no Man here to day, Presumes to think farr less to say, That ev`r it was design`d to reave, The King of his Prerogative. Or to turn Prelates to the Door, Or to impare their Right and Power. Now let it fully serve its ends If ought abound or do offend. And so your Conscience prick or gnaw, Let it be brought to this new Law;
By which it's easie to conclude, Haw each thing should be understood. Posterior Laws annul each thing, By which their purpose and design, In former Laws is contradicted. Then Conscience here need not be pricked, For let this Law have Life or Breath, Each thing in that Symbole of Faith: VVhich may oppose losses it's feet, Turns absolute, and is attrite. In short I think there's none so fond, But knows how Scripture is expon'd: To wit, the darker by the plainer, Here we must do in that same manner. Pray Brethren but consider then, That we the Symbole must explain, Not by the first Authors intentions, But by the Orders and Inventions, VVhich since were statute▪ and now stand Established within our Land. Let no Man say that I presume, Power Legislative to assume, For by their favour that so saith, I by their Laws expone my Faith. I hope now I have red the floor, And put confusion to the door. I think I need not be precise, Each thing to particularise. Yet least that any should expect, That I should every point dissect:
Of all our fetters I will red you, Distinguish but as I shall bid you, A head Art: 11 Lin: 24, Conf: Faith that is Coordinate, From that which is Subordinat, A head in sensu Proprio, From one in sens▪ Analago, Distinguish me a head Per se From per sequellam, flowing frae The power Christian Magistrats; Which with the same coagulats: And Tyrants Art: 14 Lin: 12. who want titles just From those who cheat and break their trust. And do not foster foolish fictions, By argumenting from Art: 14 L. 10 & 12 restrictions, Nor do not think that every thing That's to be offered to a King When to be crown'd Obj: Against the Test from the 8 Act of Par. KING JAMES 6: there the King being oblidgd to take the Coronation Oath for the preservation of the Protestant Religion and Liberty of the Subjects. altho rejected Doth make his right to be suspected. I hope there's none wants this Impression, Who reads the new Act of Succession. Apply these to the kittle places, That makes you wink and throw your faces: I you assure it will discuss him, And make you currant ad amussum
He makes a small bowe, takes his seat, And looks like Don in Regall state. Vain pride id circumvaile his eyes Which now he throws towards the skyes, And then then he squints them on his Mates As they had been a pack of Rates. These did conclude, that saw his starings, He thought himself no stinking herrings, While some were grieving, some were groaning Some in their heart; their case bemoning Some hanging heads down like a Bulrush, Some looking Briskly that were full sprush, Some turning up their gay Mustachoes, And others robbing their dull pashes, And others rounding to their Goss. That you was an Aurelian closs, Upstarts a Priest and his hug head claws, Whose Conscience was but yet in dead Thraws And did not cease to cave and paut, While clyred back was prickt and gald, Which frighted with this strange surprise Wrought to its knees, and strove to rise. But racked tendous, deizie head Toom nerves, dry veins made it with speed, Fall back, and then begin to grasp Like a dead Mare at the last gasp. And says, ye speak sir like a Man Who meikle with your Logick can, But theres a Clause, sir, at the end o't, Even for my Beneson gare mend it.
No Gloss, nor sweet Equivocation; Distinction Mentall Reservation: No Logick qua, nor ens rationis, Though Suarez Scotus, de Raconis, Though Thomas. Compton, Bone spei, Were here to help, would bear a sway; To make a Man though of a dull wit, If he knew a B by a Bull foot; To undertake that drearie task, And then put on the bootless mask Of some ill spun Equivocation, Or Metaphysick Explication, Let the explainer do his best, The foresaid clause of this black Test, Hocipso that he doth explaine, Makes perjury his Conscience stain, Since to that sense he's bound to swear, That the plain words do use to bear; Your Clergie is not with a bubble Your Notions flee like dust and stubble, Before the Winde, where e're it blows, You'r fit to butcher a good cause. To speak the thing I think my sell, Let's lay our compt, with Death and hell With Contumelie, slight and shame, While we Inhabite this dull frame, Let's take the Test there's no relief, And bruike our pudding, bread and Beeff, Lye by our fires, and warm our lends, And sleep on coats of geese and hens.
Or els resolve on racked necks, By some plutonick Carnifex, And though you should dit up my mouth I`le swear this is the naked truth: Thus having said, he's like to faint, Gaunts like a Mok, precise in Lent: But this did raise the Sophees humor, His face fum'd in blosie tumo. His words came out by tuos together, For one could not abide another; They were so hastie to bate down, That long lave Lugged Landward Lown. That had the Sophee so abused, Thus he broke out in words confused. I knew some peevish Clnish Carlie, Would make some noise & hurly burlie. You speak Sir, and you wot not what, Yet must be meuting like a Cat, Another Trade sir, sets you better, Then to speak none sense in a matter Of such concernment, Sir your skill Were some what fitter for the mill, To Reconcile the hoop and clapper, With Lyer, Runner, and the Happer, We came not here with Fools to clatter, Or wave our fingers in the water, Let one that knows the case speak sense, Ad he shall get an audience. The Priest said nought, but Bretheren truly, This Gentlemen, can not be throughly.
But then a Priest both wise and sage, Who griev'd to see the Sophees rge. Who did abhore his hight and Hffings, His Hectorings, his stares▪ and snuffings; He could not bide his vain preences, Contriv'd to cheat Mens consciences, Rose up, and in a sober manner, Began to speak, whereof the tenor As follows is, (where ye may see His Candor and Fidelitie) My Lord, and Gentlemen, I think It is no time for us to wink, Or in our eyes to put our Thums! Or to be meanac'd with threats & glooms, Well speak our minds Though we be weak, For Soul and conscience is at stake: But yet my Bethren e're I trace, Brave Sophee's sentiments in the cace, His arguings and his probations, Distinctions and his explications, I'am forc'd to beg your leave to tell, If what we say he do refell, As he hath now refel'd our Brother, We need not speak I pray consier, He spake nothing might give offence, The thing he said was wit and sense. And if my judgement do not fail. Upon the head he hit the nail. And with one blow drive it so right, That it's not be revers'd this night.
But now I will come to the point, And Sophee's Coupelings , Which if I do not bring t passe There  othes here that can canvass And show, that they are waning weight, To crook a conscience that is streight. Bt now good Sophee I will trace you, And think not that I do disgrace you▪ If I enquire in Vritie And lie not on Authoritie, Si, as to what you first assert I will not touch for my own part▪ For though I think it wants probation And might abide sharp disputation, It is not the perplexed Nexus That thus doth inricate and vex us. Whereas ye say; we must perpnd The Causes, Tendancie, and End. I do , we so shal do, And easilie shall gant you to, Both worker an woks tendencie I this did at the fist aggree To banish Antichriian ables, Masse, Altars, holy Grund, and Tables Romes Ordes, Pennance and Precessions, Is ▪ Ear Confssions, Is Hly Waters, and its Bells, Is , , and Sth un Wells, Is Pugatory, and its Prayers, For Dead, i Monks, and its Masse Sayers,
Its Friars, Dependents, and Abetors, Encouragers and all Romes creares: Is Saints, Relicts, Image Worship, Which to poor Souls brought skaih and hership▪ Its Hierachy & all its Trashy That stain'd Mens conscience with its fashry. The works intention is the same Since in the very words and frame, Is renovat confirm'd and Prest, As the fist clause of this new Tet: And surely the Confirmers prject Can come no better in our prospect, Then by perpending usuall figns, To wit words sentences and lynes, By which hey do themselves expresse, And very plainly do proesse, That all concern'd must sige and swear In the same sense the words do ear. Which if we do, we plainly losse The help of your Aurellion glsse. But Sir, it seems your explication, Doth intervert is Ordination This symbol was formd that we From Roman Harlotry should fle By it Church  were instructed In Truth and Unity conducted, By it thy saw how to evite The Path of Babylonish feet:
But Sir, your glosse ends us to rake The dig'st that Popes and Devils make, The same to earch and fall a finding, What part of this Symbol is binding. A brave refuge I must confesse, For a poor conscience in distresse Your arguing will lose it sale And turn as wesh as salless kail, To any who thi Symbol reads And finds that there are several heads That doth oppose Catholici, And foster that which ye call Schime. Good Sophee, I would have you minding, That by your Clergie these are binding▪ Because they're opposite to Popery, To Antichristian Trash and Foppery: Yet their Validity you rze Since they promote the Whiggsh caus. That Christ is only Head and King Of his own Church, thwarts the Designe, Of Popery; and for Whiggs do make Against the Explicating Act. Since i both Monarchs, Kings and Popes, And Princs from that Headhip Lopes, And since the Pope doth not presume, An quall Hedship to assume But will be , that He be esteem'd a Deligat; A man of Reason, must conclude This clause doth not only exclude
A Head that is Coordinate, But that which is subordinate. So this Distingu's not well founded, The rest I think no better grounded. Pray Sir, who ever yet did plead, To be an Analogick Head? Neither could such a Headship 'gree With our present Supremacie. And what a monstruous Headship's that That floweth from the Magistrate▪ Sir, if your Logicks here be good, The Church shall have a Mulitude Of heads: and yet one Body still, Let men say of it what they will: The Pope hath farr the better Plea About this business then we, And justly flings that foul disgrace Of emale Heads upon our Face. But here I need not to insist, Read at your leasure if you list, Gilespie, Catherwood and Voet; Who puts the matter out of doubt, Since it a Good Work is Reputed, To liberat the persecuted, And to defend Poor Sakeless Wights, Who may be Robbed of their Rights; Als well by Kings their malversation, As by a Cromwels Usurpation, Your Lgick Sir's, not worth a Spittle ▪Twixt Rogues that have and want a Title.
Who knows the acting and condition Of these who fram'd this old ? How Knox with Leithingtown did reaon, And when he was accusd of reason? How to the Queen he Answered, And what repor the counsel made: May without labour clearly find, That your disinction is but winde. Which is cosidered will make good, What from that sentence we conclude, Which if restricted, I am loath To touch the Coronation Oah, If the Sessions Act be right; I think that Oath can have no weight. For all your confidence, good Master You most prepare a fitter plaster Then these distinctions, for I'm sure They will not wok a kindly cure; I am no Lawer I onfeis Yet by your leave 'le grosly guess, Thought new Laws may he old correct, And lo deprive them of effct; It betters not your caue a straw For by your Argument, no Law Can pai the est, the smallest whit, Since there's none subquent to i: About Religio,n and I hope You will not make a Law to loupe; And sned it sel, and hear my Brother; One place cannot explain another.
Its made already fully clear The presen Test no glosse can bear; Good Sir your Logicks were farr beter, For Forme substantial, and first matter, Chimeras, Aomes and void plaes, And for imaginary paces For Occult Qualities and Unions, Instincts and Summuliss Opinions, (To tell your young Logicians, What Fther Aristotle means, B actus in potentia entis, Qua in potentia) ratio mentis roportionales alequatae Partes, & Spherae primo motae: With many moe such rothie quibbles, Which Schoolmens, brains throw out like bubbls For Universals and Relations, Then for connecting Implications A Chapelane's easier refutd Then such a matter prosecuted. The Sun had not sing'd Phetons hair, Had he not walk'd beyond his sphere, Narissus fnd with Eccho's clatter And other Hussies fleicht and flatter, To see his face, ran to a pool And there lay gazoing like a fool; For at this time the Lads and Lasses, Had not the use of loking Glasses While tuning dzie down he fell, With heels ov'r head into the well.
Our country Dames must try the Leaching, And old King James must all a Preaching. Baxter must be a Connecture, Of pugnant Tenents, I Conjecture In stead of Amitie and Union He broacheth out a new Opinion, VVho Soweth such Reconilations Reaps liberally Innovations And are derided for their pains, And repute Men of flotting brains, Dame Talmash when she turn'd her Grace, In Parliament, must have her place; VVho knew the verity I Trow, The half of this will erve her now; There ome old hore turnrd out of stable▪ When young Dames are at Council able; The Fate of somewere once Dandillies; Might teach the younger Sags and Fillies, Not for to Trample poor Cart▪ Horse Yet they still the worse and worse: Though when they're high they flisk and fike, Yet Dogs get of their bones to pick Men cannot walk within their Stations, But imps and Whores must govern Nations Grotins must be a Divine, The Bramble must Protect the Pine, Salmasius must write in Law, There's many Apes of Aesops Craw▪ For all this there might be some seen, If Mortals would but strive with Men.
But Kings and Poets, I'll say nought bot; It's not unknowen what Herod Got; Some hungry Tykes falls by the Ears, From others cheekblades collops Tears; About the Licking of the Looms, Before the beast to shambles comes, They louse their usk's on either cheek side, By Tawing on each others thick hide, So strength and vigour they both loe, Before the Neats head get a tosse; The one of them may loe his Thraple; Before the Bull begin to grapple; So a third birckie oft comes to, And gets the whole with small ado, Our Bishops mut be Potentats, And Logick men turns Advocats, Though ignorance sometimes may marr them, They whiles get places better for them, Lawers, Advocats and Clerks, Are not so subject to Remarks VVith Courly Ladies in their Coaches, Nor do incurr such hard reproaches; Nor yet are so in poples mouth; As these that should instruct the Youth; But these who are long in abuse And have drunk in some Childish use, Are very fair to keep that stain, Some Coward Coulie of this strain Come moved by some Schoolish Toy Ran Rampant on a Schollar Boy.
Did tear and grasp him with his claws, For he had now laid by his Tawes And gave him many a Souce and slope, For some what did concerne the Pope Canonized at Edinburgh Crosse▪ In 80 as I do suppose. Such Achillaean facts as thir Will tun a Master to a Sir; But lest much speaking do me skaith, I'le sit me down; and draw my breath, When this was said, another start up▪ Who for a while had not got hear up But Melancholy, grief, and sturt, Had over whelm'd and done him hurt, Men by his vige understood, That he was in a dumpish mood: Sometimes he on his breast did clap, Sometimes drew down his Satine cap: Put back his hair out by his eares, He was not farr from shedding tears In the Oppacity of grief He cryes what plots, O what Mischief! And still a Kikman at the nuike o'! Though old Golboun should bear the buick o', Then he began to muse and pause, Like Pullet dropt from a Glades clawes; But having grief somewhat compessed, Thus to the rest himself adressed; Our Fathers, sirs, Civill and Ghastlie; Doth traite us in a manner beastly,
If they respected us, our station Our Flocks or their Edification The est to us they would not tender, Ad us moe Odious still render Its known the bulk of all he Nation, Are troubled at our ingrssion, At our subjection to the Prelate, and other Trahrie might dolate. Now we'll get nought but Rogue and knave▪ If in this matter we behave As some have done; yea they'l eeem Us of all mankind the soul Fine I hope thee's none so void of senes? To think w're fram'd to flatter Princes? To foster praks, and hellish plots, And be admirers of fond ots serve mens lus the Pope and Devill, Sure bretheren, this proceeds of eill. Tho it were 'mongst indifferent things, Since such offence it with it brings; We might refuse't with good defence, Since we're obleidge'd in conscience, Evill's appearance to evie, Lest we cause weak ones loose their feet; What ever frolicks men may foment, Scandall's a matte of great moment: Read Duram and Calvin well, If from their reasons e resile: I'le cunt you Sots, or that you Knaverie Will lead us back to Roman slavie.
VVhen he these Honest Men had cited, Some of the Clergie frown`d and fretted, Some smil`d, and some fell in a laughter, Some look`d like Butchers making slaughter, Or like a VVife that doth begin To pull wooll from a stinking skin; Some fell a grunting like a Pig, And some cry`d out, a Whig, a Whig! But this commoved the Priests choller; It did convert in ire his Dolour. His Visage chang`d, he Fumes and Rages, Like to a Suitzer wanting VVages; Then in the Vinegar of VVrath He briskly to his Brehren saith, Now Gentlemen, I know your meaning, I know for what you are a Greening; It`s Antichrist his Pipes and Fidles, And other Tools, wherewith he Widdles, Poor Caiiffs into dark delusions, Gross Ignorance and deep Confusions. He`ll be repute a Man that cites A Rabble of the Jesuites, And Airie School men, but if we Cite men Famous for Pietie, Their Learning, and for doing Good Who in their ime firmely withstood Both Error, Heresie and Schisme; It will be term'd Phanaticisme: I would with cripture clear the matter;
But to foreber I think it better: It doth not set a sound Divine, To cast his Pearles before swine; I have too solid Ground to fear, You would it also mock and jear: Tho at such pranks my hear doth blead, I`ll no more sput a Mare that`s dead. He set him down and said no more, Turn`d melancholious as before. When he had said another rose, A gay Divine as I suppose, Who loved neither Monk nor Frier, He bow`d first to the Cavalier; And then he did himself Curvat, To all the Brethren as they sat; Then with a voice both whole & clear, He thus broke Silence as you`s hear: My Lord, and Brethren, I intend, a few words to comprehend, What I`m to speak, give ear I pray, That I to an Amen, may say, rethren, it seems this Test alledges, That neither Covenanr obliges, hat they do not us ty or bind, o Duties that`s therein contain`d. ut I confess, I`m forc`d to grant, ud am confirm`d, the Covenant Call`d National, in it nought hath, ut what`s in this Symbol of Faith, Statutes made for its behove, Which I`ll endeavour for to prove:
No sobet Man as I expect, Can against any point object: If it be not Mutual Supplie, In case that One or All should be Oppressed for Religions sake: And none can this Objection make▪ Since it`s repute in this Confession, A good Work to Repress Oppression: And to defend the Innocent. And such ate they who feel restraint▪ Are Harassen and suffer Lesion, Because of their intire Adhesion; To Pure Worship, Doctrine sound, And Discipline that hath a Ground On Scripture, all which we must grant, To them who fram'd the Covenant: Because they held the same with those, Who this Confession did compose: If any tatle the Old Tale, Which with the simple may prevail; To wit, we ought not to defend Out Faith with Swords, I condescend; And yet when I perpend the Matter, Our Cause is not a whit the better. For if you shall assault a Man, Because he neither will not can Quit his Religion, you compel That person, to defend himself; This without doubt the Law of Nature, Doth grant to every Humane Creature.
This none in Reason can restrict, Because of persons that afflict. Or their Prerogative; for why It's very easie to reply, If we consider well the thing, And trace this Defence to its Spring, It's seated in the Creature's Right, Without considering the Wight That doth the Violence; and hence We Lawfully may use Desence, Gainst those that are in high Distractions▪ Altho their Violence and Actions, If they be taken properly, Cannot be called Injury; From this precisely flowes the other, To wit, to help out sakeless Brother: In whose Defence we ought to carry, As in our own, and not to varry. This Right cannot be Alienat, And all roll'd on the Magistrat. Since all the Learn'd without Debate, Sayes it's a Principle innate: And doth accompany Man's Nature, Hoc ipso, that he's such a Creature: Which Point if pithily discuss'd, Will dash Hob`s policy to dust; The Magistrat it a fitt Mean And Instrument for to maintain This Right, by him the People may Exerce the same, in a safe way.
But these things to the Whiggs I'll leave, There's somewhat more it's like may give Ground for Objection, I will see, If it hath Pith or Energie. It's like some thinks the foresaid tye, Doth Prelats casting out imply: We'll let it be so there's no skaith, So doth this Symbol of Faith. Yea Gentlemen it would be found A kittle put from the said Bond To disprove Prelats, if it were Not that it doth Reinferre, In terms this same Case and Condition, The Church had under this Confession, Before King James began to task us, When he saw Altars at Damascus: Lest any think there is no place In this Symbol, can clear the Case; Let such be pleas'd to make inspection, Or eighteenth Article or Section, Their Discipline as instituted, By Holy Scripture, is Reputed, One of the Churches Marks and Signs; Then read but foreward two three lines, Where the then Members do profess, That the True Marks they do possess: Now Gentlemen, consider that Discipline duely Ministrat, Must be by all, and only those, On whom the Scriptute doth impose
The same, and I trow Gentlemen, No Prelat, no Person, or Dean, Bruik'd Function when this Symbol was Compiled, and brought to pass. Neither did then our Church men with Court Sceptick Stilling Fleet. If there be any more Objections, Show them, I shall give my Reflections On them; But if ye plainly see▪ The foresaid Bond's Matter to be In this Confession comprehended, I think this Point is fully ended. You see then Brethren, where we land, If we this Test shall take in Hand. I hope here's none who will cut Capers, Like Torrys when South-Eastern Vapors, Moments their Heads, who fall a roating, Sacred and Humane Things devoting; Trampling every thing that brings Not Birth from interrupted Kings! There's none I hope will strive to mix The Earth with Heavens, & World unfix; Saying such Bonds wanting Supply, Of Soveraign Authority, Are rendred Irrite, by rescinding, Which otherwise were sound and binding, Or want of the Superiours Will, Makes such Bonds, ipso jure, null: Though that to which we do us bind, Be Duty not to be Declin'd.
Or things indiffrent, in no sort Can do ur Neighbour Harm or Hurt▪ If an Kikman be so gross, He'll find that he inurts a Loss, The highest inamy and shame By reading Heahens, reats the Theam, vilians▪ ad Cannonists; Yea th mst  o Romanists: nto ith Acheron's Train'd Bands, Had carce  such a Wok in Hand▪ H no Spinosa, Hob's▪ and Parkers hese hellish Barkers, o give thm help to rim such Warrs, And mak them  a Cou-Fairs▪ this Scoup-hol with a flee, O  part of a Kildee. When speaking of this Covenant, Which ws confirm'd by Paliament▪ om what is said it is apparent, That  must be inherent Ito he rch, since it's a Mak▪ How Men may ken an Honest Kirk▪ Which grated, can Government be Affi o Regal Digitie? I cannot see it, nd think, When I look it, I not wink▪ Brethen, there is some other Ground Of suples, which I will profound▪ Some Gntlemen, that's apt to startle, Some seem two Sentences to Tartle;
Contained in this Ancient Creed▪ To wit, a Preter Scriptural Deed▪ Is evil and that Romes Baptising, B their Mass, Priest. Crossing and Greasing. And Ordintion is stark nought Since the Whoor o he hight was brought, For me I do not think it fit▪ On our Reformer's Face to spit; Without a very pessing Reason, And this is  most dangerous season, To drive out holes in our hedge dykes, When Babel's Foxes, and such Tykes, Ae endeavoring them to scale, Yea rather to ding down the Wall. Perpend but pray, what deeds we call, Omnino preter scriptural? It's not such Acting that a Man By solid Argumenting, can Prove that the Scripture dth permit, Though there be o Command for it, Precise, Precedent, or Example; Of such Acts there are umbers ample: As to make Pots of Earth and Bes▪ And Tombs of Lead, or Marble Sones, To drink Brandie, or Usqueba. And Thatch with Heather, Broom▪ or Straw, To smoak Tobacco, and make Suins, And drink of Barlie, Pease or Bean; And s with Guns in stead of Bowes, And delve seep Bras with spades and howes.
To wear Drogits and thousands such, That were not necessar to touch; But Acts that neither from command, Nor Precedent, can sit a stand, Neither by sound Argumentation From Scripture can have clea probation To be permitted; These I shall Call Acts that's Preter Scriptural, And such are baptizing of Bells, Hallowing Altars, Kirk and ells, Torturing of the Penetent, Refusing to eat Flesh in Lent: Imposing Nook'd-Caps and Cow'd▪ Heads, The wearing Relicts, Cross, or Beads, (To worship any of the three, Is horrible Idolatrie) Convents of Nuns, Monks, and Friars, And Surplices, which Curats wears; For to impose gray Gowns, or Mantles, Or any such base Tritle Trantles. If what I say be understood, The first Assertion will be good, To these that are the Truth confessing, In heart or I loss skill in guessing; As for the second I'm content, Before the black Council of Trent: And 're Reformers did presume, To warn poor Souls to flee from Rome, That Woorish Mother of Confusion, And Noxios Nurse of Hells delusion.
E're Antichrist came to his height, Romes Ordination might have weight; But after Princedomes, States, and Nations, Had com'd good length in Reformations, After the Beast had sturr'd his Taile, And set against them Tooth and Naile, And rous'd the Emperor and Kings, And all under the Dragons wings, To wedge a Warr against the Saints, And to tread down the tender plants; By which in formal Solemn manner, He spread out Antichrist his Banner. I must confess, I'm not so free, To plead for the Validitie Of Roman Orders: It smells sower, That Antichrist in his full power, And formall Warr against the Just, Should yet retain this Power and Trust. Yea wighty Reasons me inclines, To think some Eminent Divines, Makes their Assertions here▪ to Thwart, And one anothers Cheeks to scart; In their asserting closs that he Who keeps each Point of Papacie, And so remains till Life be gone, Shall never have Salvation. And yet will not say to the fll▪ Their Baptisms and Missions null▪ I hope w shall not loose Instruction, If I shall by a clear Induction
About this Argue, and shall seat The Basis of the whole Debate. Upon the general Consents Of well Reformed Protestants; To wit, that in the Papacie As such compleat, there cannot be Salvation and my Assenting, Will make Charitie Relenting. But my Iuduction I ll Exhibit, Impugne it after cui libet. Where no soul safty can be found, No Faith can grow upon that Ground; Where Faith cannot be, I am sure, None hears the Truth that's Clean and Pure; And where an Hearing cannot be, There is no Real Ministrie; Where this cannot be, there's no Mission, So no such Power in their Possession, Now having ended, I will come, A Primo, to the Ultimum. In Rome as such, there's no Salvation; And so no Power of Ordination; But pray you, take my Tale together. And rive not one Limb from another. Either subvert my Broad Foundation, Or suffer my Argumentation To stand, lest striving it to trouble, Ye Mire into a Hubble Bubble. But Brethren, what if one should say, Tho Romes Missions in Genere,
Have strength and be acknowledg'd rate, Yet they might be invalidate, Within a Churches Jurisdiction, The Church having made a Resection, In general, of any Power Conferred by that Pestsome Whore: On any Man within their Border, Sure all that loveth Peace and Order, Will grant the Church hath power to Tax Church Officers, for foulsome Facts; For their unfitness want of Care, Or going to a Romag Fair, To buy a Mession and Reeal, Their Ordination, if it shall Be found Convenient, pray you, why Should Men unto the Church deny? In bulk for to make null Men's Missions? On weighty Causes, and Conditions? But here Objections and Replyes, And Intricacies might arise: I`ll close, and will not search into Church Power, and what a Church can do; When well inform'd in their Directions, And Acts against future Defections, What they may clear evacuate, And what they might Exterminate From them, and their Posteritie, Then having made a Courtesie, With all due Rites, in such a Case, He set him down, and held his Peace.
Then rose a Priest both brisk and bold, He was both sturdy, tight and Tall, He roul'd his Visage round about As he had risen necks to clout: He was so blosie some did think That he had got his Morning drink. He threw a gruntle, hands did fold, Sometimes on his Kanes head took hold. His clowdly brows, and frizled hair, Did tell he was thuart cross grain'd ware He looked just like such as we, Say is for the cheek of a Plea, Or like a fellow, to be brief, Into whose hands there's a mischief; He was not for the French Nig nayes, But briskly to his Brethren sayes, Good Gentlemen we may not doubt, Wherefore the Duke of York's left out, And is exempted from the Test, Wherewith he doth turmoyl the rest; In publick Trust, in Church and State, Menacing some at a great rate, This is a very shrewd beginning, I think I know what was the meaning, He thinks not fit to flench and flatter, But to prove gallant in the matter. And when he his designs commences, Rears up Romes Kennels, yairds & fences. We shall not have the tale to cant, Take up your King and Covenant▪
A man of Sprit might Burn for Shame, That Scotland thus should lose its Fame. But Gentlemen, when I do Read This our Reformers Ancient Creed, I do perceive in severall parts, It very Pithily Asserts. Professed Catholicks to be Guilty of Grosse Idolatrie, And Blasphemies, why are not all Such grosse Delinquents great and small Call'd to Account, and when convicted Made beat the pains should be Inflicted On such Trassgressors, I confess Men that are Men could do no less. But we are troubled with a Pack Who truth and justice do Ransack. Devour their Bretheren that are tender, Kill some, makes others lurk and wander In Dens and Desarts with pale Faces, Feu Sympathising with their Cases: And so make us that are Conformed, Stink in the nose of all Reformed; And here are severall sitting, that Have their part largely in the Pot. A pack of Rogues I'm a swidder To dash some heads against each other Tho some's Exempted from the Test, They're not Exempted from the Rest, Of penal statutes (who ere saw A Subiect plac'd above the Law)
Which rightly weighd and put in use, Might yet cause some to shoot the buise. Should we receive the Noxious Humors, That raised Gangrens, Pox▪ and Tumors: And at the length by strong Pugation, Evacuat by the English Nation. A out upon us a Disgrace, Let's fling their Dirt back on their Face: I had said—had not my senses Been clogg`d with Pestsome Effluences, Of thir Chymerick Naughty Talkers, They smell like work-houses of Wakers▪ Of Test and of the Test Defenders, It`s wonder Brethren no Man renders▪ But I presume, I keen the Case, This ha been made a Hally Plae. By the hot Water of Saint Gile, Or some Old Saints bruik`d thir Fields. I was no wonder some enquir'd, (A flenting Fellow who desir`d To rouse the Te) whither it was Unto the Heav`ns the hig plain pass? He answered, it`s the high street, They swore that he was indicreet, For to exclude His majestie, Together with His Familie; Although the Cavalir sat dume, It`s very like, by other some, Fuisset dictum ei quereti, Non fit injuria voleni▪
us omake wambles, I must close, And with my Fist must op my Nose. Another rose, made his Congees, And said, my Brehren, if you please, Hear out my Tale, it`s be ut shott, And half in carnest, haf in sport. ome States ae plagu`d with Snakes and Frog, And other Kingdoms with Mad Dogs. Which cause a Hydrophobia, And others with Tarantulia, Som with Lyons, some with Bears, And Wlves, which Flock and Cattle tears, Som with Monkies and Babouns, Thought Rareties within our Towns. Som with the Cruel Croeodile, Who catch Men in their linked Taile. Some with Grashoppers and with Flees, And some with Wormes that hurt Fruit Trees: Some with Locusts, some with Adders, Some with filthie Toads and Spidders. Some are abus`d with stinking Broks, The Weasel, Fumart, and the Fox. Some are hurt with ocks of Crowes, Devouring Corn and their Lint Bowes. Some with Earns▪ some with Eagles, Which the Young Sheep and Goas sore mangles▪ Some with Panters, some with Tygers, Some with Monsters of strange Figures. Some with Water Rats and Mice, And others with the Ccratrice,
Which as some sayes, smies with its looks▪ But Scotland plague`s a plague of Dukes: But they`re such Dukes as soon do tyre, To plash ogether in one Myre, And so the One the Other out pakes, Which makes Men think they`re all but Drak Yet this makes many Men admire, For paeing time and all the year. Is one to them they never lein, and Hay time they`re as keen, In their Dbating as it were, After the last of Jauare. I know nought like them but the Frogs, Who do haunt Marishes and Bogs. It`s said by some the Younger Rides Above the Older`s slimi sides Till they loss breath, or else their Number Would do the Countrey meikle cumber. I`ll say no more, but prayes for Peace, I`ll quite m kill if some do Grace. But now upstart the Cavalier, He could no longer speach forebear; Their knaggie alking did up barme him, Their sharp Rflections did much warm him, His Blood having a high Frment, By hot Spirituous : Of which he made no small Voration, Nor seldom to inebration! Fo Venus failes and will decay, Sine Baho & Crere.
e bended up his Bzzards Nose, hich was farr Redder than a Rose. e did unfold no little Pride, e set his Left Hand on his side: ike  Souldiers when they stand Ordered Arms, waiting Command; nd then he brought his Right Leg foremos, s he had been to make a sore Thrust, linting and squinting with his Eyes, ike those who uses falsifies: hich sort of Motions he did make, furry all the time he spake, ith many a lofty boult and bend, sayes my Friends and Gentlemen, t several Meetings I have been, nd heard you urmur and complain f Narrow Stipends, Manse and Gleib, nd Patrons taking Bods and Bribes, nd making you by secret Pactions, of sacrilegious Actions, fore they suffer you to enter; here`s the Fanatick and Dissenter; here`s now your fear of new Whigg Plots, hich other times came up your Throats: all the Talkings were collected, hich from your Thraples e ejected, former Meetings, I have Ground, o say not so much should be found, Tende Consciences and Truth, this time hath flown from your Mouth.
Good fellows pray what may we judge, Of so surpring a Deludge O Conscience. I take it to be The Birth of some Conspiracie: What do you mean, some Innovation, Or some new Clergies Convocation: Do you intend to bell the Pus, With King, Duke, Parliament, and Us▪ I will not stay to Clash and Quibbl About your Nignayes, I`ll not nibble: I`ll with a bae word you Redargue, Tho till your wind Pipes burst you argue. Though ye should cry and shout about me, Till all the Guts within should ou flee. Pray your Alldgance but consider, And gather all your Wits together, Consider who`s the Churches Head, And at your Leasure, pray you read Your Oath, and Explicating Act, And all you say`s not worth a plack: If you the Matter rightly weigh, You`ll find it is the King's to see, What is Conenient and Right In Church Afairs; The oversight, And sole Power of Determination Is his, and all`s by Derivation That we can claime; know what you`re doin Le there may be untimeous rueing. Be sober for we will you danton, at the preent hote and wanton:
A empty Pantrie, and oom Pots, Will make you look like half drown'd Roats▪ ook on good Fellows and advise it, Warr`s sweet to them who never ryes i. He said no more but set him down, Then some began to hark and rown: omes heart began to aint and fail, o think that Cabbage, Beef, and Ale, Mutton, and Capon should be wanting, uch thoughts made some o all a gaunting▪ Some to what hand to turn was deeming, And some did look, like those that`s dreaming. ome  concluding we must do it▪ There`s no help; we will be put to it. ome their hair from their beards plucked▪ And some did claw where nothing yooked. ome said a secree Pater Noster, And some were in a Laughing Poster, ome began to Jock and Gibe, thers were cursig the whole Tribe f these, who made such ellish act▪ To put Men`s Conscience on racks, Others prepared to appear, nd Rancounter the Cavalier. ow by the way I must begg leive, brief Character for to give, f this brave Fellow spake so home, nd to the Point so clos did come▪
Which in few Words I think I can, He was a Courtlie lergie Man: Which taken in it`s Latitude, Doth all that I can say include. It`s true I dare not be precise, To say, he all the Properties Has of a Courtier; that't a Taill Too long for Jon of Laudrdail: Which if he had, it`s like he might, Play to the Tikes some Foxes slight, By taking it betwixt his feet, And with hot water making`t wet▪ And when the Tikes were near to hold'im, Might with a whisk almost blindfold`um: Altho the Cavalier doth want Som Properties, yet I must grant, Considering this present ime, He hath some that are Tight and Prime: For Champion Conscience none will bate him, For Flattery tere`s few will mate him Of Power Supeiour, and forsooth, He hath a Tongue that`s gay and smooth: He hah some art to tincture Vice, And to sell Hemlock seed for Spice. To et Court Sadles on skeigh Nages; And help to back unruly Stages. To strowe Beans on his Neighbours stairs, And trouble other Men`s Affairs. And to set Prospects to some Eyes, Who cannot well discern a prise▪
Tho he can swear from side to side, And lye, I think he cannot hide. He has been several times affronted By slie Backspearers, and accounted An emptie Rogue; They are not fitt or Stealth, that want a good Up▪ put▪ But now a Priest rose to withstand him, Who well knew where his own shoe band him, And said, your Lordship I commend, You take your Tale by the Right End. I must confess, the Matter's here, Here is the thing that nicks us near. I know there may be something said, That when this Alleadgeance was made, We thought the King would not assert To him more Power than was his par. And that he all our Grants would bring Square to the Nature of the thing. Our Loyalty was so profuse, Nothing he ask`d we did refuse. Crediting Truth and every thing To the Benigneness of a King, Looking he would not spoil us streight, Of that to which we had a Right. By Apostolick Institution, Who would have thought on such Confusion, Of Air and Water, Heav`ns and Earth, Bringing the World to it`s first Birth. The Ancient Chaos wanting figure, Who could expect so strange a Rigour.
Yea several Acts of Parliament, Might have occasiond our Consent, Framed in favours as you`ll see, Of Churches Right and Libertie: But truely when I d perpend The Matter to the nether end, I must confess, this fair like sconce, Gives little Shelter, Help, or Sonce: Tho I were hasting to the Mooles, I`ll say some knaves were, some were fools, And some were both thus, let it stand, That cots▪ men`s wise behind the hand. But when you argue to the oumost, In Truth your Arguments are but dust; Though Terms to which we have consented Makes us sit dumb, and I repent it: Your Argumentings all do hang On Hobbs, and Others of that gang; So you rub alse much of the Blutter Of the Augeian stall and gutter, On your own Cheeks as you do sting, On these who will not you Note sing. And more Sir, they`re accounted Babies, By solid Men, and Learned Rabbies, Whose Sentiments are all supported By Reasons, may be well rtorted. For gant Powr absolute to Princes, Pray from what ground shall your Defences Flow nealy out, and solid be, Against the Pope`s Supemacie.
Let us go to the King, for sight Of what`s conform to Truth and Right. What Actings fair are, what are foul, The King`s to us the higher Rule Than Sacred Write. Whither ye lean you, The Pope with your own Armes will tain you. If you say there are Contradictions In several Popes, their Noddle Fictions, Against ushe cuts that same Caper, Founded on word of mouth and paper. They`re falsoods now that once were Truth, By Father CHARLES`s dying mouth: But I think some will grant each such thing, When once it comes to go or touching; But Clergie Men may knock at Hell`s gate, And yet return, this is fell fae. For me I do not love such chps▪ Or in a Pulpit to kiss knops. Be pleased, Sir on it to think, Ye hall not all of us hood-wink: I`ll say no more lest I should make Things rather worse, and lose my talk. Upstart another with a smile, And said, my Lord▪ shall all your while Be spent in idle clitter clatter, And waving fingers in the water. This work at present will not wok, As long's these Lowns gets leave to lurk▪ In their fat Manes nought prevails, They stair on you, and tell old Tales.
To say`t my Lord,  will not spare The fault is in the Countrey Air, That so constringeth our wind pipes, Our Wasands, Stomacks, and small Tripes, That we can scarce get ought ov`r put, That`s any greater nor a Nut. Yea there are some Men that do feel, Great stress in swallowing a Pill. Yea some will spue and bock and spit At moats like to a Midge`s foot. We scunner at most part of meat, Which we`re not used for to et. Hence few of us can eat Swine`s flesh, Let it be reeed salt or fresh. Thir Gentlemen have Weasands narrow, That makes them tartle flinch and tarrow: A Medicine I will prescrive, And paun my Thraple it shall thrive. Send them a while to other Nations, Whence their Veins may have Dilatations: When they return, they`ll you request To have the favour of the Test, They are not few Experiments, To prove the Point, but one presents It self at present, which Ill relate, And put the matter beyond debate. A Man of narrow Conscience, A while agoe went ov'r to France, It`s well known what was the Occasion, He could not take the Declaration. When he return'd he got it ov`r
Without a Host, a Bock, or Glour. And when this Test came first a thort, Any that saw this strange Deport, Perceiv'd his Maw to Hink and Jarr, He went Abroad, but not so farr. If this last part want veritie, I'm wrong in∣formed, pardon me. As soon as London Air he got, It slipt like Oysters ov`r his Throat; He said no more bt down did get, And Keckled at his own Conceit. With this rose up a good old Cannie▪ A pluffie cheek`d red Bearded Mannie. Who all this time had taken ease, And fostred Lavrocks, Doves, and Bees, To keep him Companie at home, For seldom he abroad did come. He stoakes his Beard, and rubs his Chin, And clawes his Luggs, then did begin; It is a good old onsie saying, That little Wit makes meikle straying; If we had made our Judgements lurk, Till once we`d seen how things would work, We should ave met with little more Of foul Reproaches than before; But we fosooth must fyke and fling, And make our Pulpits sound and ring With bulkie words, against the Test, And now we see the day I guest. I was gret hase, but where your Sped, Your buying Wi, that`s dear indeed.
We might have mist a beastly blunner, Had we not spewed out our skunner, Against this Test, in every where, As Antichristian hellish wae. If now our fame be , We worse than Devils will be repute. I count their wits not worth a Hares dung, That have not learn'd to keep a fair tongue. I must confess, the Contradict Gave my old frozen heart a nict, That did its motion so extend, That its pyramide neither end First bang'd my breast, and then my back, I'm sure it bade not such a rack, These twice ten Years, if it was not, When I thought Whiggs should cut our Throa Altho they did not ue such deeds, You know the guilty still midreads. But e're ye cast me out from yonder, Fat Mane and Gleib, I'll further ponde The est. When Men can get no Right, They're forc'd to use some bitts of light: Let's chew it over like a figg, And in their pocket break an egg: Like to Turn▪ coats who in short, Can swallow all that comes a thort: But this he uttered, not for fear, But laugh'd it in his Gossips Ear▪ Who being one of that same gang, Sayes better goss than steall and hang.
I we with Manse and Gleib be twin'd, I swear I know no Trade behind. A stipend is not on each bank, It's good to keep in hand an hank. Up rose a Priest to tell his Tale, Whom some thought dizzi with strong Ale. Some thought he had his braines opprest, By striving to connect the Test. Some thought that he was at a loss, By too much striving it to cross. Some thought he look'd like those that spent Betwixt a Conscience and Church Rent. Some did alledge it was the Moon, That did his Vitals o mistune. Some who perceiv'd his puls to quive, Alledg'd that he was in a Fever. The Torrie lergie Men profest, It was the Nature of the Beast. Whatever it was, it doth appear, His Intellectuals were not clear. He mov'd his shoulders, hed did ling, Fom Van to Rear, from wing to wing. Some were alledging, that had good skill, He could not speak i he had stood still. Like some School Boy, thei Lessons saying, Who rocks like Fidlers a playing. Like Gilbert Burnet when he Preaches, Or like ome Lawyers making Speches; He making Hands; and Gown, and sleives wavel, Half singing vens this Reavel Ravel.
I have been hearing may things, Of Kings, of Clerkie, and Designs; My memory is very skant, Some Words I have, some words I want.) Of Popes Supremacie and Whiggs, Of cuttig Capers and Intrigues, (Sirs, my Reflecting is but bad, I'm sure I'll paire, it's like I'll add) Of Covenants, and Ancient Creeds, Monks, and of Preter Scriptural Deeds, Of Test, and those that do it oster, And of a secret Pater Noster▪ The Test was form'd, in my Opinion, To make Division, and yet Union; To make a clear Distinction, Of these have Truth, and these have none: It's like the strange Connex did come, Not without Ignorance in some; Though sight and policie did faill, Yet force is like to drive the Nail. Prejudicat and greedy Judges, Make Men seek desperat Refuges. (Sometime the Hare hath Ground to flee, Let hr Luggs, Horns should counted be.) Or Jawes must be of full Extent, For the je black Council of Trent▪ Who speaks of Helps and Explications, Rears up but slymie Machinations. I Memorie do not miscarry, Before the first of January;
We must subcrive, and March comes in Before the Parliament begin; Hence I inferr, though I'm no Plotter, No Help nor Gloss can weigh a snotter. I trow we would be in a strait, To know what Heads should be delate. Tho we should now the thing consider, And close the Point without a widder: Some slee Objector might arise, And make us take a new Advise. Some's for the Top, some's for the Taile▪ And others would reform the Haile, Some are for bitts of't here and there, And some cryes ov'r with't hove and haire. Some's for it as it doth consist, And so's fo any end they list: But keep in this, and put out that, And so we swear we wot not what: But will you stowe me frae the Rump, Deferr the taking of the Lump, Untill the Parliament explain it▪ And then it's like I will be sai of't. Tho our great Court when it dòth gather, Should cut away the foul taire Leather, That doth impede Intepretation, Men and confirm this Explication, (For as it stands it hath no Mence, It being contraire common Sense.) Yet let the present swearing Trutees, Know they give Conscience Cowper Justice.
And by subscribing it in gross Renounces every solid gloss: And this I offer to mantain 'Gainst all the Clerks in Aberdeen. Who with such trash would be content, Makes King and Counsel Parliament; And if my Judgement be not scant, Some Lybel will be relevant, And all the Process firm and fast, To give the Counsel Jedburgh east▪ Its no discretive Explication, That's ram'd to warrand a whole Nation. Who ever gets this Test down swallow'd, May let the Leviaan ollow't. Tyrants the Alcran may improve, Far better for their own behove. Than Popery look on Cham or Turk, Yet France makes Popery strangely work. But I would have you understand, Each Tyrant is not Lewis le Grand. I do not doubt a person dreads, When the mantainer of old feads, Have vote and do sit on their size, All whom the Lawyers do advise, Gets not off Sca free, but are fain To take some other shift or train. Some Highland Ralphs, and Muirland Jannets, Sayes there are showers falls out in Planets, Some showers with dew the mountains fills, And causes Roses grow on Hills.
And Strawberries on Banks of Sands, Some may make Argillaceous Lands. Bring furth good store of hearty grain, And make the Countrey laugh again. Such things have been, and may be yet, Fools and proud men had need of wit▪ And Curats had need to preach well, For there are very few tha feel Instruction and Edification, By our Lives and Conversation. Let's swear impossibilies, And then our Truths will be thought Lies▪ The cursed Jeroboams Priests Performed their Worship beore beasts: But we somes Priest must with our mouth Evert the very ground of Truth. Pack Holy Write and Sacred Criticks um Theologico Politicks. And Cook had need of cleanly fingers, And Dukes of Iuie strong purse hingers, And dull brain'd head peices that swears They'l not import prohibit wares. Had need of other Trades to sick to, Their's are possest pro de relicto. Though some be old and dull of learning, They may attain the trade of swearing; So much in fashion at this season, sham plo and putative Treason. And Whiggs had need to learn to think, They sleep not all that seem to wink.
It's folly with Kail Wives to flyte, Some Dogs bak best after they bte. Some snach the Heels and Taile about, And so get all their Harns dung out A well train'd Royster fast will close, His Jawes upon a mad Bull's Nose. Some Cowlies murders more with words, Than Trowpers do with Guns and Swords. The sore brunt Client makes Complaint, Of those Pick pockets with consent, Callingum more▪ exhausting Thieves, Thn High-way men that stealls and reaves. Lawyers, Advocats, and Clerks, May give their Thoughts, and their Remarks, On Laws, who ever to this hour Gave them a Legislative Power. Enough of this, therefore I'll had, Lest all the Polland Dogs go mad, Bfore their wonted time of Year, When such poor Cowish Sust they hear. Juries should know how Matters stands, Lest they with Pilate wash their hands. Pomantick fellows should not be Advanc'd to too much Dignitie. Some places Celia in a shrine, And she for that makes them be seen With browes adorn'd wit long dilemmas, Which some repute no pleasant gemmas. It's like some think another thing, If they be gifed by a King.
y horned Logicks I conclud And very Pithily make good That thoe who for the Test give votes Are very Ignorants and Sos. Either they this confession knew Or not. And if the first be true They're men of round spu noddle fictio Who understood not contradictions: But if the second must hold foot I will aff they're kant of wit Who in a Supream Court like that Will umph and vote they wot not These Hornes pricks pihily the side Of Ghostly Fathers our Church guides Bu like these Sains are in a Unto the mother of ▪ Without demuring I will say it They are for order peace and quie; Who  would be content With a  Form in Parliament, The matters clear, no more debe A vote  all, a speech in Sate. There are some persons I suone, Would swime with all but sink with none. Who darres to trust such snakeing slave, Are greater fools the they are knaves▪ Some may be courted for a while Whom yet the Gallowes may beguile▪ Corrupters have ground to suspect Corrupted persons and their neck
Is very fair to bide a stresse When they have done their business. They'll bury us when we are dead, Without a stipend at our head. My talking wants top, main and tail, And my Concep ives seem to fail. These have scarce Time and little Reason, Would see they do not patle Treason▪ He set him down, the Sophee rose With face so firie, that his Nose Might have endangered Corn stacks▪ And fired Powder, Lint or Flax. And cryes, Good Fellows ye may ken, that Quos Jupiter perdit dementat. He set him down. And so I end, Whom I have wrong'd let others men▪ If any ask for the Conclusion, Let them conclude it was Confusion. Altho there wants not Inquisition, If other Kirkmen did petition; Whether they be exempt by paction▪ By secret emption or transaction▪ Or if there's powder at its root, I choose at present to be mute. If Circumstances call to clear it▪ Its like hereafter you may hear it▪
Follows the Tenour of the Oath of the TEST To be taken by all Persons in Publick TRUST. I A. B. Solemnly Swear in Presence of the Eternal GOD, Whom I invocat as Judge and Witness of my sincere Intention of this my Oath; That I own, and sincere∣ly profefs the true Protestant Religion, con∣tained in the Confession of Faith, recorded in the first Parliament of King James the sixth; And that I believe the same to be founded on, and agreeable to the Written Word of GOD. And I promise & swear that I shall adhere thereto, during all the dayes of my Lifetime, and shall endeavour to Educat my Children therein, And shall never consent to any Change or Alteration contrar thereto: And that I disown, and renounce all such Principles▪ Doctrines▪ or Practises, wheth∣er Popish or Phanatical, which are cont unto, and inconsistent with the said Pro∣testant Religion, and Confession of Faith. And for Testification of my Obedience to my most Gracious Soveraign CHARLES the
Second, I do affirm, and Swear, by this solemn Oath, That the King's Majesty is the Only Supream Governour of this Realm, over all Persons, and in all Caus∣es, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; And that no Forraign Prince, Person, Pope, Prelate, State, or Potentat, hath or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superioritie, Pre▪ heminencie or Authoritie, Ecclesiastical or Civil within this Realm. And therefore I do utterlie renounce, and foresake all Forraign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiori∣ties and Authoiries. And do promise, tha from henceforth, I shal bear Faith and True Allegiance to the King's Majesty, His Heirs, and lawful Successors, And to my power shall Assist and Defend, all Rights Jurisdictions, Prerogatives, Priviledges Preheminncies, and Authorities belong∣ing to the King's Majesty, His Heirs, and Lawful Successous. And I farther affirm and swear by this my solemn Oath, That I judge it unlawful for Subjects upon pre∣tence of Reformation, or any other pre∣tence whatsoever, To enter into Covenants or Leagues, or to Convocat, Conveen, or Assemble in any Councils, Conventions,
or Assemblies, to Treat, Consult, or D∣termine in any matter of State, Civil or Ecclesiastick, without His Majesties spe∣cial Command, or express Licence had thereto, or to take up Arms against the King, or those commissionated by Him: And that I shall never so rise in Armes, or enter into such Covenants, or Assemblies: And that there lyes no obligation on me from the National Covenant, or the Solemn League and Covenant (so commonly called) (or any other manner of way whatsoever, to endeavour any change or alteration in the Government, either in Church or State, as it is now established by the Laws of this Kingdom. And I promise and swear, that I shall with my utmost power, de∣fend, assist, and maintain His Majesties Jurisdiction foresaid against all deadly: and I shall never decline His Majestie's Power and Jurisdiction, As I shall Answer to GOD. And finallie, I affirm, and swear, that this my solemn Oath, is given in the plain genuine Sense and meaning of the words, without any equivocation, mental reservation, or any manner of evasion whatsoever: And that I shall not accept, or use any dispensation from any Creature whatsoever. So help me GOD.
VERSES made upon the Death of that famous Gospel Minister, Mr. ROBERT M KW AIRD. Who died in Holland, after 18 years Ba∣nishment from Scotland, his Native Countrey. WAS it for nought that blustering sparkling Rayes Of strange stupendious Comets, did the eyes Of Earths Inhabitants, so long detain, In dayes but lately past? who can refrain, (Considering our stroak so great, so sad Heightn`d with Circumstances dark and bad,) From saying, sure these Portants did presage, Some future Tragidie, to this poor Age, Which new`s begun, so shrewdly for to think, On what may follow, may make Spirits shrinke, In droue grief, and sorrow since he`s gone, Who with a Spirit, Seraphick, his allone Resisted Truths Opposers, who did stand, Throwing their Darts at him at every hand; Yet not allone, for the great Soveraign, The King of Kings, whose Glorious splendent Train, Did fill the Temple, was his strength and stay, In whom he Liv'd; in whom he clos`d his day, With whom he now Triumphs, with whom he sings, The Lambs and Moses song, he drinks the Springs Of Joy and Consolation in a kind, Not heard nor seen, nor entred in the minde Of Mortals to conceive, while now above, In full Fruition, of that Matchless Love: Tho he Triumphs, yet we may mourn and Weep, Since in such Cloudie dayes is fallen a sleep, So great a Seer, such a shining light, Whereby our day is almost turn`d to night;
For Truth a Champion both by Tongue and Pen, Regardless of the wrath and rage of Men. What Pen can write, or what Tongue can express, His Choicest parts, his worth, his usefulness? Some praise the Liberal Soul, aud some do prize The mind that's stedfast, others magnisies The Tongue that`s eloquent, others admire, A breast not subject to, nor toucht with fear, Some praise the learn`d; some think the prudent be, Above the Common fate and destiny, Of other mortals, some takes the devote, For persons Blessed in their hardest Lot, For Poesy some have a Veneration, With some the Sedulous in their Vocation, Are in esteem, how to be praised is he, In whom these Vertues in a high degree Did burn and Blaze? Let all who do esteem These Choicest Vertues, of a Heavenly strain, Come joyn and mourn with me, O let them come, And help me to express, or sitting dumb, In Melancholious muteness, and in Tears. Regrait our present loss, and ground offears; He did Survive the rest of these great lights, Discharged their native Lands by cursed Wights, Which makes our stroke, more misty, sad and dim, For while he liv`d, they seem`d to live in him, As if the rest, who did before ascend, In loves thrice burning Chariot to attend, Their high and loftie One, their Mantles dropt, And he the same receiv`d, where with he stopt Defections current, he himself on dry, And solid ground went to Eternity. Yet e`re he went prepar`d to leave behind, Such Fragrant Writings from his candid mind, Such strengths and Bulwarks for the Truth that he, Thereby remains to teach posteritie, His famous works, serves to transmit his Fame, From Age to Age, and Eternize his Name,
Some few Lines composed by him for Divertisement, from Melancholick Thoughts, when traveling abroad. To the Tune of, Fancy free. O'Re Hills, o're Mountains, scogie woods O're Heaths o`re Desarts dry, Ore dusky Marishes and Floods, where Tritons Company So wantonly skipt here and there, within these aterie Vawes, Unanton`d by that cacking care which Human Wights inslaves. (2) O`re stony hights, o`re champine ground where Ceres bows her head, O`re ragged Rocks where Ecchoes sound and bearded people feed, O`re walled Cities. frightsome forts, o`re waterie sinking sands, Retrenched Villages and Boges where Neptouns Castle stands. (3) Through wounding woods of glistering spears, prepared for Humane Death, Through sudden Showers of leaden Spears, that quickly cut the breath, Through armed troups, where horses prance, as if they would incite,
Their roaring Riders to advance their Counter part to meet. (4) Where Trumpets sound and Drums do beat, as in a solemn way, They were ordain`d of Soveraign fate, a Triumph to convey; Great Souls of Heroes as they flie at wounds of Bteast and Brain And then bass forth their Elogie iu mournfull groaning strain. (5) 5 Through Razing rage of cursed Kings whom vitious Souls admire; Through unjust sentences which springs from avarice or fear, Or some such like infernall cause hence guiltless people quake, Before his face, whose Sword, whose Laws, should their opposers shake. (6) 6 Through firie Feavers wasting Wounds through Melancholious want; Through sad disastures which abound to such as long and pant; Even for true vertue, which sure the weakly spirit faints, Who forced troubles to Endure must die in discontent.
Through Calumnies through frauds and slights that moveth mortals mind; Through slandering tongues of bruttish wights to pevishness inclin`d: They must adventure who intends in Vertues camp to warr, Abhoring mean penurious ends that brave exploits do marr. (8) If when travers`d by all such fates honour and vertue be, Both proof against Enchanting bates: and frowning destiny A Soul may have a sure solace when stormed on every side. And look proud Tyrants in the sace with scorn to be dismay`d. (9) Contentment with a present case to praise I`le not forbear, Sure it deserves the highest place amongst these vertues rare, By Heathen people so much sought but never yet obtain`d, Its Heaven`s great gift, not to be bought nor by Industrie gain`d.
Some Lines made by him upon the Ob∣servation of the Vanity of Worldly Honours, after he had been at seve∣ral Princes Courts To the Tune of Come let us walk and veiw the Spring. HOw mean a thing is it to stay, On praising Emperours of Clay; While He who being Life and Breath To every Mortall granted hath, Doth us invite to Praise and Sing The Trophies of his Glorious Reign. Hosts of strong Angels to express, His pow`r and perfect Blessedness, Their spacious thoughts extended have, Since Times first morning, yet perceive Their notes so low, they shade with Wings Their blushing Countenance and Sings. Heaven, Earth, and all that in them is, Eehoes their notes, and addeth this, We't but thin shaddows of that light, That Wisdom, Goodness, Truth and Might, Which from noughts Bowells us Extracted, By which we`re ordered and acted. The whole Creation doth accord, To Adam`s Sons, they will affoord, Constraining maters to concert,
With them for acting of a part That so conjoyned, with those above, They may advance in light and Love. The splended Sun by subtile Rayes, Preacheth his Glory to our eyes, The Seas, and Thunder do declare, His Might and tertour to the ear, His Milk, and Hony, Corn, and Wine, Taste of a Goodness that`s Divine. In Heats we feel, his Cooling Gales, His Florid fields of Bounty smells, He sends his Ministering Spirits▪ Who Man protects▪ Instructs, incites, In their blessed Chore, to take a place, And sing albeit, a Feeble bass. In Heavenly state from Sinai Hill, He published his Sacred will, His Fiery Throne surrounded with Thunder, And smokie Oceans, caused such wonder, And fright, that those conveened to hear it, Had Souls too limited to bear it. His shaddow on meek Moses Face, Did more than dazle Jacob's Race. Which Vail`d, he did them declare, GOD`s will in sounds, which they might bear, And did in Aarons hands Consign, Books of the manner of his Reign.
Omnipotence, could not sp ak low Enough, to make blind Mortals know, Much of himself, even Mojes eye, Though strong, his Glory would not see, His Trembling ear heard him proclaim, The high Abridgement of his Name. By all we`re forced to conclude, He's Wisdom▪ Strength, He`s Just and Good, But when we fixedly Consider, How to bring Heaven and Earth together, Wrapt in a Vail of Ahram's seed, GOD came himself, and Crushed their feed. The first advances disappear, Angels bless'd spirits, and Saints draw near, In through that Vail, the place to enter, Where Holyness and Glory Center, Where Seraphims themselves see more, Of his blessed nature them before, But here its fit, I hide my Face, I stop my mouth, and pant for Grace, With Adoration to admire, Untill he wholly me retire, Where Elect Souls, and Angels strong, Consoris the Lambs and Moses long.
An Answer to a Letter, from a Souldier Comerad, while in the Camp. I have Received thy Line, thy Heart With a thrice sad adiew▪ Which so my Marble Breast did smart, That makes me to avow: Tho hard it be in Friendship true And still Resolve to be, That hates to lose but still Renew Especially with thee. Thy Heart of Gold I do append, To this my Marble Breast, There to Remain, till Death shall send It`s Breathing to arrest; Ten I'm content that she or he, That shall the same nloose, In this suceed to me and thee, I Heart and Brasts dispose. But since these Fates thou`rt mind to try, In Sympathy with thee; These severall riks, I`m mind to run; But sure our Company Would help full sweet and gratefull e; These leaden showers beore, But let`s not blame out Destiny, But rather hope the more.
Our meeting, I do not Despair, But till it chance to come, No other Musick I will care, But shot nd tuck of Drum. My eeble Meeter up I`le summ; No muse I`le more implore, But rather wish they may sing dumb, And hear the Cannon Roar, No Venus smile, notwinkling eyes, No specious Graceful port, Which wekly mortals of surprise, Shall Lines from me extort▪ I`le me demne in such a sort, That nought but Languid Prose, My Souls itentions shall Report, Thrice thrice adiew I close▪ The Popish Party, after the defeat of Mon∣mouth and Argyle: published an Insulting Ballad, To the Tune of, Hey Boyes up go we, which coming to the hands of Leiutenant Col: Cleland, e made the second part, t the same Tune and Strain, holding forth the Language of their ayes. Anno 1685. NOW down with the Confounded Whiggs let Loyaltie take place: Let Hell possess their Damn`d intrigues, nd all that cursed Race;
Let Oaths abound, and Cups go round▪ and Whoores and Rogues go free, And Heaven it Self toop to the Crown. For Hey Boies up go Wee. Come, let us Drink a Health about, unto our Holy Father, His sacred Maxims without Dobt, we will Embrace the rather Because they are fram`d with Wit and Sense and favours Monarchy, And can with all ou Sins Dispense: so Hey Boyes up go we. There we shall Ramble at our case, and still enjoy the best, And all our wild affections please in a Religius Vest; And yet keep Heaven at our Dispose, if such a ting there be; And Dag the people by the Nose, so Hey Boyes up go we. Our Mnastries, they will provide, and store above all Measure, And spacious Nuneries beside, where we may take our pleasure. The English Ladis when hey ind restraint in Liberty, Will prove to us Excessive kind, s H Boies up g we.
There`s some who do for Vertue plead, and Glory, do miscarry, Assert we serve a Parricide or an Incendiaie; Bu we will murder, Sham and Trick, of such to make us free, Well burn alive, and  Quick, so Hey Boyes up go we. The Paliament, these poor sham Sots, we`l make them well conten, To give supplies to cut their Throats, and when they do consent, We`ll kick these Villans on the breach, no more of them will we, But Britain, better manners teach for Hey Boes up go we. But if they Cance to Temporize, and foster fond Suspicions, And tell King James of their Franchees, their Charter and Conditions; He`ll piss upon them and their Laws, they`re blind that cannot see The longest Sword decides the Cause, thus Hey Boies up go we. The sis of the long Parliament, he`ll visie them upon, Their oher Crimes and Heinous faults, which since are come and gone,
Of Westminster and Oxfoord too the Damned Memorie; He hath an Jrish Job to do, so Hey Boies up go we. And that he may Faeilitat, his work he`l work a while, By Toleration, Lull asleep, the Rogues, and them beguile, Some subtile potions he'll compose, of Grace and Clemencie, To blunt all those, who him oppose, so Hey Boyes up go we. Some few Lines made upon the sight of Print∣ed Papers of Mr. William Houstouns. To die obscure must be a dismal Fate, Since Mortals purchase Fame at such a rate; As burning Cities, razing Regal seats. Destroying Temples; overturning States. But meaner sp'rits whom Destiny contracts, Not to aspire unto such Glorious Acts; Yet Phaetons in conceit, will be content E`re Fame be wanting to be Fools in Print. FINIS.
Follows some Verses made by diverse Hands upon Leiutenent Col: William Cleland, after his Death. An ELEGIE upon the Death of the much Honoured, Leiutenent Colonel WILLIAM CLELAND. IS Cleland gone? And is there any Breath, Will not bemoan this galant Hero`s death Yea Clelands gone; who after him can be A Cleland, to compose his Elegie? His Pen, wherewith he did immortalize The death of others, for a hand now cries To be employed, to publicat his Fame, In his own Stile, who can exhaust this Theam? Some praise the Liberal Soul, and some do prize The Mind that`s stedfast, others magnifies The Tongue thats eloquent, others admire A Breast, not subject to, nor toucht with fear. Some praise the Learned, some think the Prudent be Above the common Fate and Destinie Of other Mortals; some think the Devote Are persons blessed in their hardest Lot. or Poesie some have a Veneration, ith some, the Sedulous in their Vocation Are in esteem: How to be praised is be,
In whom these Vertues in a high degree, Did burn and blaze in a most lofty strain, Who from his Praises can himself refrain. Come Poets all, supply my lake of skill, To write his praises bring each one his Quil. From wings of Pegasus, and do not spare; To celebrate in Verse, his Vertues rare, Mourn ye Inhabitants of Helicon, Your Captain now lyes dead at Galedon. Come Philosophick wits imploy your Arts, To find out what perfections and parts The Learned do aceomplish, which he wanted▪ And what they have which to him was not granted Mourn all ye Learn'd, and his death bemoan, Who was the Muses eldest, dearest Son. Come all ye Lovers of the Mathematicks, Students of politicks, and Laws or practicks; Ye that the Divine Mysteries of Truth Profess to search, admire this excellent Youth, Deplore his death, whose great Soul did aspire To all the highest secrets you admire. Come all Religions Lovers, who for duty, And for your Zeal, for Reformations beauty Were persecute, by treacherous Tyrants hands Chas'd in your own, baniish to other lands, Bedew his herse with tears, who ne`r comply With Tyrants snares, nor yeelded to their pride
But ever did undauntedly oppose True Liberties, and true Religious oes. And ever scorned danger, or demur With any glorious project to concur. The Church in its due order to retrive, His Countrey from all slavery to relieve, His Princes Interest for to advance, 'Gainst all attempts of Ireland or of France. In these no danger were his dread, but pleasure, Where in he spilt his blood, & spent his treasure. Come therefore all ye Souldiers, sons of Valour, Over his funeral express your dolour. Who for undaunted Magnaminity `Mong th`Ages Worthies may plac`d be in the first three `Mong Hero's all, of whom this age can glory, No worthie, more may be renown`d in story. You chiefly are oblig`d of all the Region. Poor little remnant of his proper Legion: To turn your Triumphs into bitter mourning, And with your brinish tears to quench the burning Of ruinous Dunkel, in whose black smoak, His Soul did soar up to its Eternal Rock. Curst Caledon, Gilboa of the Highland, Where Canaanites, did kill our bravest Cleland. Be thou for ever barren, and unbuilt, Like Jericho, in punishment and guilt; Be thou henceforth famous for nought, but from Leiutenent Colonel Cleland's Marble Tomb.
In MEMORY of Leiutenent Colonel WILLIAM CLELAND▪ I`m doubtful whom first to invite, to share In what my Griefs and heavy Sorrows are. Mars or the Muses; both receiv`d a Wound That dismal day, Great Cleland fell to Ground; Who e`re love Learning, must his fall deplore: For in his Brain was comprehended more Philosophy, Divinity and Law, Than of his Years, this Age in one Man saw, I justly may then call the poreing Tribe, That in the Courts of Great Appollo bide, To joyn with me, and to Lament in Verse And poure a shower of Tears upon his Hearse: Oh! fruitless Tears, for they cannot return This Worthy Hero from his Mournfull Urne; Mournful to us, to him a sweet Repose; For`s Mortal part: While as his Soul with those Who are Redeem`d, sweet Halelujahs Sings▪ And'mongst those crown`d heads triumphs & reigns In the next place, my sad and grieved Heart Calls greatest Sword Men here to take a part: And tho ye`re more acquaint with Blood than tears▪ Yet when this sad distressing Sight appears, Brave Cleland`s Corps laid in a daksome Grave▪ Dry Eyes, ty`d Tongues, or whole Hearts can you have▪ He`s gone, who Valour could the Valiant teach He`s gone, who`s Conduct was of no mean reach▪
(But if he fell by Craft, or Treachery; When he`s turn`d Dust, his precious Blood shall cry) He's gone, prefer`d his Honour to his Breath; He`s gone prizd Life, yet never feared Death. He`s gone, whose Art in using Tempered Steel. Has made his Foes seek safety from their Heel. No Mortals Name I will bid you Adore, But such a loss, ye surely should deplore And grieve he`s gone: It is but now and then, This barren Earth, produceth such rare Men. Great Cleland, when thy soul from earth took flight Thou prov`d it true, saints can both pray & fight▪ And gave the lye to their reproachful Words, Say Praying men, can make no use of Swords. And as thy Life to Enemies was Pain, As Sampsons death, so thine may prove their Bane From many eyes, thy fall a salt shower drew: But God still lives. Blest Soul we bide Adieu. EPITAPH. Grace, Learning, Valour centered in one Adorn`d that dust, lyes here below this stone: Because on Earth, his Equals were but few, His Soul took wing, & early Heavenward flew That he might shun earths folly stains, & care, And with His Mates, sing Halelujahs there.
ELEGIE Upon the Death of Leiutenent Colonel WILLIAM CLELAND. Who died at Dunkel, 21 of August, 1689. Composed by the Laird of Airdrie. WHat? Cleland dead! would he had never been, Or  in some Cloister, past unseen; Then we`d liv`d ignorants, ne`re come to know To what a pitch in vertue man might grow It had been an easie Faith. that death had been Our due, and but the just reward of sin: But now my doubting Fancy doth surmize; Death might have made attempt on Paradice, In spite of Innocence, and can`t forbear, Even with Religion, thus to interfeir. I`m grown (great Cleland) cross to thy design, I`m grown half Atheist, through this fall of thine Inclin`d almost with passion to dispence, To curse hard Fae, and quarel Providence. Was`t but t`amaze the World, kind Heaven, he came And past like lightning, vanisht like a flame? Ws it for only this, thou sent him here, To make all other wonders disappear?
Or was`t to make poor sillie mortals know, What worth thou couldst on mortal flesh bestow? Or but to make th`ungrateful earth repine, That Heaven envy`d it any thing Divine? What ever brought him here, or took him hence It was no mean, or common influence, Of Heavens best mettal, that inform`d his soul, And made all vertue, but a blubr`d scrol Of his great mind: So that a doubt it is If he were Vertues soul, or she were his. I cannot solve the doubt; but this I find, He being gone, she could not stay behind. For if she was his soul, he being gone, She hath no Organ, now to work upon. If he were hers, he being sar`d above, She`s but a carcase dead, and cannot move. He`s gone, no mortal pensil e`re shall limn A lively draught, or of his worth, or him. Wit finds it self for that great Task unfit: For Cleland was an Universe of Wit. Dumb Rhetorick hath lost her Tongue & sense, Is quite benumb'd, for he was Eloquence, And Sense in the pure abstract. Reason she By weeping her sad loss, hath lost her Eye: Retaining only store of tears, to keep A Consort with the mourning World, & weep. The Muses sory wights, have quit their mountain. And drown`d their harps in their forsaken fountain. They were his Converts, he had made them follow His Heav'nly lays, & quit the devil Apollo.
Had given them Zion for Parnassus Hill, Taught them in Davids streams to dip their q Learning hath lost her Son and hopul Heir, And damps the Christal skys, with sighs & car Her hopes with him, are now for ever gone, To trace the Laberinths, of her secret stone. Even Mars himself, through loss of him is sai T`have broke his sword, & curst his fighting trade But those are losses of a second rate, Poor Triffs scarcely worth a grave regrait: There comes a Ladie, in a mourning guise; Whose bloody gaping wounds, & weeping eyes Crave all our tears, and all our sighs as due, To her, and wills us even forget him too: Religion! Heaven befriend thee, thou hast lost: Scarce thy remaining stock, will clear thy co Long hast thou been a stranger, to these Land Banish`d and torn by sacriligious hands; And but in hope once more to raise thine head When by a fatal blow, thy patron`s dead. He was thy son, but such a hopefull Child, As gave the Mother, (fatally beguil`d) Just hopes of conquest, O`re the powers of Hell▪ And all that durst, against her Laws rebell. Thy first Grand Enemie, the Dragons Beast; Was by his matchless Courage, cou`d, and chas' The Whore, its rider, found it plain, that she, Had ne`re Encounterd such an Enemie: And that beneath the Sun, was not one Name Was justly more Romes terrour, and her shame. Could foil with Reason, and the force of words▪ Her Reason; and her Treason, with sharp Swords▪
This Justifies the Figure, where I said, That he was verrues Soul, and she now dead. Mark but how that black vermins poisonous gall. Alongst this Worlds, consuming Gorps doth crawl; Me thinks I see, how Romes mas smumbling Moles: Like frighted Rats, peep from their Dens & hols; Fearfull, least Fame perhaps may have belyed, Their credulous hops, in telling Cleland`s dead: Or least he may, altho he now be gone, Anticipat the Resurrection: And make them once more doubt, which doth affoord Most fright, his Reasons conquest, or his Sword. But now expect no Legends of his praise, For all these Triffles, Lawralls, Mirtles, Bays, Were Herogliphicks Dark, and Figures dimn, Were honour`d by, but could not honour him: His was a greater Crown, envy will grant, He Reconcil`d the Souldier and the Saint For Monument, his Memorie can not need; He build before hand his own Piramid, On solid Vertue, whence he did aspyre, Elijah like, to Heaven, in Flames of Fire, And sith no hand could write an Elegie, Or speak of him as he deserv`d, but he▪ With his own hand, he made his honour good, And wrote his Obsequies, in Rebells Blood. Tears, Tears of Blood! not these saint streams that rise, A Wheining Sacrifice, in Female Eyes; Become the Mournfull memorie of his Hearse, Stop Muse: least thou prophane it with thy Verse. Vivit post Funera Virtus.
An ACROSTICK upon his NAME. WEll, all most stoop to death, none dare gain∣say If it command, of force we must obey: Life, honour, Riches, Glory of our State, Lyes at the all disposing Will of Fate: If't were not so, why then by sad loud thunder And sulph`rous crashes, which rends the skies asunder Must a brave Cleland by sad destiny. Cull'd out a Victime, for his Country die. Lo, here's a Divine Hand, we find in all, Eternal VVisdom had decreed his fall. Let all lament it, while loud fame reports And sounds his praise inCountry, Cities, Courts No old forgetful Age shal end his story. Death cut his days, but could not stain his glory FINIS. CORONAT OPUS.
