C6270 99895575 54539
CERTAIN ELEGANT POEMS, WRITTEN By Dr. CORBET, BISHOP OF NORWICH. London, Printed by R. Cotes for Andrew Crooke at the Green Dragon in Pauls Church-yard, 1647.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lady Teynbam: Her humble Servant N. N. wisheth eternall Beauty, both in this world, and the world to come. Madam, I Have read that a poor and mean Lamp of a great Phi∣losopher, hath been sold at a great price; And I have seen a Me∣dail,
which in the intrinseck value was worth little, sold at a great rate, because it had the Name and Image of some great Person stampt upon it. I therefore that I may gain an extrin∣seque value to this Book, have presu∣med to dedicate it unto you, Madam, in hope that your Noblenesse and gen∣tlenesse is as great as your Beauty, which delighteth and causeth admi∣ration in the eyes of all, but those of the envious: And that you will in the permission of your Name to be set before this Book, imitate the custome of Kings, who set their Names on coines of Copper, as well as on those of Gold; and as the King that coines, sets what value hee pleaseth on his
Money; so when your name is set to his Work, I will give it what price  please, and every wise person will uy it.
POEMS. Iter Boreale. FOure Clerks of Oxford, Doctors two, and two, That would be Doctors, having lesse to doe With Austin, then with Galen, in Vacation Chang'd studies, and turn'd bookes to recreation And on the tenth of August Northward bent, A journey not so soone conceiv'd as spent. The first halfe day they rode, they light upon A Noble Clergy host, Kitt Middleton; Who numbring out good dishes with good tales, The major part o'th cheere weigh'd downe the scales, And though the count'nance make the feast, say bookes; Wee nere found better welcome with worse lookes; Here we payd thankes, and parted, and at night Had entertainment all in one mans right, At Flowre, a Village, where our Tenant shee Sharpe as a winter morning, fierce, yet free, With a leane visage like a Carved face On a Court-cupboard, offer'd up the Place;
She pleas'd us well, but yet her husband better, A hearty fellow and a good bone-setter; Now whither it were providence or lucke, Whether the keepers or the stealers bucke, There we had ven'son such as Virgill slew, When he would feast AEneas and his crew; Here we consum'd a day, and the next morne, To Daintry with a Land-winde wee were borne, It was the Marker, and the Lecture day, For Lecturers sell Sermons, as the Lay Doe sheepe and Oxen, have their seasons just, For both their Markets, there wee dranke downe dust. I'th' interim comes a most officious drudge, His face and gowne draw'd out with the same budge, His pendant pouch which was both large and wide, Look'd like a Letters-patents by his side: He was as awfull as he had beene sent From Moses with the eleventh Commandement; And one of us he sought, a man of Flower He must bid stand, and challenge for an hower: The Doctors both were quitted of their scare, The one was hoarse, the other was not there, Therefore him of the two he seised best, Able to answer him of all the rest, Because he needs but ruminate that ore, Which he had chew'd the Sabbath day before; For though we were resolv'd to doe him right, For Master Bayleys sake, and Master Wright, Yet he dissembl'd that the Mace did erre, For he nor Deacon was, nor Minister; No quoth the Serjeant, sure then by relation, You have a licence Sir, or Toleration;
And if you have no orders 'tis the better, So you have Dods precepts, or Cleavers letter; Thus looking on his Mace and urging still, 'Twas Master Wrights, and Master Bayleys will, That he should mount, at last he condescended To stoppe the gap, and so the Treaty ended; The Sermon pleas'd, and when we were to dine, Wee all had Preachers wages, thankes, and wipe. Our next dayes stage was Littleworth a Towne Not willing to be noted, or set downe, By any Traveller, for when we had beene Through at both ends, wee could not find an Inne, Yet for the Church sake turne and light wee must, Hoping to finde one dramme of Wickless dust, But wee found none, for underneath the Pole, No more rests of his body, then his Soule; Abused Martyr, how hast thou beene torne, By two wilde factions! first the Papists burne Thy bones for hate, the Puritanes in zeale Doe sell thy Marble, and thy Brasse they steale. A Parson met us there who had great store Of Livings, some say, but of Manners more; In whose streight cheerefull age a man might see Well govern'd fortune, bounty, wise and free; He was our guide to Lester, save one mile, There was his dwelling where wee stay'd a while And dranke stale Beere, I thinke was never new, Which the dunne wench that brought it us did brew; And now wee are at Lester, where wee shall Leapeo're sixe steeples and an Hospitall Twice told, those Lande-markes I referre To Cambdens eye, Englands Chronogropher;
Let me observe the Almes mens Herauldry, Who being ask'd what Henry that should bee That was their founder Duke of Lancaster, Answer'd, 'T was John of Gaunt, I assure you Sir; And so consured all their walls that said; Henry of Ricmond this foundation laid. The next thing to be noted was our Cheere, Enlarg'd with seaven and six pence, bread and beere. But O you wretched Tapsters as you are, Who reckon by your number, not your sare; And set false figures for all Companies, Abusing innocent Meales, with oathes and lyes; Forbeare your Cousnage to Divines that come, Lest they bee thought to drinke all that you summe. Spare not the laity in your reckoning thus, But sure your thest to us is scandalous. Away my Muse from this base Subject, know Thy Pegasus nere strucke his soote so low: Is not th' usurping Richard buryed here, That King of hate, and therefore slave of feare; Drag'd from the satall lield Bosworth, where hee Lost life, and what he liv'd for, Cruelty? Search, finde his name, but there is none; O Kings Remember whence your Powre, and vastnesse springs: If not as Richard now, so may you bee, Who hath no Tombe, but Scorne and Memorie. And though from his owne store Wolsey might have A Palace, or a Colledge for his grave; Yet here he lyes inrr'd, as if that all Of him to be remembred were his fall: Nothing but earth to earth, nor pompous weight Upon him but a pebble, or a quayte.
If thou art thus neglected, what shall wee Hope after death that are but shreds of thee? Hold! William calls to horse, William is he, Who though he never saw threescore and three, Ore-reckon'd us in age, as he before In drink, and will bate nothing of fourescore; And he commands, as if the warrant came, From the great Earle himselfe, to Notinghame: There wee crosse Trent, and on the other side Pray'd for Saint Andrew, as up hill wee ride. Where wee observ'd the cunning men like Moles Dwelt not in houses, but were arth'd in holes. So did they not build upwards, but digge thorough, As Hetmits Caves, or Coneys doe their Borough. Great underminers sure as any where, 'Tis thought the powder Traytots practis'd there. Would you not thinke that men stood on their heads, When Gardens cover houses there, like leads, And on the Chimnies toppe, the maide may know, Whether her potrage boyle, or not, below; There cast in herbes, or Salt, or bread, her meate, Contented rather with the smoake, then heate. This was the rockie Parish, higher stood Churches and houses, buildings, stone and wood, Crosses not yet demolish'd, and our Lady, With her armes on; embracing her whole Baby: Where let us note, though these be Northerne parts, The Crosse findes in them more then Southerne harts. The Castle's next; but what shall wee report, Of that which now is ruine, was a fort? The Gates, two Statues keepe, which Gyants are, To whom, it seemes, committed is the care
Of the whole downefall, if it be your fault, If you are guilty, may King Davids vault Or Mortimers darke Cell containe you both, A just reward for so prophane a sloath; And if hereafter tydings shall be brought Of any place, or office to be bought, And your left lead, or unwedg'd timber yet Shall passe by your consent to purchase it, May your deformed Bulkes endure the edge Of axos, feele the beerle and the wedge, May all the ballads be call'd in and dye, That sing the wars of Colebrand, and Sir Guy; O yee that do Guild Hall and Holmby keepe So carefully when both the Founders sleepe, You are good Gyants, and partake no shame, With these two worthlesse trunks of Notingham: Looke to your sev'rall charges, we must go, Though griev'd at heart to leave a Castle so. The Bull-head is the word, and we must eate, No sorrow can descend so low as meate: So to the Inne we came, where our best chere, Was that his Grace of Yorke had lodged there. He was objected to us when we call, Or dislike ought, my Lords Grace answers all; He was contented with this bed, this dyet, This keeps our discontented stomacks quier. The Inne keeper was old, fourescore almost, Indeed an Embleme, rather then an Host: In whom wee read how God and Time decree, To honour thrifty Hostlers, such as he: For in the stable first he did begin, Now see he is soe Lord of the whole Inne.
Marke the increase of straw, and hay, and how By thrift a bottle may become a Mow, Marke him all yee that have the golden Itch, All whom God hath condemned to be rich; Farewell glad father of thy daughter Mayresse, Thou Hostler Phoenix, thy example rare is. Wee are for Newarke after this sad talke, And thither 'tis no journey but a walke, Nature is want on there, and the high way Seem'd to bee private though it open lay; As if some swelling Lawyer for his health, Or srantique Usurer to ame his wealth, Had chosen out two miles by Trent, to try Two great effects of Art and Industry: The ground wee tread is meadow fertile land, New trimm'd, and leveld by the Mowers hand, Above t grew a rocke, rude, steepe and high, Which claimes a kind of Rev'rence from the Eye: Betwixt them both there flides a lively streame, Not lod, but swift: Mande was a Theame Crooked and rough, but had those Poets seene Streight-even Trent, it had immortall beene; This side the open plaine admits the Sunne, To halfe the River which did open rune; The other halfe rane clouds, where the curld wood With his exalted head threatned the flood: Here I could wish us never passing by, And never past; Now Newarke is too nigh; And as a Christmasse seeme a day but short, Deluding times with revels, and good sport, So did this beaurious mixture us beguile, And the whole twelve being travail'd seem'd one mile.
Now as the way was sweete, so was the End, Our Passage easie, and our prize a Friend; Whom there we did enjoy, and for whose sake As for a kind of purer coyne men make Us lib'rall welcome, with such Harmony As the whole Towne had beene his Family Mine host of the next Inne did not repine That we perfer'd the Hart and pass'd his signe: And where we lay the host and hostesse saine Would shew our loves were aym'd at, nor their gaine. The very beggers were so ingenuous, They rather pray sor him, then beg of us; And so the Doctors friends be pleas'd to stay, The Pritans will let the Organs play. Would they pull downe the Gallery builded new, With the Church wardens seate and Burleigh pew? Newarke for light, and beauty might compare With any Church, but what Cathedrals are: To this belongs a Viar, who succeeded The friend I mention'd, such a one there needed, A man whose life and tongue is eloquent, Able to char those ninous head of Trent, And urge the Canon home when they conspire Against the Crosse and Bls with sword and fire: There stood a Castle too, they shew us here The place where the King slept, the window where He talk'd with such a Lord, how long he stayd In his discourse, and all but what he sayd. From whence without a perspective we see Bever and Lincolne, where we faine would bee, But that our purse, and horses too were bound Within the compasse of a nrrower ground.
Our purpose is all homeward, and 'twas time At parting to have wi, as well as wine. Full thee a clocke and twenty miles to ride, Will aske a speedy horse, and a sure Guide: We wanted both, and Lowborough may glory, Error hath made it famous in our story. 'Twas night, and the swift horses of the Sunne Two houres bore our Jades their race had runne; Nor pilor, Moone, nor any such kinde starre, As guided those Wise men that came from farre, To holy Bethlem; such lights had they binne They would have soone conveyd us to an Inne: But all were wandring starres, and we as they Were taught no course but to ride on and stray: When Oh the fate of darknesse, who hath try'd it, Here our whole Fleete it scatter'd, and divided! And now we labour more to meere, then erst We did to lodge; the last cryes downe the first; Our voyces are all spent, and they that follow Can now no longer tracke us by the hollow; They curse the foremost, we the hindmost, both Accusing with like patience, haste, and sloth. At last upon a little Towne we fall, Where some for drinke, some for a candle call: Unhappy we! such straglers as we are, Admire a Candle ofter then a starre; We care not for those glorious lights aloofe, Give us a allow Candle, a dry roofe. And now we have a guide, weele cease to chase, Now we have time to pray the rest be safe, Our guide before cries Come, and we the whiles Ride blindfold, and take bridges to be styles,
Till at the last we overcome the darke, And spight of night and error hit the marke: Some halfe houre after enters the whole rayle, As if they were committed to the Jayle; The Constable that tooke 'em thus divided, Made 'em seeme apprehended and not guided, Where when wee had our fortunes both detesed, Compassion made us friends, and so we rested; Twas quickly morning, though by our short stay, Wee could not find that wee had lesse to pay; All Travellers these heavy judgements heare, A handsome hostesse makes a reckoning deare; Her smiles, her words, your purses must requ 'em, And every welcome from her adds an Item. Glad to be gone from hence, at any rate, For Bosworth wee are hors'd: behold the sate Of mortall men, foule error is a mother, And pregnant once doth soone beget another: Wee who last night did learne to lose our way, Are perfect since, and further out next day, And in a Forest having travaild sore, Like wandring Bevi he found the Boare, Or as some Love-sicke Lady of hath done, Before she was rescued by the knight oth Sunne, So are we lost, and meet no comfort then But Carts and horses, wiser then the men: Which is the way? They neither speake, nor point, Their tongues and fingers, both are out of joynt, Such monsters by Cole Herton banks there sit, After their Resurrection from the pit. Whiles in this Mill wee labour and turne round, As in a Conjurers circle, William found
A meanes for our delivery, Turne your clokes Quoth he, for Pucke is busie in these Oakes; If ever ye at Bosworth will be found, Then turne your Cloakes, for this is Fairie ground. But e're this witchcraft was perform'd, wee meete A very man, who had not cloven feere, Though William still of little saith doth doubt, 'Tis Robin or some Spirit walkes about, Strike him, quoth he, and it will turne to aire, Crosse your selves thrice, and strike him: Strike that dare Thought I, for sure this massie Forester, In blowes will prove the better Conjurer; But 'twas a gentle keeper, one that knew Humanity and manners where they grew, And rode along with us, till he could say, Loe yonder Bosworth stands, and this your way. And now when we had sweat, 'twixt Sunne and Sunne; And eight miles long, to thirty broade had runne, Wee learn'd the just proportion from hence, Of the Diameter, and Circumference. That night made yet amends, our meate, our sheeres, Were farre above the promise of those streetes, Those houses that were til'd with straw and mosse, Promis'd but weake repaire for that dayes losse Of patience, yet this outside lets us know, The worthy'st things make not the greatest show. The shot was easie, and what concernes us more, The way was so, mine host did ride before, Mine host was full of Ale, and History, And on the morrow when he brought us high Where the two Roses joyned, you would suppose, Chaueer nere writ the Romant of the Rose,
Heare him: see yee yond' woods? there Richard lay With his whole Army: looke the other way, And loe where Richmond in a bed of grosse, Encamp'd himselfe o're night with all his sorce. Upon this Hill they met; why, he could tell The Inch where Richmond stood, where Richard sell; Besides what of his knowledge he could say, Hee had Authenrique notice from the Play; Which I might guesse by's mustrimg up the Ghosts, And policies not incident to hosts: But chiefly by that one perspicuous thing, Where he mistooke a Player for a King, For when he would have said, King Richard dy'd, And call'd a Horse, a Horse, he Burbage cry'd. How e're his talke, his company pleas'd well, His Mare went truer then his Chronicle; And even for Conscience sake uns purr'd, unbeaten, Brought us sixe miles and turn'd taile to New-Eaton; From thence to Coventrey, where we scarce dine, Onely our stomachs warm'd with zeale and wine, And thence as if wee were predestin'd sorch, Like Lot from Sodome, flye to Killingworth. The keeper of the Castle was from home, So that halfe mile was lost; yet when wee come An host receives us there, wee ne're deny him, My Lord of Losters man, the Parson by him; Who had no other proose to testifie, He serv'd the Lord, but age and bawdery. Away for shame, why should three miles divide Warwicke, and us? they that have horses ride, A short mile from the Towne, an humble shrine, At foore of a high rocke consists in signe
Of Guy and his devotions, who there stands, Ugly and huge, more then a man on's hands, His Helmet steele, his Gorget Mayle, his Shield Brasse, made the Chappell fearfull as a field. And let this answer all the Popes complaints: Wee set up Gyants, though wee pull downe Saints. Beyond this in the rode way as wee went, A pillar stands where this Colossus leant, Where he would love, and sigh, and for hearts case Oft times write verses, some say such as these. Here will I languish in this silly bower, While my sweere heart triumphs in yonder Tower. No other hindrance now, but wee may passe, Cleare to our Inne; Oh there an hostesse was, To whom the Castle and the dunne Cowe are Sights after dinner, shee is morning wae, Her whole behaviour borrowed was and mixt, se foole, halfe puppet, and her pace betwixt Measure and Jigge, her courtsy was an honour, Her gare as if her neighbours had out gone her; Shee was barr'd up in Whale bones that did leese None of the whales length, for they reach'd her knees; Off with her head, and then shee hath a middle, As her Wast stands, just like the new found fiddle, The favourite Theorbo, truth to tell yee, Whose neck and throate are deeper then the belly: Have you seene Monkeys chain'd about the loynes, Or pottle pots, with rings? just so shee joynes Her selfe together; a dressing shee doth love, In a small print below, and text above. What though her name be King, yet 'tis no treason, Nor breach of Statute to enquire the reason
Of her branch'd russe, a Cubit every poake I seeme to wende her, but she strucke the stroake At our departure, and our worships there Payd for our titles deare, as any where. Though Beadles and Professors both have done, Yet every Inne claimes augmentation: Please you walke out and see the Castle, come, The owner saith, it is a Schollers home, A place of strength, and health, in the same Fort You would conceive a Castle and a Court, The Orchards, Gardens, Rivers and the Ay e May with the Trenches, Rampires, Wals compare, It seemes no art, no force can intercept it, As if a Lover built, a Souldier kept it; Vp to the Tower, though it bee steepe and high, Wee doe not clime, but walk; and though the eye Seeme to be weary, yet our feet are still In the same posture, cousn'd up the Hill, And thus the workemans art deceives our sence, Making those rounds of pleasure and defence. As wee descend the Lord of all this frame, The Honourable Chancellour to us came, Above the hill there blew a gentle breath, But now wee feele a sweeter gale beneath, The phrase and welcome of this Knight did make The place more elegant: each word he spake Was wine and musicke, which he did expose To us if all our art could censure those: With him there was a Prelate, by his place Arch deacon to the Bishop, by his face A greater man, for that did counterfeit Lord Abbot of some Covent standing yet,
A corpulent relique, marry and'tis sinne, Some Puritane gets not that face call'd in; Aongst leane brethren it may scandall bring, That looke for parity in ev'ry thing; For us let him enjoy all that God sends, Plenty of flesh, of livings and of friends, Imagine us here ambling downe the streete, Circling in Flower, and making both ends meere, Where wee sare well foure dayes, and did complaine Like harvest folkes of weather and of raine, And on the feast of Bolmew we try, What Revels that Saint keepes at Babury; Ih name of God Amen first to beginne, The altar was converted to an Inne, Wee lodged in the Chappell by the signe, But in a banck'rupt Taveme by the wine, Besides our horses usage makes us thinke, 'Twas still a Church, for they in Coffins drinke, As if'twere congruous that the ancient stlye Close by those Altars in whose faith they dye; Now you believe the Church hath great varietie Of Monuments when Innes have such societie, But nothing lesse, ther's no inscription there, But the Church-wardens of the last yeare, In stead of Saints in windowes, and in wals, Here buckets hang, and there a Cobweb fals: Would you not thinke they love antiquity, Who rush their quire for perpetuity, Whilst all the other pavements and the floore Are supplicant to the surveyors power Of the high wayes, that he would gravell'd keepe Them, or in winter sure they will bee deepe;
If not for Gods sake, for Master Wheatley's sake, Levell the Walkes; suppose these pit-sals make Him spraine a Lecture, or misplace a joynt In his long prayer, or in his seventeenth point, Thinke you the Dawes and Sares can set him right? Surely this sinne upon your heads will light; And say, Beloved, what unchristian charme Is this, you have not left a leg or arme Of an Apostle? Thinke you it those were whole, They would arise at last t'assume a soule? If not, 'tis plaine all the Idolatry Lyes in your solly, not the imag'ry. 'Tis well, the pinnacles are falne in twaine, For now the devill should he tempt againe, Hath no advantage of a place so high: Fooles! he can dash you from your Gallery, Where all your medley meetes, and doe compare Not what you learne, but who was longest there; The Puritan, the Anabaptist, Brownist, Like a grand Sallad, Tinkers, what a Towne is't? The Crosses also like old stumps of Trees, Or stooles for horsemen that have seeble knees, Carry no heads above Ground: those which tell, That Christ hath nre descended into Hell, But to the Grave, his picture buryed have In a farre deeper dungeon then a Grave, That is descended to endure what paines The Devill can thinke, or such disciples braines. No more my griefe, in such prophane abuses Good whips make better verses then the Muses: Away, and looke nor backe, away, while yet The Church is standing, while the benefit
Osseeing it remaines so long you shall Have that rackt downe and call'd Apocryphall, And in some Barne heare cited many an Author, Ka Stubs Anne Ascue, or the Ladies daughter, Which shall be urg'd for Fathers: stop disdaine, When Oxford once appeares Saran refraine. Neighbours, how hath our angerlius out-gone us, Is not Saint Gileses this, and that Saint Johns? We are return'd, but just just so much ore As Rauleigh from his voyage, and no more. R. C. WHen too much zeale doth fire devotion, Love is not love, but superstition: Even so in civill duties when we come Too oft, we are not kind, but troublesome, Yet as the first is not Idolatry, So is the last, but grieved industry, And such was mine whose strife to honour you By overplus, hath robd you of your due. On Bishop Ravis. WNen I passe Pauls, and travai in the walke, Where all our Brittish sinners sweare and talke,
Old hairy Ruffins, Bankrupts, South sayers, And youth whose cousenage is as old as theirs; And there behold the body of my Lord, Trod under foot by vice which he abhord. It wounded me the Land lord of all times Should let long lives and leases to their crimes; But to his saving honour scarce afford But so much Sunne as to the Prophets Gourd, Yet since swift flights and envy hath best end, Like breath of Angels with a blessing send, And vanisheth withall, while fouler deeds Expect a tedious harvest of bad seeds; I blame not fame and nature if they gave Where they could adde no more, the last a grave; And justly doe thy grieved friends forbeare Bubble and Alablaster boyes to reare Ore thy religious dust, but bid men know Thy life, which such illusions cannot show; For thou hast dyed amongst those happy ones, Who trust not in their superstitions, Their hired Epitaphs, and perjur'd stone, Which oft belies the soule when she is gone, But durst commit thy body as it lies, To tongues of living men, not unborne eyes; What profits thee a sheet of lead, what good? If on thy course a marble Quarry stood? Let those that feare their rising purchase vaults, And send their statues  faults As if like birds that picke at painted grapes, Their Judge knew not their persons from their shapes, Whilst thou assured by thy easie dust Shalt spring at first, they would not, yet they must:
Not need the Chancellor boast, whose Pyramis Above the Host and altar reared is; For though thy body fill a narrow roome, Thou shalt not change deed with him for his Tombe. R. Corbet. On Doctor Corbets Father. VIncent Corbet farther known By Pointers name then by his owne, Here lies engaged till the day Of raysing bones and quickning clay: No wonder reader that he hath Two Sir-names in one Epitaph, For this one doth comprehend All that both families could lend; And if to know more art then any Could multiply one into many, Here a Colony lies then Both of qualities and men. Yeares he liv'd were neere fouscore; But count his vertues, he liv'd more; And number him by doing good, He liv'd the age before, the flood. Should we undertake his story, Truth would seeme fain'd, and fainednesse glory: Besides the Tablet were too small, Adding the pillars and the wall;
Yet of this volume much, if found, Writ in many a fertill ground, Where the Printer thee affords Earth for Paper, Trees for Words He was natures Factor here, And leiger gu for every shiere; To supply the ingenious wants Of some Spring fruits, and fortaine plants. Simple he was, and withall, His purs not base, nor prodigall, Poorer in substance, then in friends, Future and publique were his end His conscience like his diet, such As neither tooke nor left too much, So the made lawes needlesse growne To him, he needed but his owne: Did he his neighbour bid like those That feast them onely to enclose, Or with their Roastmeat rack their , And cousen them with their  consents? No the free meeting of his board Did but one liberall sense afford; No Close or Aker understood, But onely love and neighbourhood His Almes were such as Paul defines, Nor causes to be said, but Which Almes by faith, hope, love, laid downe, I ayd up what now he wea, a Crowne. Besides his fame, his goods, his life, He left a griev'd sonne and wife; Strange sorrow scarce to be bleev'd, When as a sonne and heire is griev'd. R. Corbet.
On the death of Master Rice Manciple of Christ-Church. WHo can doubt (Rice) to what eternall place Thy soule is fled, that did but know thy face? Whose body was so light it might have gone To heaven without a resurrection; Indeed tho wert all Type, thy limbes were signes, Thy Arteries but Mathematick lines; As i two soules had made the compound good, Which both should live by faith, and none by blood. R. C. To his sonne Vincent Corbet. WHat I shall leave thee none can tell, But all shall say I wish thee well; I wish thee (Vin) before all wealth, Both bodily and ghostly health; Nor too much wealth, nor wit come to thee, So much of either may undoe thee. I wish thee learning, not for show, Enough for to instruct, and know; Not such as Gentlemen require To prate at Table, or at Fire.
I wish thee all thy mothers graces, Thy fathers fortunes, and his places. I wish thee friends, and one'at Cout Not to build on, but support, To keepe thee, not in doing many Oppressions, but from suffering any. I wish thee pace in all thy way, Nor Lazy nor contentious days; And when thy soule and body part, As innocent as now thou a. R. C. An Elegy on the late Lord William Ho∣ward, Baron of Effingham, dead the 10. of December, 1615. I Did not know thee, Lord, nor doe I strive To winne accesse, or grace, with Lords alive: The dead I serve, from whence nor faction can Move me, nor favour; nor a greater man. To whom no vice commends me, nor bribe sent, Fr whom no Penance warnes, nor portion spent, To these I dedicate as much of me As I can spare from my owne husbandry: And till Ghosts walke, as they were wont to doe, I trade for some, and doe these errants too. But first I doe enquire, and am assur'd, What tryals in their Journeys they endur'd,
What certainties of Honour and of worth, Their most uncertaine Life times have brought forth; And who so did least hurt of this small store, He is my patron, dy'd he rich or poore. First I will know of Fame (after his peace, When Flattery and Envy both doe cease) Who ruld his actions: Reason, or my Lord? Did the whole man relie upon a word, A badge of Title, or above all chance Seem'd he as Ancient as his Cognisance? What did he? Acts of mercy and refraine Oppreions in himselfe, and in his Traine? Was his essentiall table full as free As boasts and invitations use to be? Where if his Russet-friend did chance to dine, Whether his Satten-man would fill him wine? Did he thinke perjury as lovd a sinne, Himselfe for sworne, as is his slave had beene? Did he seeke regular pleasures? was he knowne Just Husband of one Wife, and she his owne? Did he give freely without puse, or doubt, And read petitions, ere they were worne out? Or should his well-deserving Client aske, Would he bestow a Tilting, or a Maske To keepe need vertuous? And that done not feare What Lady damn'd him for his absence there? Did he attend the Court for no mans fall? Wore he the ruine of no Hospitall? And when he did his rich apparell don, Put he no Widow, nor an Orphan on? Did he love simple vertue for the thing? The King for no respect but for the King?
But above all, did his Religion wait Upon Gods Throne, or on the Chaire of state? He that is guiltie of no Quaere here, Our-lasts his Epitaph, our-lives his Heire. But there is none such, none so little bad, Who but this negative goodnesse ever had: Of such a Lord we may expect the birth, He's rather in the wombe than on the earth. And 'twere a Crime in such a publike fate. For one to live well and degenerate: And therefore I am angry, when a name Comes to upbraid the World like Eingham. Nor was it modest in thee to de part To thy eternall home, where now thou art, Ere thy reproach was ready: or to dye, Ere custome had prepar'd thy calumny. Eight dayes have past since thou hast paid thy debt To sinne, and not a libell stirring yet, Courtiers that scoffe by Patent, silent sit. And have no use of Slander or of wit; But (which is monstrous) though against the tide, The Water-men have neither rayld nor lide. Of good and bad there's no distinction knowne, For in thy praise the good and bad are one. It seemes we all are coverous of Fame, And hearing what a purchase of good name Thou lately mad'st, are carefull to increase Our title by the holding of some lease From thee our Land-lord, and for that th'whole cue Speake now like Tenants ready to renew: It were too sad to tell thy pedegee, Death hath disordered all, misplacing thee,
Whilst now thy Herauld in his line of heires Blots out thy name, and fils the space with teares. And thus hath conqu'ring death, or nature rather, Made thee prepostrous ancient to thy Father, Who grieves th'art s, and like a glorious light Shines ore thy Harse. He therefore that would write And blaze thee throughly, may at once say all, Here lies the Anchor of our Admirall. Let others write for glory or reward, Truth is well paid, when the is sung and heard. R. Corbet. An Epitaph on Doctor Donne, Deane of Pauls. HE that would write an Epitaph for thee And doe it well, must st begin to be Such as thou wert; for none can truly know Thy worth, thy life, but he that hath liv'd so. He must have wit to spare, and to hule downe Enough to keepe the Gallams of the Towne, He must have learning plenty, both the Laws, Civill and Common, to judge any cause; Divinitie great store, above the rest, Not of the last Edition, but the best. He must have language ravaile, all the Arts. Judgement to use, or else hee wants thy parts;
He must have friends the highest, able to doe, Such as Mecans and Augustus too. He must have such a sicknesse, such a death, Or else his vaine descriptions come beneath. Who then shall write an Epitaph for thee He must be dead first, let't alone for me. R. Corbet. Upon Mistris Mallet. HAve I renounc'd my faith? or basely sold Salvation, or my loyalty for gold? Have I some fo in practice undertooke By poyson, shot, sharpe knife, or sharper looke To kill my King? have I beay'd the State To fire or fury, or some newer fate? Which learn'd murtherers, those grand destinies, The Jesuits have nurst if of all these I guilty am, proceed, I am content That Mallet take me for my punishment: For never sinne was of so high a rate But one nights hell with thee could expiate: Although the law with Garne and the rest Deale farre more mildly, hanging's but a jest To this immortall torture; had she beene In Martyrs torrid dayes ingendred, when Cruelty was wity, and invention free Did live by blood and thrive by cruelty,
Shee would have beene more horrid engins sa Then sire or famine, tacke or halters are. Whether her wit, forme, talke, smile, tire I name, Each is a stock of tyranny and shame. But for her breath, spectators, come nor nigh, That layes about, God blesse the company. The man in a Beares skin baited to death Would abuse the dogs much rather then her breath. One kisse of hers, and eighteene words alone Puts downe the Spanish inquisition. Thrice happy we (quoth I) thinking thereon, That see no dayes of persecution, For were it free to kill, this grilly else Would Martyrs make in compasse of her selfe. And were she not prevented by our prayer By this time she corrupted had the ayre. And am I innocent? and is it true That thing which Poet Pliny never knew. Nor Assrik, Nile, not ever Hackluits eyes Descri'd in all his East, West voiages? That thing which Poets were afraid to saine For feare her shadow should infect their braine, This spouse of Antichrist, and hers alone Shee' rest so like the whore of Babylon, Should dote on me? as if there should contrive The devill and shee to damne a man alive. Why doth not Welcome rather purchase her, And beate about this rare familiar? Six market dayes, a Wake, and a Faire too't Would beate his charges, and the ale to boore. No Tigerlike, she seeds upon a man, Worse then a Tygresse or a Leopard can,
Let me goe pray and thinke upon some spell, At once to bid the Devill and her farewell. R. Corbet. On great Tom of Christ-Church. BE dumbe ye infant Chime, thumpe nor your mettle, That nee'r out-ting a Tinker and his Kenle, Cease all your petty Las, for to day Is young Toms resurrection from the clay: And know when Tom rings out his knells, The best of you will be but dinner bells: Old Tom's growne young againe, the fiery cave Is now his Cradle that was erst his grave; He grew up quickly from his mother earth, For all you see was but an houres birth, Looke on him well, my life I dare ingage You nee'r saw prettier Baby of his age. Some take his measure by the rule, some by The Jacobs Staffe take his profundirie, And some his altitude but some doe sweare Young Tom's not like the old, but Tom nee'r feare The critick Geometricians line. If thou as loud as e're thou did ring'st nine; Tom did no sooner peepe from under ground, But straight Saint Maries Tenor lost his sound; O how this May poles heart did swell With full maine sides of joy, when that crackt bell
hoakt with annoy, and's admiration, ung like a quart pot to the Congregation; Tom went his progresse lately and look o're What he nee'r saw in many yeares before, But when he saw the old foundation, With like hope of preparation, He burst with griese, and left he should not have Due pompe, he's his owne Bell man to the grave: And that there might of him be full some mention, He carryed to his grave a new invention, They drew his Browne bread face on pretty gins. And make him stalk upon two Rowling-pins, But Sander Hill swore twice or thrice by heaven, He nee'r set such a loafe into the Oven; And Tom did Sanders vex his Cyclops maker As much as he did Sander Hill the Bakr; Therefore loud thumping Tom be thi thy pride, When thou this motto shall have on thy side. Great world! one Alexander conquer'd thee, And two as mighty men scarce conquer'd me. Brave constant spirit, none could make thee turne, Though hang'd, drawne, quarter'd, till they did thee burne; Yet not for this, norten times more be sorry, Since thou was marryr'd for the Churches glory, But for thy meritorious suffering Thou shortly shalt to heaven in a string; And though we grievd to see thee thumpt and bang'd, Wee'l all be glad great Tom to see thoe haug'd.
On John Dawson Butler of Christ Church. Doctor Corbet. DAwson the Butler's dead, although I thinke Poets were nee'r infus'd with single drinke, Ile spend a farthing Muse, a warry verse Will serve the turue to cast upon his hearse. If any cannot weepe among us hert, Take off his cup, and so squeze out reare. Weepe O ye barrells, let your drippings fall In trickling streames, make wast more prodigall, Then when our beare was good, that John may float To Syx in heare, and list up Charons boat, With wholesome waves: and as the Conduits ran With Claret, at the Coronation, So let your Channels flow with single tiffe, For John I hope is crown'd; take off your whisfe, Ye men of Rosematy, and drinke up all, Remembring 'tis a Bus sunerall Had he beene master of good double beare, My life for his, John Dawson had beene here. Doctor Corbet against the Anniversarist. EVen so dead Hector thrice was triumpht on The walls of Troy, thrice slaine when fates had done,
So did the barbaus Greekes before their host Toiment his ashes, and prophane his Ghost, At Henries vault his peace and sacred hearse Are torne and battered by thy anniverse; Wast not enough nature and strength were foes, But thou must yearely murther him in prose? Or couldst thou hope thy raving phrase could make A louder eccho then the Almanacke? Trust me, November doth more gastly looke In Dades and Hoprens penny, then thy booke. A sadder record their sixt figure beares, Then thy false printed and ambitious reas, For were it not for Christians which is ngh. When fruite, spice, eaten, and digested Pye Call for more paper, no man could make sh: How to imploy thy writings to his thrit Wherefore for beare for pity, or for shame, And bid some richer pen redeeme his name From rottennesse, leave thou him captive, since So vile a Price nee'r ransom'd such a Prince. A Letter sent from Doctor Corbet to Ma∣ster Ailebury, Decem. 9. 1618. MY Brother and much more, hadst thou been mine, Hadst thou in one rich present of a line Inclos'd Sir Francis, for in all this store, No gift can cost thee lesse, or binde me more,
Hadst thou (deare churle) imparted his returne, I should not with a tardy welcome burne; But had let loose my joy at him long since, Which now will seeme but studied negligence; But I forgive thee, two things kept thee from it, First such a friend to gaze on, next a Comet, Which Comet we discerne, though not so true As you at Sion, as long taild as you, We know already how will stand the case, With Barnavell of universall grace, Though Spaine deserve the whole Star, is the fall Be true of Lerma Duke, and Cardinall, Marry in France, we feare no blood, but wine, Lesse danger's in her sword, then in her vine: And thus we leave the blazers comming over For our portents are wise and end at Dov; And though we use no forward censuring, Not send our learned Proctors to the King, Yet every morning when the starre doth rise, There is no blacke for three houres in our eyes; But like a Puritane dreamer towards this light All eyes turne upward, all are zeale and white: More it is doubtfull that this prodigie Will turne ten Schooles to one Astronomy; And the Analysis we justly feare, Since every Art doth, seeke for resene there, Physitians, Lawyers, Glovers on the stall, The Shopkeepers speake Mathematicks all, And though men read no Gospels in these signes, Yet all professions are become Divines, All weapons from the Bodk in to the Pike, The Masons Rule, and Tailors Yard alike,
Take altitudes, and th'early sidling knaves, On Fluirs and Hoboyes, made them Jacobs slaves, Lastly of fingers, glasses we contrive, And every first is made a Prospective; Burton to Gunter Cants, and Burton heares From Gunter, and th Exchange both tongue & eare, By carriage: thus doth mired Guy complaine, His Waggon in their letters beates Charles Waine, Charles Waine, o which they say the tayle will reach And at this distance they both heare, and teach. Now for the peace of God and men, advise (Thou that hast wherewith all to make us wise) Thine owne rich studies, and deepe Harriors mine, In which there is no drosse, but all refine, O tell us what to trust to, lest we wax All stiffe and stupid with his paralex; Say, shall the old Philosophy be true? Or doth he ride above the Moone thinke you? Is he a Meteor forced by the Sun? Or a first body from creation? Hath the same starre beene object of the wonder Of our forefathers? shall the same come under The sentence of our Nephewes? write and send Or else this starre a quarrell doth pretend. Doctor Corbet to the Lord Mordant. MY Lord, I doe confesse at the first newes Of your returne from home, I did refuse
To visit you, for feare the Northerne winde Had pierc'd into your manners, and your minde, For feare you might want memory to forget Some arts of which might haunt you yet, But when I knew you were, and when I heard You were at Woodstocke seene well sun'd and ayr'd, That your contagion in you now was spent, And you were just Lord Mordant as you went, I then resolv'd to come, and did not doubt To be in season, though the Bucke was out. Windsor the place, the day was Holy-rood, Saint George my muse, for be it understood, For all Saint George more early in the yeare Broke fast, and eate a bit, yet he din'd here, And though in Aprill in red inke he shine, Know't 'twas September made him red with wine. To this good sport rode I, as being allow'd To see the King, and cry him in the crowd, And at all solemne meetings have the grace To thrust, and to be trod on by my place. Where when I come I see the Church beset With tumults, as had all the bren met To heare some silenc'd teacher in that quarter, In veigh against the Order of the Garter; And justly might the weake be griev'd and wrung, Because the Garter prayes in a strange tongue, And doth retaine traditions yet of France, In an old [Honi soit qui maly pense] Whence learne (those Knights that order that have ra) That all besides the buckle is prophane; But there was no such doctrine now at stake, No starv'd physitian from the pulpit spake,
And yet the Church was full, all sorts of men, Religions, sexes, ages were there then, Whilst he that keepes the Quire, togother locks Papists and Puritanes, the Pope and Kn. Which made some wise men feare that love our nation, This mixture would be get a toleration; Or that Religion should united be, When they said Service, these the Letany. But no such hast, this dayes devotion lies Not in the hearts of men, but in their eyes; They that doe see Saint George, heare him aright, For he loves not to parley, but to fight. Amongst this audience (my Lord) stood I Well edified as any that stood by; And knew how many leggs a Knight lets fall, Betwixt the King, the offring, and his stall: Aske me but of their robes, I shall relate The colour and the fashion; and the state: I saw too the procession without doore, What the pooe Knights and what the Prebends wore: All this my neighbours that were by me tooke, Who div'd but in the garment, and the looke, But I saw more, and though I have their fate In place and favour, yet I want their pate: Me thought I then did these first ages know, Which brought forth Knights so arm'd, and looking so, Who would maintaine their oath and bind their word With these two seales, an Altar and a Sword. Then saw I George new Sainted, when such Priests Wore him not onely on, but in their breasts. Oft did I wish that day, with open vow, O that my Country were in danger no:
And 'twas no treason, who could feare to die When he was sure his rescue was so nigh? And here I might a just digression make, Whilst of some particular Knights I spake, To whom I owe my thankes, but 'twere not best By praysing two or three t'accuse the rest, Nor can I sing that order or those men, That are above the mysterie of my pen; And private fingers may not touch those things Whose authors Princes are, whose partners Kings Wherefore imburnt I will refraine that fire, Lest hearing such a Theame I should aspire T'include my King and Prince, and so rehearse Names fitter for my Prayer then my Verse; He that will speake of Princes let him use More grace then wit, know God's above his Muse. No more of counsell harke the Trumpets sound, And the grave Organs with the Antheme drown'd, The Church had said Amen to all their rites, And now the Trojan horse lets loose her Knights, The triumph moves: O what could added be Save your successe to that solemnity; Which I expect and doubt not but to see't, When the Kings favour and your worth shall meet, I thinke the robes will now be come you so, Saint George himselfe would not his owne Knights know, From the Lord Mordant: Pardon me that preach A doctrine onely that King James can teach; To whom I leave you who alone hath right To make Knights Lords; and you a Lord a Knight. Imagine now the Scene lies in the hall, (For at high noone we are sants all)
The Church is emptie as the bellies were, Of the spectators that had languish there; And now the favorites of the Clearke o'th' checke, Who oft had yawnd and stretcht our many a necke Twixt morne and evening, the dull seeders on Fresh patience, and rayss of the Sun, They who liv'd in the Hall five houres at least, As if 'twere an arraignment, not a feast, And looke so like the hangings they stand neere, None could discerne which the true pictures were; These now shall be refresht, whiles the bold rum Strikes up his srolick through the Hall they come. Here might I end, my Lord, and here subscribe Your honours to his power: but O what bribe, What feare, or mulct can make my muse refraine When she is ing'd of nature or disdaine? Not all the guard shall hold me, I must write Though they both sweare, and lie, how they would fight If I proceed: my though their Captaine say Hold him, or else you shall not cae to day; These goodly yeomen must not seape my pen, 'Twas dinner time, and I must speake of men; So to the Hall made I, with little care To praise the dishes, or to tast the fare; Much lesse t'endanger the least Tart, or Pye By any water there stolne, and set by, But to compute the value of the meare, Which was for glory, not for hunger eate; Nor did I feare, stand backe: who passed before The presence or the privy Chamber doore, But woe is me, the Guard, those men of warre But two weapons use, Beese, and the Barre
Began to gripe me, knowing not in truth That I had sung John Dory in my youth, Or that I knew the day when I could chaunt, Chivie, and Arthur, or the Siege of Gaunt; And though these be the vertu which must try, Who is most worthy of their courtesie, They profited me nothing, for no notes Will move them now, they're dense in their new coates; Wherefore on run I, afresh they sall, and show Themselves more active then before, as though They had some wager laid, and did contend Who should abuse me furthest at armes end; One I remember with a grizled beard, And better growne then any of the heard, One were he well examin'd, and made looke His name in his owne parish, and Church Booke, Could hardly prove his Christendome, and yet It seemes he had two names, for there were set On a white Calves doublet which he wore, Two Capitall Letters of a name, before; Letters belike which he had spu'd, and spilt, When the great Bumbard leak, or was at tilt: This Iron side takes hold, and suddenly Hurles me, by judgement of the standers by Some twelve foot by the square, takes me againe Out throwes it halfe a barre, and thus we twaine At this hot exercise an houre had spent. He the fierce agent, I the instrument, My man began to rage, but I ery'd peace, When he is dry or hungry he will cease, Peace for the Lords sake Nicholas, lest they take us And use us worse then Hercules did Cas.
And now I breath my Lord, now have I time To tell the cause and to consess the crime; I was in blacke, a Scholler straight they guess'd, Indeed I colourd for it at the least, I spake them saire, desir'd to see the hall, And gave them reasons for it, this was all; By which I learne it is a maine offence, So neere the Cleark oth Check to utter sense. Talke of your emblems masters, and relate How AEsop hath it, and how Aliate, The Cocke, the pearle, the dunghill and the gem, This passeth all that talke of sense to them. Much more good service was committed yet, Which I in such a tumut must forget, But shall I smother that prodigious fit, Which past in cleare invention, and pure wit As thus: a nimble knave, though somewhat far, Strikes at my head, and fairely steales my hat; Another breakes a jest, (well Windsor, well, What will ensue there's none can tell. When they spend wit, serve God) yet 'twas not much, Although the Clamour and the applause were such, As when Sir Archey, or Garret doth provoke them, And with wide laughter, and a cheate loase choake them. What was the jest d'ye aske? I dare repeat it, And put it home before you shall entreate it, He call'd me Bloxsord man, confesse I must 'Twas bitter; and it griev'd me in a thrust That most ingratefull word Bloxford to heare From him whose breath yet stunke of Oxford Beare; But let it passe, for I have now pass'd through Their halberds, (and worse weapons) their teeth too,
And of a worthy officer was invited To dine; who all their rudenesse hath required, Where we had mirth and meate, and a large boord Furnisht with all the kitchin could affoord, But to conclude, to wipe off from before ye All this which is no better then a story; Had this affiont beene done me by command Of noble Fenton, had their captives hand Directed them to this, I should beleeve I had no cause to jest, but much to grieve; Or had discerning Pembrooke seene this done And thought it well bestowed, I would have run Where no good man had dwelt, no learnd should flie, Where no disease would keepe me company, Where it should be preserment to endure To teach a Schoole or else to serve a cure. But as it stands, the persons and the cause Considered well my manners and their Lawes, 'Tis no affliction to me, for even thus Saint Paul hath sought with beasts at Ephsus, And I at Windsor; let this comfort then Rest with all able and deserving men; He that will please the guard and not provoke Court wits, must sell his learning, buy a cloake; For at all seasts, and maskes the doome hath been, A man thrust sorth, and a gay cloake let in. To the Duke of Buckingham. I'Ve read of Ilands floating and remov'd In Ovids time, but never saw it prov'd,
Till now; that fable by the Prince and you, (By your transporting England) is made true. We are not whore we were, the dog-Star reignes No cooler in our climate, then in Spaines; The selfesame breath, same age, same heate, same burning Is here, and there, 'twill be till your returning; Come ere the Cards be altred, else perhaps Your stay may make an errour in our mappes, Lest England will be sound when you shall passe, A thousand times more Southward then it was; O that you were (my Lord) O that you were Now in Black-Friers, or had a disguis'd eare, Or you were Smith againe two houres to be In Pauls next Sunday, at sull Sea at three; There you should heare the Legends of each day, The perills of your Inne, and of your way Your enterprizes, accidents untill You should arrive at Court and reach Madrill. There should you heare how the States grandees out you, With their twice diligence about you, How one inviron'd Prince walkes with a guard, Of Spanish spies, and his owne servants barr'd; How not a Chaplaine of his owne may stay When he would heare a Sermon preacht, or pray. You would be hungry having din'd to heare The price of victuall, and the scarcity there, As if the Prince had ventured there his life To make a samine, not to setch a wise. Your Egges (which must be addle too) are deare As English Capons, Capons as sheepe here. No grasse for horse or cattle, for they say It is not cut and made, grasse there growes hay,
Then 'tis so seething hor, they sweare You never heard of raw Oyster there; Your cold meate comes in reeking, there your wint Is all burnt Sacke, the fire was in the vine; Item the Pullers are distinguisht there Into soure quarters, as we branch the yeare, And are a weeke a wasting; Munday noone A wing, at supper something with a spoone; Tuesday a leg, and so forth, Sunday more, The Liver and the gizzards betwixt foure; As for the mutton, in the best house holder, 'Tis selony to cheapen a whole shoulder: Lord how our stomacks come to us againe, When we conceive what snatching is in Spaine? I whilst I write and doe your newes repeate, Am forc'r to call for breakefast in and eate; And doe you wonder at this dearth the while The flood that makes it runs ith' middle Ile, Poets of Pauls, these of Duke Hum messe, That feed on naught but graves and emptinesse. But hearke you noble Sir, in one crosse weeke, My Lord hath lost 4000. l. at Gleeke, And sith they doe allow you little meate, They are content your losses should be great; False on my Deanery, alser then your sare is Or then the difference with the Grand d'Olivaries, Which was reported strongly for one tide, But after six houres flowing eb'd and dy'd. If God would not this great designe should be, Perfect and round without some knavery, Nor that our Prince should end this enterprize, But for so many tales, so many lies.
for a good intent the heavens may please, ens tongues should become rougher then the as, nd that th'expence of paper should be such, irst written, then translated out of Dutch, urrants, diaries, packets, newes, more newes Which innocent whitenesse constanly abuse first the Belgick pismire must be seene, Before the Spanish Lady be our Queene, With that successe and such an end at last, All's welcome, pleasant, gratefull that is past, And such an end I pray that you may see A type of that which mother Zebedee Wisht for her Sonnes in heaven, the Prince and you At either hand of James, you need not sue, Him on the right, you on the lest, the King Safe in the middest you both invironing, Then shall I tell my Lord his words and band Are forfeit till I kisse the Prince his hand, Then shall I tell the Duke our royall friend, How all your other honours, this hath earn'd, This you have wought for, this you hammerd out, Like a strong Smith, good workman, and a stout; In this I have a part, in this I see Some new addition smiling upon me; Who in an humble manner crave my share In all your greatnesse whatso'ere they are. R. Corbet. Upon the death of the Lady Haddington dying of the Small Pox. DEare losse! to tell the world I griey'd, were true, But that were to bewayle my selfe, not you.
That were to cry out helpe for my affaires, For which nor publike thoughts nor private cares; For when thy sate I publish among men I should have power to write with the States pen. I should by naming thee force publique teares, And bid their eyes pay ransome for their eares. First, thy whole life was a short feast of wit, And death the attendant which did wait on it; To both mankind doth owe devotion ample, To that their first, to this their last example. And though 'twere fame enough with thee, where same And vertue nothing but an ample name, That thou wert highly borne, which no man doubts, And so might swathe base deeds in noble clouts, Yet thou thy selfe in titles didst nor shroud, And being noble wast not soule, nor proud; And when thy fruit was ripe, when all the suite Of all the longing Courtiers for thy fruit, How wisely didst thou choose soure blessed eyes, The Kings and thine had taught thee to be wise. Did not the best of men the Virgin give Into his hands by whom himselfe did live, Nor did they two yeares after talke of force, Or Lady-like, make suite for a divorse; Who when their owne vile lust is fully spent Cry out my Lord, my Lord is impotent; Nor hast thou in his Nuptiall armes injoyd Barren embraces, but sweet girld and boyd; Twice pretty ones, twice worthy were their youth Might thou but bring them up that broughtst them fo She would have taught them by a thousand straines Her blood runs in their manners, not their veines,
That glory is a lie, slate a grave sport, And country sicknesse above breath at Court, Oh what a want of her losse gallants have, Since she hath changed her window for a grave; From whence she wont to datt her wit so fast, And sticke them in their Coaches as they past, Who now shall make well coloured vice looke pale And a rld meor with her eyes exhale And talke him into nothing, who shall dare Tell barren braine they live in fertile ayre? Who now shall keepe old Countesses in awe, And by att similies repentance draw From those whom Pachers had given or some such Whom Smons could not reach her arrowes touch, Hereafter fooles shall prosper with applause, And wise men smild, and no man aske the cause, He of so score, three night caps, and two hads; Shall marry her of twenty and get lieirs, Which shall be thought his owne, and none shall say, But 'tis a wondrous blessing; and he may. or whichis more then pitty, many a knight Who can doe more then quarrell, lesse then fight; Shall choose his weapons, ground, draw seconds thither; Put up his sword, and not be laught at neither; O thou deformed unwoman-like disgrace, Thou plowst up flesh and blood, and there fost peace And leaves such print on beauty if thou come, As cloured shooes doe on  oore of loome, Thou that of faces huny bes lost ke, And of two breast  forsake Thy deadly trade, thou art now rich give ore,
Or if thou needst wilt magnifie thy power, Goe where thou art invoked every houre; Amongst the gamesters where they call thee thick At the last maine, of the last pockie nick, Get thee a lodging where thy clients dice, There thou shall practise on more then one vice, There's where withall to entertain the pox, Ther'es more then reason cousening for the Box, Thou who hast such superfluous store of gaine, Why stickst thou on whose ruine is thy shame? O thou hast murdered where thou shouldst have kist, And where thy hast was needfull there thou mist; Thou shouldst have chosen out some homely face, Where thy ill favoured kindnesse might adde grace, That men might say, How beaous once was she, Or what a peece ere she was sea by thee! Thou shouldst have wrought upon some Ladies mould That nere did love her Lord, nor never could, Untill she were deform'd, this crueltie Were then within the rule of charitie: But upon one whose beautie was above All sort of beautie, whose love was more then love; On her to fix thy ugly counterfeit, Was to erect a Pyramis of Jea, And put out fire to dig a curse from hell, And place it where a blessed soule should dwell; A soule which in the body would not stay, When 'twas no more a body nor good clay, But a high ulcer O thou heavenly race, Thou soule which  tion of thy case, Thy house, thy prison Soule, , faire Rest where no health, no cold no compounds are,
Rest in that Country, and enjoy that case Which thy fraile flesh divides and thy disease. R. Corbet. A proper new Ballad, intituled The Fairies farewel, or God a mercy Will, to be sung or whistled, to the tune of the Medow Brow by the learned, by the unlearned to the tune of Fortune. FArewell rewards and Fairies Good housewives now may say, For now sowle sluts in Dairies Do fare as well as they; And though they sweepe their hearths no lesse Then maides were wont to doe, Yet who of late for cleanlinesse, Findes Six pence in her shooe? Lament, lament old Abbies The Fairies lost command, They did but change Priests babies, But some have chang'd your land And all your children stolne from thence Are now growne puritanes, Who live as changelings ever since For love of your demaines. At morning and at evening both, You merry were and glad;
So little care of sleepe and sloath, These pretty Ladies had, When Tom came home from labour, —Or Cisse to milking Rose; Then merrily went their Tabor And nimbly went their Toes. Witnesse those rings and rounde layes Of theirs which yet remaine, Were sooted in Queene Maries dayes On many a grassy plaine. But since of late Elizabeth And later James came in, They never daunc'd on any heath As when the time had beene. By which we nore the Fairies Were of the old profession, Their Songs were Ave Maries, Their daunces were procession; But now alas they all are dead Or gone beyond the Seas, Or further from Religion fled Or else they take their case. A tell-tale in their company They never could endtire, And who so kept not secretly Their mirth was punisht sure, It was a just and Christian deed To pinch such black and blew,
O how the Common-wealth doth need Such Iustices as you! Now they have left our Quarters, A Register they have, Who can preserve their Charters; A Man both wise and grave. A hundred of their merry pranks By one hat I could name, Are kept in store; con twenty thank, To William for the same. To William Churne of Staffordshire, Give laud and praises due; Who every meale can mend your cheere, With Tales both old and true. To William all give audience, And pray you for his Noddle; For all the Fairies evidence, Were lost if it were addle. To the Ghost of Rob. Wisdome. THou once a Body, now but ayre, Arch-botcher of a Psalme or Prayer; From Carfaux come: And pah us up a zealous Lay, With an old Aver and for aye, Or all and some.
Or such a Spirit lend me, As may a Hymn down send me, To purge my brain. So Robert look behinde thee, Lest Turk or Pope doe finde thee; And goe to bed again. An Epitaph on Tho. Jonce. HEre for the nonce Came Thomas Jonce, In St. Jileses Church to lye. None Welch before, None Welshman more, Till Shon Clerk dye. Ile role the Bell, Ile ring his Knell; He dyed well, He's saved from Hell: And so farewell Tom Jonce.
On the Earl of Dorsets Death. LEt no prophane ignoble soot tread here, This hallowed piece of Earth, Dorset lyes there: A small poor Relique of a Noble spirit, Free as the Alre, and ample as his Merit: A soul refin'd, no proud forgetting Lord, But mindfull of mean names, and of his word: Who lov'd men for his Honour, not his ends, And had the noblest way of getting friends By loving first, and yet who knew the Court, But understood it better by report Then practise: He nothing took from thence But the Kings favour for his recompence. Who for Religion, or his Countreys good, Neither his Honour valued, nor his blood. Rich in the worlds opinion, and mens praise, And full in all we could desire, but dayes. He that is warn'd of this, and shall for beare To vent a sigh for him, or shed a teare, May he live long scorn'd, and unpitied fall, And want a Mourner at his Funerall. R. Corbet. On Henry Bolings. IF gentlenesse could tame the Fates, or wi Deliver man, Bolings had not dyed yet: But one which over us in judgement sits, Doth say our sins are stronger then our wi. R. Corbet.
The Authors Answer. SO to ded Hector boyes may doe disgrace, That durst not look upon his living face. So worst of men behinde their betters back May stretch mens names and credit on the rack. Good friend, our generall tye to him that's gone, Should love the man that yearly doth him mone: The Authors zeale and place he now doth hold, His love and duty makes him be thus bold To offer this poor mite, his Anniverse Unto his good great Masters scared Herse: The which he doth with priviledge of name, Whilst others 'midst their Ale in Corners blame. A penny-worth in Print they never made, Yet think themselves as good as Pond or Dade, One Anniverse; when thou hast done thus twice, Thy words among the best will be of Price. Dr. Price. A Reply. NOr is it griev'd (grave Youth) the memorie Of such a Story, such a Book as he, That such a Copy through the world were read, Henry yet lives, though he be buryed I could be wisht that every day could beare Him our good witnesse that he still were here;
That sorrow rl'd the yeare; and by that sun (Such Man) could tell you how the day had run. O'twere an honest cause for him, could say, I have been busie, and wept out the day Remembring him; an Epitaph would last, Were such a Trophee, such a Banner plac't Upon his Herse as this, Here a man lyes Was slain by Henry's date, not Destinies. But for a Cobler to throw up his Cap, And cry, The Prince, the Prince: O dire mishap! Or a -Bridegroom after grace To throw his Spouse i'th fire, or scratch her face: To the tune o'th' Lamentation, and delay His Friday Capon till the Sabbath-day: Or an old Popish Lady half vow'd dead, To fast away the day with Ginger-bread: For him to write such Annalls: All these things Doe open laughter, and shut up griefs springs. Wherefore Vertumm, if you Print the next, Bring better votes, or choose a meaner Text. R. Corbet. FINIS.
