E3894 12121507 54435
BUCANIERS OF AMERICA: Or, a true ACCOUNT OF THE Most remarkable Assaults Committed of late years upon the Coasts of The West-Indies. By the Bucaniers of Iamaica and Tortuga, Both ENGLISH and FRENCH. Wherein are contained more especially, The unparallel'd Exploits of Sir Henry Morgan, our En∣glish Iamaican Hero, who sack'd Puerto Velo, burnt Panama, &c. Written originally in Dutch, by Iohn Esquemeling, one of the Bucaniers, who was present at those Tragedies; and thence translated into Spanish, by Alonso de Bonne-maison, Doctor of Physick, and Practitioner at Amsterdam. Now faithfully rendred into English. LONDON: Printed for William Crooke, at the Green Dragon with∣out Temple-bar. 1684.
THE Translator TO THE READER. THe present Volume, both for it's Curiosi∣ty, and Ingenuity, I dare recommend unto the perusal of our English Nation, whose glorious Actions it containeth. What relateth unto the curiosity hereof, this Piece, both of Natural and Humane History, was no sooner published in the Dutch Original, than it was snatch t up for the most curious Library's of Hol∣land; it was Translated into Spanish; (two Im∣pressions thereof being sent into Spain in one year) it was taken notice of by the learned Academy of Paris; and finally recommended as worthy our e∣steem, by the ingenious Author of the Weekly Memorials for the Ingenious, printed here at Lon∣don about two years ago. Neither all this undeser∣vedly, seeing it enlargeth our acquaintance of Natu∣ral History, so much prized and enquired for, by the Learned of this present Age, with several obser∣vations not easily to be found in other accounts alrea∣dy
received from America: and besides, it inform∣eth us (with huge novelty), of as great and bold attempts, in point of Military conduct and valour, as ever were performed by mankind; without ex∣cepting, here, eithr Alexander the Great, or Ju∣lius Caesar, or the rest of the Nine Worthy's of Fame. Of all which actions, as we cannot but con∣fess our selves to have been ignorant hitherto, (the very name of Bucaniers being, as yet, known but unto few of the Ingenious; as their Lives, Laws, and Conversation, are in a manner unto none) so can they not chse but be admired, out of this in∣genuous Author, by whosoever is curious to learn the various revolutions of humane affairs. But, more especially, by our English Nation; as unto whom these things more narrowly do appertain. We having here more then half the Book filled with the unparallel'd, if not unimitable, adventures and Heroick exploits of our own Country-men, and Re∣lations; whose undaunted, and exemplary courage, when called upon by our King and Country, we ought to emulate. From whence it hath proceeded, that nothing of this kind was ever, as yet, published in England, I cannot easily determine; except, as some will say, from some secret Ragion di Stato. Let the reason be as t'will; this is certain, so much the more we are obliged unto this present Author, who though a Stranger unto our Nation, yet with that candour
and Fidelity hath recorded our Actions, as to render the Metal of our true English Valour to be the more believed and feared abroad, than if these things had been divulged by our selves at home. From hence peradventure will other Nations learn, that the En∣glish People are of their Genius more inclinable to act than to write; seeing as well they as we have lived unacquainted with these actions of our Nation, until such time as a foreign Author to our Country came to tell them. Besides the merit of this Piece for its curiosity, a∣nother point of no less esteem, is the truth and sinceri∣ty, wherewith every thing seemeth to be penned. No greater ornament or dignity can be added unto Histo∣ry, either humane or natural, than truth. All other embellishments, if this be failing, are of little or no esteem; if this be delivered, are either needless or superfluous. What concerneth this requisite in our Author, his Lines do every-where declare the faith∣fulness and sincerity of his mind. He writeth not by hearsay, but was an eye-witness, as he somewhere telleth you, unto all and every one of the bold and ha∣zardous attempts which he relateth. And these he delivereth with such candour of stile, such ingenuity of mind, such plainness of words, such conciseness of periods, so much devested of Rhetorical Hyberboles, or the least flourishes of Eloquence, so hugely void of Passion or national Reflections, as that he strong∣ly perswadeth all-along to the credit of what he saith;
yea, raiseth the mind of the Reader to believe these things far greater than what he hath said; and having read him, leaveth onely this scruple or con∣cern behind, that you can read him no longer. In a word, such are his deserts, that some persons perad∣venture would not stickle to compare him to the Fa∣ther of Historians, Philip de Comines: at least, thus much may be said, with all truth imaginable, that he resembleth that great Author in many of his excellent qualities. I know some persons have objected against the greatness of these prodigious Adventures, intimating that the resistance our Bucaniers found in America, was every-where but small. For the Spaniards, say they, in the West-Indies, are become of late years nothing less, but rather much more degenerate than in Europe. The continual Peace they have enjoyed in those parts, the defect of Military Discipline, and European Souldiers for their Commanders, much contributing hereunto. But more especially, and a∣bove all other Reasons, the very Luxury of the Soil and Riches, the extream heat of those Countries, and influence of the Stars being such, as totally inclineth their bodies unto an infinite effeminacy and cowar∣dize of minds. Unto thse Reasons I shall onely answer in brief, This History will convince them to be manifestly false. For as to the continual Peace here alleadged, we know that no Peace could ever be established beyond
the Line, since the first possession of the West-In∣dies by the Spaniards, till the burning of Panama. At that time, or few months before, Sir William Godolphin by his prudent negotiation in quality of Embassadour for our most Gracious Monarch, did conclude at Madrid a Peace to be observed even be∣yond the Line, and through the whole extent of the Spanish Dominions in the West-Indies. This trans∣action gave the Spaniards new causes of complaints against our proceedings, that no sooner a Peace had been established for those parts of America, but our Forces had taken and burnt both Chagre, St. Catha∣rine, and Panama. But our Reply was convincing, That whereas eight or ten months had been allowed by Articles for the publishing of the said Peace through all the Dominions of both Monarchies in America, those Hostilities had been committed, not onely with∣out orders from his Majesty of England, but also within the space of the said eight or ten months of time. Until that time the Spanish Inhabitants of America being, as it were, in a perpetual War with Europe, certain it is, that no Coasts nor Kingdoms in the World have been more frequently infested nor alarm'd with the invasions of several Nations, than theirs. Thus from the very beginning of their Con∣quests in America, both English, French, Dutch, Portuguese, Swedes, Danes, Curlanders, and all other Nations that navigate the Ocean, have fre∣quented the West-Indies, and filled them with their
Robberies and Assaults. From these occasions have they been in continual watch and ward, and kept their Militia in constant exercise, as also their Gar∣risons pretty well provided and paid; as fearing e∣very sail they discover'd at Sea, to be Pirats of one Nation or another. But much more especially, since that Curasao, Tortuga, and Jamaica have been in∣habited by English, French, and Dutch, and bred up that Race of Hunts-men, than which, no other ever was more desperate, nor more mortal Enemies to the Spaniards, called Bucaniers Now shall we say, that these People, through too long continuation of Peace, have utterly abolished the exercises of War, having been all-along incessantly vexed with the Tumults and Alarms thereof? In like manner is it false, to accuse their defect of Military Discipline for want of European Comman∣ders. For who knoweth not that all places, both Military and Civil, through those vast Dominions of the West-Indies, are provided out of Spain? And those of the Militia most commonly given unto expert Commanders trained up from their infancy in the Wars of Europe, either in Africa, Milan, Sicily, Naples, or Flanders, fighting against either English, French, Dutch, Portuguese, or Moors? Yea, their very Garisons, if you search them in those parts, will peradventure be found to be stock'd three parts to four with Souldiers both born and bred in the King∣dom of Spain.
From these Considerations it may be inferr'd, what little difference ought to be allowed betwixt the Spa∣nish Souldiers, Inhabitants of the West-Indies, and those of Europe. And how little the Soil or Climat hath influenced or caused their Courage to degenerate towards cowardize or baseness of mind. As if the very same Arguments, deduced from the nature of that Climate, did not equally militate against the va∣lour of our famous Bucaniers, and represent this to be of as degenerate Metal as theirs. But nothing can be more clearly evinced, than is the Valour of the American Spaniards, either Soul∣diers or Officers, by the sequel of this History. What men ever fought more desperately than the Garrison of Chagre? Their number being 314, and of all these, only thirty remaining; of which number scarce ten were unwounded; and among them, not one Officer found alive? Were not 600 killed upon the spot at Panama, 500 at Gibraltar, almost as many more at Puerto del Principe, all dying with their Arms in their hands, and facing bravely the Enemy for the defence of their Country and private Concerns? Did not those of the Town of San Pedro both fortifie themselves, lay several Ambuscades, and lastly sell their lives as dear as ever any European Souldier could do; Lolonois being forced to gain step by step his advance unto the Town, with huge loss both of bloud and men? Many other instances might be pro∣duced out of this compendious Volume, of the generous
resistance the Spaniards made in several places, though Fortune favoured not their Arms. Next, as to the personal Valour of many of their Commanders, what man ever behaved himself more briskly than the Governour of Gibraltar, than the Governour of Puerto del Principe, both dying for the defence of their Towns; than Don Alonso del Campo; and others? Or what Examples can easily parallel the desperate courage of the Governour of Chagre? who, though the Palizada's were fired, the Terraplens were sunk into the Ditch, the Breaches were entred, the Houses all burnt about him, the whole Castle taken, his Men all killed; yet would not admit of any quarter, but chose rather to die under his Arms, being shot into the brain, than surrender himself as a Prisoner unto the Bucaniers. What Lion ever fought to the last gasp more obstinately than the Governour of Puerto Velo? who seeing the Town enter'd by surprizal in the night, one chief Castle blown up into the Air, all the other Forts and Castles taken, his own assaulted several ways, both Religious men and women placed at the front of the Enemy to fix the Ladders against the Walls; yet spared not to kill as many of the said Religious per∣sons as he could. And at last, the Walls being sca∣led, the Castle enter'd and taken, all his own men o∣vercome by fire and sword, who had cast down their Arms, and begged mercy from the Enemy: yet would admit of none for his own life. Yea, with his own
hands killed several of his Souldiers, to force them to stand to their Arms, though all were lost. Yea, though his own Wife and Daughter begged of him upon their knees that he would save his life by cra∣ving quarter, though the Enemy desired of him the same thing; yet would hearken to no cries nor per∣swasions, but they were forced to kill him, combating with his Arms in his hands, being not otherwise a∣ble to take him Prisoner, as they were desirous to do. Shall these men be said to be influenced with Cowar∣dize, who thus acted to the very last Scene of their own Tragedies? Or shall we rather say, that they wanted not Courage, but Fortune? It being cer∣tainly true, that he who is killed in a Battel, may be equally couragious with him that killeth. And that whosoever derogateth from the Valour of the Spani∣ards in the West-Indies, diminisheth in like manner the Courage of the Bucaniers, his own Country-men, who have seemed to act beyond mortal men in Ame∣rica. Now, to say something concerning John Esqueme∣ling, the first Author of this History. I take him to be a Dutch-man, or at least born in Flanders, not∣withstanding that the Spanish Translation represen∣teth him to be Native of the Kingdom of France. His printing this History originally in Dutch, which doubtless must be his native Tongue, who otherwise was but an illiterate man, together with the very sound of his name, convincing me thereunto. True it
is, he set sail from France, and was some years at Tortuga; but neither of these two Arguments, drawn from the History, are prevalent. For were he a French-man born, how came he to learn the Dutch Language so perfectly as to prefer it to his own? Especially that not being spoken at Tortuga nor Jamaica, where he resided all the while. I hope I have made this English Translation something more plain and correct, than the Spanish. Some few notorious Faults either of the Printer or of the Interpreter, I am sure I have redressed. But the Spanish Translator complaining much of the in∣tricacy of Stile in the Original (as flowing from a person who, as hath been said, was no Scholar) as he was pardonable, being in great haste, for not ren∣dring his own Version so distinct and elaborate as he could desire; so must I be excused from the one, that is to say, Elegancy, if I have cautiously declined the other, I mean Confusion.
BUCANIERS OF AMERICA. PART I. CHAP. I. The Author setteth forth towards the We∣stern Islands, in the Service of the West India Company of France. They meet with an English Frigat. And arrive at the Island of Tortuga. WEE set sail from Havre de Grace, in France, in a Ship called St. Iohn, the second day of May, in the year 1666. Our Vessel was equipp't with eight and twenty Guns, twenty Mariners, and two hundred and twenty Passengers; includ∣ing, in this number, those, whom the Compa∣ny sent as free Passengers, as being in their ser∣vice.
Soon after we came to an anchor under the Cape of Borflor, there to joyn other seven Ships of the same West India Company, which were to come from Diep, under the Convoy of a Man of War, mounted with seven and thir∣ty Guns, and two hundred and fifty men. Of these Ships two were bound for Senegal, five for the Cariby Islands, and ours for the Island of Tortuga. In the same place there gather'd un∣to us, about twenty sail of other Ships, that were bound for New-found land, with some Dutch Vessels, that were going for Nants, Ro∣chel, and St. Martins. So that in all we made a Fleet of thirty sail. Here we prepared to sight, putting our selves into a convenient po∣sture of defence, as having notice, that four English Frigats, of threescore Guns each, did lie in wait for us, about the Isle of Ornay. Our Admiral the Chevalier Sourdis, having distribu∣ted, what Orders he thought convenient, we set sail from thence with a favourable gale of wind. Presently after, some mists arising, these totally impeded the English Frigats, from disco∣vering our Fleet at Sea. We steer'd our course, as near as we could, under the Coast of France, for fear of the Enemy. As we sailed along, we met a Vessel of Ostend, who complained, unto our Admiral, that a French Privateer had robb'd him that very morning. This complaint be∣ing heard, we endeavoured to pursue the said Pi∣rate;
but our labour was in vain, as not being able to overtake him. Our Fleet, as we went along, caused no small fears and alarms, unto the Inhabitants of the coasts of France; these judging us to be Eng∣lish, and that we saught some convenient place for landing. To allay their frights, we used to hang out our Colours; but notwithstand∣ing they would not trust us. After this we came to an anchor in the Bay of Conquet, in Bri∣tany, nigh unto the Isle of Heysant; there to take in water. Having stor'd our selves with fresh Provisions at this place, we prosecuted our Voy∣age, designing to pass by the Ras of Fonteneau, and not expose our selves to the Sorlingues, fea∣ring the English Vessels, that were crusing there-abouts to meet us. This River Ras is of a current very strong and rapid, which rowl∣ing over many Rocks, disgorgeth it self into the Sea, on the coast of France, in the latitude of eight and forty degrees, and ten minutes. For which reason this passage is very dange∣rous; all the Rocks as yet, being not thorough ly known. Here, I shall not omit to mention the cere∣mony, Baptism used by the French at Sea. which at this passage, and some other places, is used by the Mariners, and by them called Baptism, altho it may seem, either little to our purpose, or of no use. The Masters Mate cloathed himself with a ridiculous sort of
garment, that reached unto his feet, and on his head he put a sutable Cap, which was made very burlesque. In his right hand he placed a naked wooden sword; and, in his left, a pot full of ink. His face was horribly blackt with foot, and his neck adorn'd with a Collar of many little pieces of wood. Being thus apparell'd, he commanded to be call'd before him every one of them, who never had passed that dan∣gerous place before. And then causing them to kneel down in his presence, he made the sign of the Cross upon their foreheads, with ink; and gave each one a stroke on the shoulders with his wooden sword. Mean while the stan∣ders by did cast a Bucket of water, upon every mans head; and this was the conclusion of the ceremony. But, that being ended, every one of the Baptised, is obliged to give a Bottle of Brandy for his offering; placing it nigh the main Mast, and without speaking a word; e∣ven those, who have no such liquor, being not excused from this performance. In case the Vessel never passed that way before, the Cap∣tain is obliged to distribute some Wine among the Mariners, and other people, in the Ship. But, as for other gifts, which the newly bap∣tized do frequently offer, they are divided a∣mong the old Sea-men; and, of them, they make a Banquet, among themselves. The Hollanders likewise do use to baptize
such as never passed that way before. And not only at the passage abovementioned, but also at the Rocks called Berlingues, nigh the coast of Portugal, in the latitude of thirty nine degrees, and forty minutes, (as being a pas∣sage very dangerous, especially by night, when, through the obscurity thereof, the Rocks are not distinguishable, by reason the Land is very high,) they use some such ceremony. But, their manner of Baptizing is much distinct from that we have described above, performed by the French. He therefore, that is to be baptiz∣ed, is fast'ned and hoised up three times at the main yard's end, as if he were a Criminal. If he be hoised the fourth time, in the name of the Prince of Orange, or of the Captain of the Vessel, his honour is more than ordinary. Thus they are dipped, every one, several times in the main Ocean. But he that is the first dipp'd, hath the honour of being saluted with a Gun. Such as are not willing to fall, are bound to pay twelve pence, for their ransom: if he be an Officer in the Ship, two shillings: and if a Passenger, according to their pleasure. In case the Ship did never pass that way before, the Captain is bound to give a small Run∣let of Wine; which if he doth not perform, the Mariners may cut off the Stem of the Ves∣sel. All the profit, which accrueth by this ce∣remony, is kept by the Masters Mate; who af∣ter
reaching their Port, doth usually lay it out in wine, which is drank amongst the ancient Seamen. Some will say this ceremony was in∣stituted by the Emperour Charls the Fifth; how∣soever it is not found amongst his Laws. But here I leave these customes of the Sea; and shall return unto our Voyage. Having passed the River Ras, we met with very good weather, untill we came to the Cape of Finis-Terrae. Here a huge Tempest of wind surprized us, and separated our Ship from the rest, that were in our company. This storm continued for the space of eight days: In the which time it would move compassion to see how miserably the Passengers were tumbled to and fro, on all sides of the Ship; inso∣much, as the Mariners, in the performance of their duty, were compell'd to tread upon them every where. This uncouthsom weather be∣ing spent, we had again the use of very fa∣vourable gales, untill we came unto the Tro∣pick of Cancer. This Tropick is nothing else, but an imaginary circle, which Astrologers have invented in the Heavens; and serveth as a period to the progress of the Sun towards the North-pole. It is placed in the latitude of three and twenty degrees, and thirty minutes, under the line. Here we were baptized the se∣cond  Ce∣remonious baptism. time, after the same manner as before. The French do alwayes perform this Ceremony
this Tropick; as also under the Tropick of Capricornus, towards the South. In this part of the World, we had very favourable wea∣ther, at the which we were infinitely gladded, by reason of our great necessity of water. For Necessity of fresh water. at this time, that Element already was so scarce with us, that we were stinted unto two half pints, by man, every day. Being about the latitude of Barbadas, we met an English Frigat, or Privateer; who first began to give us chase. But finding himself not to exceed in strength, did presently steer a∣way from us. This flight gave us occasion to pursue the said Frigat, as we did, shooting at him several Guns, of eight pound carriage. But at length he escaped; and we returned to our course. Not long after we came within sight of the Isle of Martinica. Our endea∣vours Arrival at the Caribbe Islands. were bent unto the coast of the Isle of St. Peter. But these were frustrated, by reason of a storm, which took us hereabouts. Hence we resolved to steer to the Island of Guadalupe. Yet neither this Island could we reach, by rea∣son of the same storm, and thus we directed our course unto the Isle of Tortuga; which was the very same land we were bound unto. We passed along the coast of the Isle of Punta Rica, which is extreamly delicious, and agreeable to the view; as being adorned with beautiful trees and woods, even to the tops of the Moun∣tains.
After this, we discovered the Island Hi∣spaniola (of which I shall give a description in this Book) and we coasted about it, until we came unto the Isle of Tortuga, our desired Port. Arrl at the Isle of Tortuga. Here we anchor'd the seventh day of Iuly, in the same year; not having lost one man in the whole Voyage. We unladed the goods, that belonged unto the Company of the West Indies; and soon after, the Ship was sent to Cal de Sac, with some passengers. CHAP. II. Description of the Island of Tortuga: Of the Fruits and Plants there growing. How the French settled there, at two se∣veral times, and cast out the Spaniards, first Masters thereof. The Author of this Book was twice sold in the said Island. THe Island of Tortuga is situated on the Dscription  the Isle of Ta. North side of the famous and great I∣sland, called Hispaniola, nigh unto the Conti∣nent thereof, and in the altitude of twenty de∣grees and thirty minutes. Its just extent is three∣score Leagues about. The Spaniards, who gave
name unto this Island called it so, from the shape of the land, which in some manner resem∣bleth a great Sea Tortoise, called by them Tor∣tuga de mar. The Country is very mountai∣nous, and full of Rocks, yet notwithstanding hugely thick of lofty trees, that cease not to grow upon the hardest of those Rocks, with∣out partaking of a softer soil. From hence it cometh, that their Roots, for the greatest part, are seen all over, entangled among the Rocks, not unlike unto the branching of Ivy against our Walls. That part of this Island, which stretcheth towards the North, is totally disinha∣bited. The reason is, first, because it hath proved to be very incommodious, and un∣healthy: And secondly, for the ruggedness of the coast, that giveth no accesse unto the shoar, unless among Rocks, almost unaccessible. For this cause it is populated only on the Southern part, which hath one only Port, that may be esteemed indifferently good. Yet this harbour hath two several entries, or channels, which afford passage unto Ships of seventy Guns; the Port it self being without danger, and ca∣pable, of receiving a great number of Vessels. That part which is inhabited, is divided into four other parts; of which the first is called the Low-land, or Low-country. This is the cheifest, among the rest, because it containeth the Port aforesaid. The Town is called Cayona, and
here, do live the chiefest, and richest Planters of the Island. The second part is called the Middle plantation. Its Territory, or soil, is hi∣therto almost new, as being only known to be good for the culture of Tobacco. The third is named Ringot. These places are situated to∣wards the Western part of the Island. The fourth, and last, is called The Mountain, in which place were made the first plantations, that were culti∣vated upon this Island. As to the Wood, that groweth on the Island, Of the Trees,  grow at Tortuga. we have already said, that the Trees are excee∣ding tall, and pleasing to the sight; whence no man will doubt, but they may be applied, unto several uses, with great benefit. Such is the yellow Saunder, which Tree, by the inhabi∣tants, of this Country, is called Bois de chan∣del, or, in English, Candle-wood, being it bur∣neth like a Candle, and serveth them with light, while they use their fishery in the Night. Here groweth also, Lignum Sanctum, by others cal-Guaiacum. Its vertues are very well known; more especially unto them, who observe not the sixth Commandment, and are given to all manner of impure copulations; Physitians, drawing from hence, under several compositi∣ons, the greatest antidote, for all Venerel dis∣cases; as also for cold, and viscous humours. The trees, likewise, that afford Gummi Elemi, grow here in great abundance. In like man∣ner
doth Radix Chinae, or China Root: Yet this is not so good, as that, which cometh from other parts of the Western world. It is very white, and soft; and serveth for pleasant food unto the wild Bores, when as they can find nothing else. This Island also is not defici∣ent in Aloes, nor an infinite number of other medicinal herbs, which may please the curio∣sity of such, as are given to their contempla∣tion. Medicinal Herbs. Moreover, for the building of Ships, or any other sort of Architecture, here are Wood for building. found, in this spot of Neptune, several sorts of Timber very convenient. The Fruits, like∣wise, Fruits. which here abundantly grow, are no∣thing inferior, as to their quantity, or quali∣ty, unto what the adjacent Islands produce. I shall name only some of the most ordinary, and common. Such are Magniot, Potato's, Acajou apples, Yannas, Bacones, Paquayes, Ca∣rosoles, Mamayns, Ananaes, and diverse other sorts; which not to be tedious, I omit to spe∣cifie. Here grow likewise in huge number, those trees called Palmito's or Palmites, from whence is drawn a certain juyce, which serveth Palmito,  the inhabitants instead of Wine; and whose leaves, do cover their houses, instead of tyles. In this Island aboundeth also, with dayly in∣crease, Wild Bor the Wild-Bore. The Governour hath prohibited the hunting of them with dogs; fearing, least, the Island being but small, the
whole race of those Animals, in short time should be destroy'd. The reason why he thought convenient, to preserve those Wild Beasts, was that in case of any invasion of an external enemy, the inhabitants might sustain them∣selves, with their food. Especially were they once constrained to retire unto the VVoods, and Mountains. By this means he judg'd, they were enabled, to maintain any suddain assault, or long persecution. Yet this sort of Game is almost impeded by its self, by reason of the many Rocks, and precipices which for the greatest part, are covered with little shrubs, very Green, and thick; from whence the huntsmen have oftimes precipitated themselves, and left us the sad experience, and grief, of many me∣morable disasters. At a certain time of the year there resorteth unto this Island of Tortuga huge flocks of Wild-Pigeons: Great flocks of Wild Pigeons. At which season the inhabitants feed on them very plentifully, having more then they can consume, and leaving totally to their repose all other sorts of Fowl, both VVild and Tame, to the intent, that in absence of the Pigeons, these may supply their place. But as nothing in the Universe, though never so pleasant, can be found, but what hath some∣thing of bitterness joyned to it, the very sym∣bol of this truth we see in the aforesaid Pige∣ons. For thse, the season being past where∣in
God hath appointed them, to afford deli∣cious food unto those people, can scarce be touched with the tongue, they become so extreamly Lean, and bitter even to admi∣ration. The reason of this bitterness, is at∣tributed unto a certain seed, which they eat about that time, even as bitter as Gall. A∣bout the Sea shoars, every where are found great multitudes of Crabs, belonging both to the Land, and Sea; and both sorts very big. Land-Crabs and Sea-Crabs These are good to feed Servants and Slaves, who find them very pleasing to the pallat, yet withall, very hurtful to the sight. Besides which symptom, being eaten too often, they also cause great giddiness in the head, with much weakness of the Brain, insomuch, that very frequently they are deprived of Sight, for the space of one quarter of an hour. The French having established themselves in The French sent Boats towards the West to dis∣cover other Islands. the Isle of St. Christopher, planted there a sort of Trees, of which at present, there possibly may be greater quantities. VVith the Tim∣ber of those Trees, they made Long-boats, and Hoy's, which they sent from thence VVestward being well man'd, and victualled, to discover other Islands. These setting Sail from St. Christopher's, came within sight of the Island of Hispaniola, where at length they arrived with abundance of joy. Having landed, they marched into the Country, where they found
huge quantities of Cattle, such as were, Cows Bulls, Horses, and Wild-Bores. But finding no great profit in those animals unless they could enclose them, and knowing, likewise the Island, to be pretty well peopled by the Spaniards, they thought it convenient to enterprize upon and seize the Island of Tortuga. This they per∣formed First try   French  Tortu∣ without any difficulty, there being up∣on the Island no more, then ten, or twelve Spaniards, to guard it. These few men let the French come in peaceably, and possess the Island, for the space of six months, without a∣ny trouble. In the mean while they passed, and repassed, with their Canows unto Hispani∣ola from whence they transported many peo∣ple, and at last began to plant the whole Isle of Tortuga. The few Spaniards, remaining there perceiving the French to encrease their number dayly began at last, to repine at their prospe∣rity, and grudge them the possession, they had freely given. Hence they gave notice unto others, of their own Nation, their Neighbours, who sent several great Boats well arm'd and man'd, to dispossess the French of that Island. This expedition succeeded accor∣ding to their desires. For the new possessors seeing the great number of Spaniards, that came against them, fled with all they had unto the VVoods. And hence by Night, they wafted over with Canows, unto the Isle of
Hispaniola. This they more easily performed as having no Women nor Children, with them, nor any great substance to carry away. Here they also retired into the VVoods, both to seek themselves food, and from thence with secrecy, to give intelligence unto others, of their own faction; as judging for certain, that within a little while, they should be in a ca∣pacity to hinder the Spaniards, from fortify∣ing in Tortuga. Mean while the Spaniards of the greater Island ceased not to seek after their new guests the French, with intent to root them out of the VVoods, if possible, or cause them to pe∣rish with hunger. But this their design soon failed, having found that the French were ma∣sters both of good Guns, Powder, and Bullets. Here therefore, the fugitives waited for a cer∣tain opportunity, wherein they knew the Spa∣niards were to come, from Tortuga, with armes and great number of men, to joyn with those of the greater Island for their destruction. When this occasion proffer'd they i'th mean while deserting the woods where they were, returned unto Tortuga, and dispossessed the small num∣of The French return  Tortga. Spaniards, that remained at home. Having so done, they fortified themselves, the best they could; thereby to prevent, the return of the Spaniards, in case, they should attempt it. Moreover, they sent immediately unto
the Governour of St. Christophers, craving his They petition for a Gover∣nour to him of St. Christophers aid and relief; and demanding of him, to send them a Governour, the better to be united, among themselves, and strengthened on all occasions. The Governour of St. Christophers received their petition with ex∣pressions of much satisfaction, and without any delay, sent unto them Monsieur le Passeur in quality of a Governour; together with a Ship full of men, and all other things necessa∣ry, both for their establishment and defence. No sooner had they received this recruit, They build a Fort. but the Governour commanded a Fortress to be built upon the top of a high Rock; from whence he could hinder the access of any Ships or other Vessels, that should design to enter the Port. Unto this Fort no other access could be had, then by almost climbing through a very narrow passage, that was capable only of receiving two persons, at once; and those not without difficulty. In the middle of this rock was a great cavity, which now serveth for a store∣house: And besides here was great convenience for raising a battery. The Fort being finished the Governour commanded two Guns to be moun∣ted; which could not be performed without huge toil and labour. As also, a house to be built, within the Fort; and afterwards, the narrow way that led unto the said Fort, to be broken and demolished, leaving no other
ascent thereunto, then by a Ladder. Within the Fort gusheth out a plentiful Fountain of fresh Water, which perpetually runneth with a pure and Crystalline Stream; sufficient to re∣fresh a Garrison of a Thousand Men. Being possessed of these conveniences, and the secu∣rity these things might promise, the French began to people the Island, and each of them to seek their living; some by the exercise of hunting, others by planting Tobacco, and o∣thers by crusing, and robbing, upon the coasts of the Spanish Islands; which trade is continued by them unto this day. The Spaniards, notwithstanding, could not behold, but with jealous eyes, the dayly in∣crease The Spani∣ards enter in∣to Tortuga the second time. of the French in Tortuga; fearing least in time they might by them, be dispossessed al∣so of Hispaniola. Thus taking an opportuni∣ty, (when many of the French were abroad at Sea, and others employ'd in hunting) with eight hundred Men in several Canows, they landed again in Tortuga, almost without being perceived by the French. But finding that the Governour had cut down many Trees, for the better discovery of an Enemy, in case of any assault; as also that nothing of conse∣quence could be done without great Guns, they consulted about the fittest place for raising a Battery. This place was soon concluded, to be the Top of a Mountain, which was in Sight;
seeing that from thence alone, they could le∣vel their Guns at the Fort, which now did lie open unto them, since the cutting down of the Trees, by the new possessors. Hence they re∣solved, to open a way, for carriage of some pieces of Ordnance to the Top. This Moun∣tain is somewhat high, and the upper part there∣of plain, from whence the whole Island may be view'd. The sides thereof are very rugged by reason an huge number of unaccessible Rocks do surround it every where. So that the ascent was very difficult, and would always have been the same, had not the Spaniards undergone the immense Labour, and Toil of making the way aforementioned, as I shall now relate. The Spaniards had in their company many Slaves, and Indians, labouring Men, whom they call Matates, or in English, half yellow Men. Unto these they gave orders, with Iron Tools, to dig a way through the Rocks. This The Spani∣ards out open a way in the Mountain. they performed with the greatest speed imagi∣nable. And through this way by the help of many Ropes, and Pullies they at last, made shift to get up two Sole Canon pieces, wherewith they made a Battery, and intended next day to batter the Fort. Mean while the French were not ignorant of these designs. But rather prepared themselves for a defence (while the Spaniards were busied about the
battery) sending notice every where to their companions, and requiring their help. Thus the Hunters of the Island, all joyned together, and with them all the Pirats, who were not alrea∣dy too far from home. These landed by night at Tortuga, least they should be seen by the Spaniards. And under the same obscurity of the Night, they all together by a back way clim∣bed Are assaulted by the French and precipita∣ted. up the Mountain, where the Spaniards were posted: Which they more easily could per∣form as being acquainted with those Rocks. They came thither at the very instant, that the Spaniards, who were above, where prepa∣ring, to shoot at the Fort, not knowing in the least of their coming. Here they set upon them, at their backs, with such fury, as for∣ced the greatest part to precipitate themselves from the top to the bottom, and dash their Bodys in pieces. Few or none escaped this attacque, for if any remained a live, they were all put to the Sword, without giving quarter to the meanest. Some Spaniards did still keep the bottom of the Mountain, but these hear∣ring The rest fly, and abandon the Isle for ever. the Shreek's, and crys of them, that were kill'd, and believing some tragical revolution to be above, fled immediately towards the Sea, despairing, through this accident, to ever re∣gain the Isle of Tortuga. The Governours of this Island did always behave themselves, as proprietors, and absolute
Lords thereof until the year 1664. At which time the West India Company of France took possession thereof, and sent thither for their Governour, Monsieur Ogeron. These planted the Colony for themselves, by the means of their Factors, and Servants, thinking to drive some considerable trade, from thence, with the Spaniards, even as the Hollanders do from Curasao. But this design did not answer their expectation. For with other Nations they could drive no trade, by reason they could not establish any secure commerce from the begin∣ning with their own. Forasmuch, as at the first institution of this Company in France, they made an agreement with the Pirats, Hunters, and Planters, first possessours, of Tortuga, that these should buy all their necessaries, from the said Company, taking them upon trust. And although this agreement was put in executi∣tion, yet the Factors of the Company, soon after found that they could not recover either Monys, or returns, from those People. In so much, as they were constrained to bring some armed men into the Island, in behalf of the Company, for to get in some of their pay∣ments The West In∣di ompany veth Tor∣ga. But neither this endeavour, nor any other could prevail, towards the settling a se∣cure trade with those of the Island. And here∣upon the Company recalled their Factors, giving them orders to sell all that was their
own, in the said Plantation, both the Servants, belonging to the Company (which were sold, some for twenty, others for thirty, pieces of eight) as also, all other Merchandizes, and proprieties, which they had there. With this resolution all their designs fell to the ground. In this occasion I was also sold, as being a Servant under the said Company; in whose The Author is sold. service I came out of France. But my fortune was very bad. For I fell into the hands of the most cruel Tyrant, and perfidious man, that ever was born of Woman; who was then Go∣vernour, or rather Lievtenant General of that Island. This Man did treat me with all the hard usages imaginable; yea with that of hun∣ger, with which I thought to have perished in∣evitably. Withal he was willing to let me buy my freedom, and liberty; but not under the the rate of three hundred pieces of eight, I not being Master of one, at that time in the whole World. At last through the manifold miseries I endured, as also affliction of mind, I was thrown into a dangerous Fit of Sick∣ness. This misfortune, being added to the rest of my calamities, was the cause of my happi∣ness. For my wicked Master, seeing my con∣dition, began to fear, least he should lose his monies with my Life. Hereupon he sold me the second time, unto a Chirurgion, for the He is sold the second time. price of seventy pieces of eight. Being in the
hands of this second master, I began, soon after to recover my health, through the good usage I received from him, as being much more humane, and civil, then that of my first Patron. He gave me both Cloathes and very good food, and after that I had served him but one year, he offered me my liberty; with only this condition, that I should pay him one hundred pieces of eight, when I was in a Capacity of VVealth, so to do. VVhich kind proposal of his, I could not choose but He getteth  eedom accept with infinite Joy, and gratitude of mind. Being now at liberty, though like unto A∣dam, when he was first Created by the hands of his maker, that is naked, and destitute, of all human necessaries, nor knowing how to get my living, I determined to enter into the wicked Order of the Pirates, or Robbers at Sea. Turneth Pirat. Into this Society, I was received, with common consent both of the Superior, and Vulgar sort, and among them I continued until the year 1672. Having assisted them in all their designs, and attempts, and served them in ma∣ny notable exploits, of which hereafter, I shall give the Reader a true account, I returned un∣my own Native Country. But before I begin to relate the things abovementioned, I shall say something, for the satisfaction of such as are curious, of the Island Hispaniola, which
lyeth towards the VVestern parts of America, as also give my Reader a brief description thereof, according to my slender ability, and experience,
CHAP. III. Description of the great and famous I∣sland of Hispaniola. The very large and rich Island called Hispani∣ola, lieth stuate in the altitude of seventeen degrees, and an half. The greatest part, there∣of extendeth from East to West, twenty de∣grees, Southern latitude. The circumference
is of three hundred Leagues; the length one hundred and twenty; its breadth almost fif∣ty; being more or less, broad or narrow, at certain places. I shall not need here to in∣sert, how this Island was at first discovered; it being known unto the World, that it was performed by the means of Christopher Colum∣bus, Discovered by Colum∣bus. in the year 1492; being sent, unto this purpose, by Ferdinand, the Catholick, then King of Spain. From which time, unto this present, the Spaniards have been continually possessors thereof. There be upon this I∣sland, many very good, and strong Cities, Towns, and Hamlets; as also it aboundeth in a great number of pleasant, and delicious, Country Houses, and Plantations: All which are owing unto the care, and industry, of the Spaniards, its inhabitants. The chief City, and Metropolis of this Island, Qualities of the City of Santo. Do∣mingo. is called Santo Domingo; being dedicated un St. Dominick, from whom it deriveth this name. It is situated towards the South, in a place which affordeth a most excellent prospect. The Country round about being embelished, with innumerable rich plantations, as also verdant Meadows, and fruitful Gardens; all which do produce plenty, and variety, of excellent, and pleasant fruits, according to the nature of those Countries. The Governour of the Island maketh his residence in this City; which
is as it were, the Store house of all the other Ci∣ties, Towns and Villages; which from hence do export, and provide themselves, with all necessaries whatsoever for human Life. And yet hath it this particularity, above many o∣ther Cities in other places, that it entertaineth no external commerce with any other Nation then its own, the Spaniards. The greatest part of the inhabitants are rich, and substan∣tial Merchants, or such as are shop-keepers, and do sell by retail. Another City of this Island, is named San Tiago, or in English, St. Iames, as being con∣secrated City of St. Tiago. unto the Apostle of that Name. This is an open place, without either Walls, or Castle; situate in the altitude of nineteen degrees of Southern latitude. The greatest part of the inhabitants thereof are Hunters, and Planters; the adjacent territory, and soil, being very proper for the said exercises of its constitution. The City is surrounded with large, and delicious Fields, as much pleasing to the view, as those of Santo Domingo: And these abound with all sorts of Beasts, both VVild, and Tame; from whence are tane an huge number of Skins, and Hides, that afford unto the Owners, a very considerable traf∣fick. Towards the Southern parts of this Island City of Nu∣stra Senno∣ra de Alta Gracia. is seen another City called Nuestra Sennora de
Alta Gracia. The territory hereof produceth great quantities of Cacao, which occasioneth the inhabitants, to make great store of the rich∣est sort of Chocolat. Here groweth also much Ginger, and Tobacco; and much Tallow is prepa∣red of the Beasts, which here abouts are hunted. The inhabitants of this beautiful Island of Isle of Savona. Hispaniola, often go, and come in their Canows, unto the Isle of Savona, not far distant from thence, where is their chief fishery; especially of Tortoises. Hither those Fish do constantly re∣sort in huge multitudes, at certain seasons of the year, there to lay their eggs, burying them in the sands of the Shore. Thus by the heat of the Sun, which in those parts is very ardent, they are hatched, and continue the propaga∣tion of their Species. This Island of Savona hath little, or nothing that is worthy consi∣deration, or may merit any particular descrip∣tion, as being so extreamly barren, by rea∣son of its Sandy Soil. True it is, that here groweth some small quantity of Lignum Sanct∣um or Guajacum; of whose use we have already said something in another place. VVestwards of the City of Santo Domin∣go The Town of Aso is also situated another great village called by the Name of El Pueblo de Aso, or the Town of Aso. The inhabitants of this Town drive a great commerce, and traffick, with those of another Village, which is placed in
the very middle of the Island, and is called San Iuan de Goave, or St. Iohn of Goave. This place is environ'd with a magnificent prospect Town of St. John of Goave. of Gardens, Woods, and Meadows. Its territory extendeth above twenty Leagues inlength; and grazeth an huge number of Wild Bulls, and Cows. In this village scarce dwell any others, then Hunters, and Butchers; who flay the beasts that are killed. These are for the most part a mungrel sort of people of several Bloods. Some of which are born of white European people and Negros, and these are called Mu∣latos. Others are born of Indians, and white people; and such are termed Mesticos. But o∣thers are begotten of Negros, and Indians, and these also have their peculiar Name, be∣ing called Alcatraces. Besides which sorts of people, there be several other species, and races, both here and in other places of the West Indies. Of whom this account may be given, that the Spaniards love better the Negro Women, in those Western parts, or the tawny Indi∣an Females, than their own white European race. When as peradventure, the Negros and In∣dians have greater inclinations to the white wo∣men; or those that come near them, the tawny, then their own. From the said village are expor∣ted yearly, vast quantities of Tallow, and Hides; they exercising no other traffick, nor toil. For as to the Lands, in this place, they are not
cultivated, by reason of the excessive dryness of the soil. These are the chiefest places, that the Spaniards possess, in this Island, from the Cape of Lobos, towards St. Iohn de Goave, un∣to the Cape of Samana, nigh the Sea, on the North side; and from the Eastern part, towards the Sea, called Punta de Espada. All the rest of the Island, is possessed by the French; who are also Planters, and Hunters. This Island hath very good Ports for ships Convenience of Harbourt in Hispani∣ola. from the Cape of Lobos, to the Cape of Tibu∣ron, which lyeth on the Western side thereof. In this space of Land there be no less, then four Ports, which exceed in goodness, largness, and security, even the very best of England. Besides these, from the Cape of Tiburon, unto the Cape of Donna Maria, there be two very excellent Ports, and from this Cape, unto the Cape of St. Nicols, there be no less, then twelve others. Every one of these Ports, hath also the confluence of two or three good Rivers, in which are found several sorts of Fish, very pleasing to the palate; and also in great plen∣ty. The Country hereabouts, is sufficiently watered, with large, and profound Rivers, and Brooks; so that this part, of the land may easily be cultivated, without any great fear of droughts; it being certain, that bet∣ter streams are not to be found, in any part of the World. The Sea coasts, and Shoars,
are also very pleasant; unto which the Tor∣toises resort, in huge numbers; there to lay their eggs. This Island was formerly very well peopled, on the North side thereof, with many Towns and Villages. But these being ruined by the Hollanders, were at last, for the greatest part deserted by the Spaniards. CHAP. IV. Of the Fruits, Trees, and Animals, that are found at Hispaniola: THe spacious fields of this Island, docom∣monly extend themselves, to the length of five or six leagues. The beauty whereof is so plea∣sing to the Eye, that, together with the great vari∣ety of their natural productions, they infinite∣ly applaud, and captivate the senses of the contemplator. For here at once, they not on∣ly, with diversity of objects recreate the sight but with many of the same, do also please the smell, and with most contribute abundancy of delights unto the taste. With sundry diver∣sities also they flatter and excite the appetite; but more especially with the multitude of O∣renges, and Lemons: Here growing both sweet Orenges and Lemons.
and sower, and those that participate of both tastes, and are only pleasantly tartish. Besides which here abundantly grow several other sorts of the same fruit, such as are called Ci∣trons, Toronjas, and Limas; in English not im∣perly called Crab-Lemons. True it is, that as to the Lemons, they exceed not here the big∣ness of an Hens egg; which smallness distin∣guisheth them, from those of Spain most fre∣quently used in these our Northern Countries. The Date Trees, which here are seen to cover Palm-trees the whole extent of very spacious plains, are exceedingly tall in their proportion; which notwithstanding doth not offend, but rather delight the view. Their highth is observed to be from 150. unto 200. feet; being wholly destitute of Branches unto the very tops. Here it is, there groweth a certain pleasant white substance not unlike unto, that of white Cabbage, from whence the Branches, and leaves, do sprout, and in which also the seed, or Dates are con∣tained. Every Month, one of those branches falleth to the ground, and at the same time, another sprouteth out. But the seed ripeneth not, but once in the year, The Dates are food extreamly coveted by the Hedge-Hogs. The white substance, growing at the top of the Tree, is used by the Spaniards, after the same manner, for common sustenance, as Cabbage in Europe; they cutting it into slices, and boy∣ling
it, in their Ollas, with all sorts of meat. The leaves of this sort of Date Tree, are seven or eight foot in length, and three or four in breadth; being very fit to cover houses with∣al. For they defend, from Rain, equally with the best Tiles, though never so rudely hud∣dl'd together. They make use of them also to wrap up smoaked Flesh withal; and to make a certain sort of Buckets, wherewith to carry Water; though no longer durable than the space of six, seven, or eight days. The Cabba∣ges of these trees, for so we may call them, The white substance of the Palm-Tree very useful. are of a greenish colour, on the out side, though inwardly very white, from whence may be separated a sort of rind, which is very like unto parchment, being fit to write upon, as we do upon Paper. The bodies of these Trees are of an huge bulk or thickness, which two Men can hardly compass with their Arms. And yet they cannot properly be termed Woody, but only three or four inches deep, in thick∣ness; all the rest of the internal part being ve∣ry soft. Insomuch that paring off those three, or four inches of woody substance, the remain∣ing part of the Body, may be sliced like un∣to new Cheese. They wound them three or four foot above the Root, and making an in∣cision, or broach in the body, from thence gently distilleth a sort of Liquor, which in short time, by fermentation, becometh as strong,
as the richest wine, and which doth easily in∣ebriate, Palm-Wine if not used with Moderation. The French call this sort of Palm-trees Frank-Palms, and they only grow, both here, and elsewhere, in saltish grounds. Besides these Palm-trees, of which we have made mention, there be also in Hispaniola four other species of Palms, which are distinguished by the Names of Latanier, Palma Espinosa or Prickle-palm, Palma a chapelet or Rosary-palm, Palma-Vinosa or Wine-Palm, The Latanier-palm Latanier-palm. is not so tall, as the Wine-palm: Although it hath almost, the same shape, only that the leaves are very like unto the Fans our Women use. They grow mostly in gravelly, and sandy ground, their circumference being of seven foot more or less. The body hath many prickles or thorns, of the length of half a foot, very sharp and pungent. It produceth its seed af∣ter the same manner with that abovemen∣tioned, which likewise serveth for food unto the Wild beasts. Another sort of these Palm-trees is called Prickle-Palm as we said before, by reason it is Prickle-palm infinitely full of prickles, from the Root unto the very leaves thereof much more then the precedent. With these prickles, some of the barbarous Indians use to torment their priso∣ners at War, whom they take in battel. They tye them unto atree, and then taking these
thorns, they put them into little pellets of cotton, which they dip in oyl, and thus stick them in the sides of the miserable Prisoners, as thck as the brizles of an hedg-hog; which of ne∣cessity cause an incredible torment unto the Patient. Afterwards, they set them on Fire, and if the tormented Prisoner singeth in the midst of his torments and flames, he is esteem∣ed as a valiant and couragious Soldier, who neither feareth his Enemies, nor their torments. But if on the contrary, he cryeth out they esteem him but as a Poltron or Coward, and unworthy of any memory. This custom was told me by an Indian, who said he had used his Enemies thus oftentimes. The like cruel∣tis unto these many Christians have seen, while they lived among those barbarians. But returning unto the Prickle-palm, I shall only tell you, that this palm-tree is in this only diffe∣rent from the Latanier, that the leaves are like unto those of the Frank-palm. Its seed is like unto that of the other palm-trees, being only much bigger and rounder, almost as a farthing, and inwardly full of little kernels, which are as pleasing to the taste, as our Wallnuts in Europe. This tree groweth for the most part in the Marshes, and low grounds of the Sea-coast. The Wine-palm, is so called from the abun∣dance Wn-palm. of Wine, which is gathered from hence.
This palm groweth in high and rocky Mountains, not exceeding in tallness the heigth of forty or fifty foot: But yet of an extraor∣dinary shape or form. For from the root, unto the half of its proportion, it is only three or four inches thick. But upwards something above the two thirds of its higth, it is as big, and as thick, as an ordinary bucket or Milk Pail. Within it is full of a certain mat∣ter, very like unto the tender stalk of a white cabbage, which is very juicy of a liquor that is much pleasing to the palate. This liquor after fermentation, and settling of the grounds, reduceth it self into a very good and clear wine, which is purchased with no great indu∣stry. For having wounded the tree with an ordinary hatchet, they make a square incision or orifice, in it, through which they bruise the said matter, until it be capable of being squeesed out, or expressed with the hands, they nee∣ding no other instrument, then this. VVith the leaves they make certain vessels, not on∣ly to settle and purifie, the aforementioned li∣quor, but also to drink in. It beareth its friut like unto other palms; but of a very small shape; being not unlike unto Cherries. The taste hereof, is very good; but of dangerous con∣sequence unto the threat, where it causeth huge and extream pains, that produce ma∣lignant Quinzies in them, that eat it.
The Palm a Chapelet, or Rosary-palm, was Rosary-palm thus called both by the French, and Spani∣ards, because its seed is very fit to make Rosa∣ries or Beads, to say prayers upon, the beads being small, hard and capable of being easi∣ly bored, for that use. This fourth species groweth on the tops of the highest Mountains and is of an excessive tallness; but withall very strait; and adorned with very few leaves. Here groweth also in this Island a certain sort of Apricott-trees, whose fruit equalleth in Apricot-trees bigness, that of our ordinary Melons. The colour is like unto Ashes, and the taste, the ve∣ry same with that of our Apricotts in Europe, the inward stones of this fruit, being of the bigness of an Hens egg. On these the wild-Bores do feed very deliciously, and fatten even to admiration. The trees called Caremites, are very like un∣to our Pear-trees, whose fruits resemble much Caremite-tree. our Damascene plums or Pruants of Europe, being of a very pleasant and agreeable taste, and almost as sweet as milk. This fruit is black on the inside, and the Kernels thereof, some∣times only two in number, sometimes three, others five; of the bigness of a Lupine. This plum affordeth no less pleasant food unto the wild-Bores, then the Apricotts abovementioned, only that it is not so commonly to be found upon the Island, nor in such quantity, as those are.
The Genipa-trees are seen every where, all Genipa-tree. over this Island, being very like unto our Cherry-trees, although it's branches are more dilated. The fruit, hereof, is of an ash-colour, of the bigness of two fist's, which interiourly, is full of many prickles, or points, that are involved under a thin membran, or skin; the which, if not taken away, at the time of eating, causeth great obstructions, and gri∣pings of the belly. Before this fruit groweth Genipa-ink. ripe, if pressed, it affordeth a juice, as black as ink, being fit to write withal upon paper. But the letters disappear within the space of nine days, the paper remaining as white, as if it never had been written upon. The wood of this tree is very strong, solid, and hard; good to build Ships withal, seeing it is obser∣ved, to last many years in the water, without putrefaction. Besides these, divers other sorts of trees, are natives unto this delicious Island, that produce very excellent, and pleasant fruits. Of these I shallo mit to name several, knowing there be entire volums of learned Authors, that have both described, and searched them with greater attention, and curiosity, then my own. Notwithstanding, I shall continue, to make mention of some few more, in particular. Such are the Cedars; which trees, this part of the world produceth, in prodigious quantity. Cedars.
The French Nation calleth them Acajou: And they find them very useful, for the building of Ships, and Canow's. These Canows are like unto little wherry-boats, being made of one only tree, excavated, and fitted for the Sea. They are withal so swift, as for that very pro∣perty, Canow's how they are made. they may be called Neptunes post-horses. The Indians make these Canows without the use of any iron instruments; by only bur∣ning the trees, at the bottom, nigh unto the root; and afterwards, governing the fire, with such industry, as nothing is burnt more then what they would have. Some of them have hatchets, made of flint, wherewith they scrape, or pare, off, whatsoever was burnt too far. And, thus, by the sole instrument of fire, they know how to give them that shape, which rendereth them capable of Navigating threescore, or fourscore leagues, with ordi∣nary security. As to Medicinal productions, here is to be found the tree, that affordeth, the Gum Elemi, Medicinal trees. used in our Apothecaries Shops. Likewise Gua∣iacum, or Lignum Sanctum; Lignum Aloes, or Aloe-wood, Cassia Lignea, China-roots, with se∣veral others. The tree called Mapou, besides that it is medicinal, is also used for making of Canow's as being very thick. Yet is it much in∣feriour unto the Acajou, or Cedar, as being something spongy, whereby it sucketh in Mapou.
much water, which rendreth it dangerous in Navigation. The tree called Acoma hath its wood very hard, and heavy, of the colour of Palm. These qualities render it very fit to make Oars for the sugar-mils. Here are also in great quantities, Brasilete, or brasil-wood, and that which the Spaniards call Mancanilla. Brasil-wood is now very well known in the Provinces of Holland, and the Low Countries. Brasil-wood. By another name it is called, by the Spaniards, Lenna de Peje palo. It serveth only or chiefly, for dying, and what belong∣eth to that trade. It groweth abundantly a∣long the Sea coasts, of this Island; especially in two places called Iacmel, and Iaquina. These are two commodious Ports or Bays; capable of receiving Ships of the greatest bulk. The tree called Mancanilla, or Dwarf-apple∣tree, groweth nigh unto the Sea Shoar; being Mancanlla very vene∣mous. naturally so low, that its branches, though never so short, do always touch the water. It beareth a fruit, something like, unto our sweet sented apples; which notwithstanding is of a very venemous quality. For these ap∣ples being eaten by any person, he instantly changeth colour, and such an huge thirst doth seize him as all the Water of the Thames can∣not extinguish, he dying raving-mad within a litle while after. But what is more the Fish that eat as it often happeneth, of this fruit
are also poysonous. This tree affordeth, also a liquor, both thick, and white; like unto the Fig-tree; which, if touched by the hand, rais∣eth blisters, upon the skin, and these are so red in colour, as if it had been deeply scald∣ded, with hot water. One day, being hugely tormented with Mosquitos or gnats, and as yet, unacquainted with the nature of this tree, I cut a branch thereof, to serve me instead of a fan; but all my face swelled the next day, and filled with blisters, as if it were burnt to such a degree, that I was blind for three days. Ycao is the name of another sort of tree, so called by the Spaniards, which groweth by Ycaos. the sides of Rivers. This beareth a certain fruit, not unlike, unto our bullice, or damson plums. And this food is extreamly coveted by the wild boar, when at its perfect maturi∣ty; with which they fatten as much as our hogs, with the sweetest acorn's of Spain. These trees love sandy ground: Yet are so low, that, their branches being very large, they take up a great circumference, almost couched upon the ground. The trees named Abelcoses bare Abelcose tree. fruit of like colour, with the Ycaos abovemen∣tioned, but of the bigness of Melons; the seeds, or kernels, being as big as eggs. The substance of this fruit is yellow, and of a plea∣sant taste; which the poorest, among the
French, do eat, instead of bread; the wild-Bore not caring at all for this fruit. These trees grow very tall, and thick; being some∣what like unto our largest sort of Pear∣trees. As to the Insects, which this Island produ∣ceth, Flies. I shall only take notice of three sorts of Flies, which excessively torment all human bodies; but more especially such, as never be∣fore, or but a little while, were acquainted with these Countries. The first sort of these flies are as big as our common horse flies in Europe. And these darting themselves upon mens bodies, do there stick, and suck their blood, till they can no longer flie. Their importunity obligeth to make, almost, con∣tinual use of branches of trees, wherewith to fan them away. The Spaniards in those parts call them Mosquito's, or Gnats; but the French Mosquitos. give them the name of Maranguines. The se∣cond Second spe∣cies of Flies: sort, of these Insects, is no bigger then a grain of sand. These make no buzzing noise, as the precedent species doth; for which rea∣son it is less avoidable, as being able also, through its smalness, to penetrate the finest linnen, or cloth. The Hunters are forced to anoint their faces, with hogs-greece, thereby to defend themselves from the stings of these little Ani∣mals. By night, in their Huts, or Cottages, they constantly, for the same purpose burn
the leaves of Tobacco, without which smoke they were not able to rest. True it is, that in the day time, they are not very trouble∣some, in case any Wind be stirring; for this, though never so little, causeth them to dissi∣pate. The Gnats, of the third Species, ex∣ceed not the bigness of a grain of Mustard. Third species. Their colour is Red. These sting not at all, but do bite so sharpely upon the Flesh, as to cre∣ate little Ulcers therein. From whence it of∣ten cometh, that the Face swelleth, and is ren∣dred hideous to the view, through this incon∣venience. These are chiefly troublesome by day, even from the beginning of the Morning, until Sun-setting; after which time, they take up their rest, and permit humane Bodies to do the same. The Spaniards gave these In∣sects the Name of Rojados; and the French that of Calarodes. The Insects, which the Spaniards call Cochi∣nillas, Cochinillas. and the English Glow-worms are also to be found in these parts. These are very like unto such, as we have in Europe, unless that they are somewhat bigger and longer then ours. They have two little specks on their heads, which by Night give so much light, that three or four of those Animals, being together upon a tree, it is not discernable, at a distance from a bright shining Fire. I had on a certain time, at once three of these Co∣chinillas,
in my Cottage, which there conti∣nued until past midnight, shining so bright∣ly, that without any other Light, I could ea∣sily read in any Book, although of never so small a print. I attempted to bring some of these Insects into Europe, when I came from those parts, but assoon as they came into a colder climate, they dyed by the way. They lost also their shining, upon the change of Air even before their death. This shining is so great, according to what I have related, that the Spaniards, with great reason, may well call them from their luminous quality, Moscas de fuego, that is to say; Fire-flies. There be also in Hispaniola an excessive num∣ber of Grillones, or Crickets. These are of an Crickets. extraordinary magnitude, if compared unto ours; and so full of noise, that they are ready to burst themselves with singing, if any per∣son cometh near them. Here is no lesser num∣ber of Reptils, such as Serpents are, and others: But by a particular providence of the Crea∣tor, Serpents, or Snakes. these have no poyson. Neither do they any other harm, then unto what fowl they can catch. But more especially, unto Pullets, Pigeons, and others of this kind. Oftimes these Serpents, or Snakes, are useful in hou∣ses to cleanse them of Rats, and Mice. For with great cunning, they counterfeit their Shreeks; and hereby both deceive and catch
them at their pleasure. Having taken them, they in no wise eat the guts of these Vermin, but only suck their blood at first. Afterwards throwing away the guts, they swallow almost entire the rest of the body; which as it should seem, they readily digest into soft excrements, of which they discharge their bellies. Another Fly-catchers. sort of Reptils belonging to this Island, is cal∣led by the name of Cazadores de Moscas, or Fly-catchers. This name was given unto this Reptil by the Spaniards, by reason they never could experiment, it lived upon any other food then flies. Hence itcannot be said, this crea∣ture causeth any harm unto the Inhabitants, but rather benefit; seeing it consumeth by its continual exercise of hunting the vexatious and troublesome flies. Land-Tortoises here be also in great quanti∣ties. Land-Tortoi∣ses. These mostly breed in mud, and feilds that are overflown with water. The Inhabi∣tants eat them, and testifie they are very good food. But a sort of Spiders, which is here found, is very hidcous. These are as big as Spiders. an ordinary egg; and their feet as long as those of the biggest Sea-crabs. Withal, they are very hairy; and have four black teeth, like unto those of a Rabbet, both in bigness, and shape. Notwithstanding their bitings are not venomous; although they can bite very sharp, and do use it very commonly. They
breed for the most part in the roofs of houses. This Island also is not free from the Insect cal∣led Millepedes. in Latin Millepes, and in Greek Scolopen∣dria, or Many-feet: Neither is it void of Scor∣pions. Yet by the providence of nature, nei∣ther the one nor the other, beareth the least suspicion of poyson. For although they cease not to bite, yet their wounds require not the application of any medicament, for their cure. And although their bitings cause some infla∣mation, and swelling at the beginning; how∣ever these Symptoms disappear of their own accord. Thus in the whole circumference of Hispaniola, no Animal is found that produceth the least harm with its venom. After the Insects abovementioned, I shall Cocodriles. not omit to say something of that terrible Beast, called Cayman. This is a certain species of Cocodrile, wherewith this Island very plen∣tifully aboundeth. Among these Caymanes, some are found to be of a corpulency, very horrible to the sight. Certain it is, that such have been seen, as had no less then threescore and ten foot in length, and twelve in breadth. Yet more marvellous, then their bulk, is their Subtility of the Cayman. cunning and subtilty, wherewith they pur∣chase their food. Being hungry they place themselves nigh the sides of Rivers; more e∣specially at the Fords, where Cattel come to drink or wade over. Here they lie with∣out
any motion, nor stirring any part of their body, resembling an old tree fallen into the River, only floating upon the waters, whe∣ther these will carry them. Yet they recede not far from the bank-sides, but continually lurch in the same place, waiting till some wild Bore, or salvage Cow cometh to drink, or refresh themselves, at that place. At which point of time, with huge activity they as∣sault them, and seizing on them with no less fierceness, they drag the prey into the water and there stifle it. But what is more worthy admiration, is, that three, or four days before the Caymanes go upon this design, they eat nothing at all. But diving into the River they swallow one, or two hundred weight of stones, such as they can find. With these they render themselves more heavy, then before, and make addition unto their natural strength (which in this animal is very great) thereby to render their assault the more terrible and secure. The prey being thus stifled, they suf∣fer it to lie four or five days under water un∣touched. For they could not eat the least bit thereof, unless half rotten. But when it is ar∣rived at such a degree of putrefaction, as is most pleasing to their palate, they devour it with great appetite and voracity. If they can lay hold on any hides of Beasts, such as the Inhabitants oftimes place in the feilds for dry∣ing
against the Sun, they drag them into the water. Here they leave them for some days, well loaden with stones, till the hair falleth off. Then they eat them with no less appetite, then they would the animals themselves, could they catch them. I have seen my self many times, like things unto these I have related. But besides my own experience, many Writers of natural things, have made entire Treatises of these Animals, describing not only their shape, magnitude, and other qualities, but al∣so their voracity, and brutish inclinations; which, as I have told you, are very strange. A certain person of good reputation and cre∣dit, A Strange Relation of a Cayman. told me, that one day he was by the River side, washing his Baraca, or Tent, where∣in he used to lie in the feilds. As soon as he began his work, a Cayman fastned upon the Tent, and with incredible fury, drag'd it un∣der water. The man desirous to see if he could save his Tent, pulled on the contrary side with all his strength, having in his mouth a Butchers knife, (wherewith as it happened he was scraping the Canvas) to defend him∣self, in case of urgent necessity. The Cayman being angry at this opposition, vaulted upon his body, out of the River, and drew him with great celerity into the water, endeavouring with the weight of his bulk, to stifle him un∣der the banks. Thus finding himself in the
greatest extremity almost crushed to death by that huge and formidable Animal, with his knife he gave the Caman several wounds in the belly, wherewith he suddenly expir'd. Be∣ing thus deliver'd from the hands of immi∣nent fate, he drew the Cayman out of the water, and with the same knife open'd the body, to satisfie his own curiosity. In his stomack, he found nigh one hundred weight of stones, each of them being almost of the bigness of his fist. The Caymanes are ordinarily busied in hunt∣ing and catching of flies; which they eagerly The Cayma∣nes persecute the flies. devour. The occasion is, because close unto their skin, they have certain little scales, which smell with a sweet sent, something like unto Musk. This aromatick odour is coveted by the flies, and here they come to repose them∣selves and sting. Thus they both persecute each other continually, with an incredible ha∣tred, and antipathy. Their manner of pro∣creating, and hatching their young ones, is as Manner of  procreating of the Cay∣manes. follows. They approach the sandy banks of some River, that lies exposed to the rays of the South Sun. Among these Sands they lay their eggs, which afterwards, they cover with their feet: And here they find them hatcht, and with young generation, by the only heat of the Sun. These as soon as they are out of the shell, by natural instinct, run unto the water.
Many times those eggs are destroyed by Birds that find them out, as they scrape among the Sands. Hereupon, the Femals of the Caymanes, at such times, as they fear the coming of any flocks of Birds, do ofttimes, by night, swallow these their eggs, and keep them in their stomack, till the danger is over. And from time to time, they bury them again in the Sand, as I have told you bring∣ing them forth again out of their belly, till the season is come, of being excluded the Shell. At this time, if the Mother be nigh at hand, they run unto her and play with her as little Whelps would do with their Dams, sporting themselves according to their own custom. In this sort of sport, they will often∣times run in and out of their Mothers belly, even as Rabbets into their holes. This I have seen them do many times, as I have spyed them at play, with their Dam, over the wa∣ter, upon the contrary banks of some River. At which time, I have often disturb'd their sport by throwing a Stone that way, causing them on a suddain, to creep into the Mothers Bowels, for fear of some imminent danger. The manner of procreating of those Animals, is always the same, such as I have related; and at the same time of the year, for they neither meddle, nor make with one another The Cay∣manes do not procreate but in May. but in the month of May. They give them
in this Country, the name of Cocodriles; though in other places, of the West-Indies, they go under the Name of Caymanes. CHAP. V. Of all sorts of quadruped Animals, and Birds, that are found in this Island. As also a relation of the French Bu∣caniers. BEsides the Fruits, which this Island pro∣duceth, whose plenty, as is held for certain, surpasseth all the Islands of America, it aboundeth also, very plentifully, in all sorts of quadruped Animals. Such are Horses, Bulls, Cows, Wild-Bores, andothers very use∣full unto human kind, not only for common sustenance of Life, but also for cultivating of the ground, and the management of a suffi∣cient Commerce. In this Island therefore are still remaining an huge number of Wild-Dogs. These de∣stroy yearly, multitudes of all sorts of Cattle. Wild-dogs. For no sooner hath a Cow brought forth her Calf, or a Mare foaled, but these Wild-Mastives come to devour the young breed, if they find not some resistance from keepers, and other domestick dogs. They run up and down the
Woods, and fields, commonly, in whole troops of fifty, threescore, or more together. Being withal, so fierce, that they ofttimes will assault an entire herd of Wild-Bores, not cea∣sing to persecute them, till they have at last, overcome, and torn in pieces two, or three. One day a French Bucanier caused me to see a strange action of this kind. Being in the Fields hunting together, we heard a great noise of Dogs, which had surrounded a Wild-bore. Having tame dogs with us, we left them to the Notable acti∣on of the Wild-dogs. custody of our Servants; desirous to see the sport, if possible. Hence my Companion, and I, each of us, climbed up into several trees; both for security and prospect. The Wild-bore was all alone, and standing against a tree; with his tusks endeavoured to defend himself from a great number of Dogs, that had enclos'd him: Having killed with his teeth, and wounded, several of them. This bloody fight continued about an hour; the Wild-bore, mean while, attempting many times to escape. At last, being upon the flight, one of those Dogs, leaping on his back, fastned upon the testicles, which at one pull, he tore in pieces. The rest of the Dogs, perceiving the courage of their companion, fastned like∣wise upon the Bore, and presently after killed him. This being done, all of them, the first only excepted, laid themselves down upon the
ground, about the prey, and there peaceably continued till he, the first andmost couragi∣ous of the troop, had eat as much as he could devour. When this dog had ended his repast, and left the dead beast, all the rest fell in to take their share; till nothing was left that they could devour. What ought we to infer from this notable action; performed by the brutish sense of wild animals? Only this, that even Beasts themselves are not destitute of knowledge; and that they give us documents how to honour such as have well deserved; seeing these being irrational animals, as they were, did reverence, and respect him, that exposed his life to the greatest danger, in vanquishing couragiously the common enemy. The Governour of Tortuga Mounsieur Ogeron, Persecution of the wild-dogs in Tortuga. understanding that the Wild-dogs killed too many of the Wild-bores, and that the Hun∣ters of that Island had much a do to find any, fearing least that common sustenance of the Isle should fail, caused a great quantity of poyson, to be brought from France, there∣with to destroy the Wild-Mastives. This was performed in the year 1668, by comman∣ding certain horses to be killed, and enve∣nom'd, and laid open in the woods and feilds, at certain places, where mostly Wild-dogs used to resort. This being continued for the space of six months: there were killed an in∣credible
number, in the said time. And yet all this industry was not sufficient, to exterminate and destroy the race; yea, scarce to make any diminution thereof; their number appearing to be almost as entire as before. These Wild-dogs are easily rendred tame among people, even as tame as the ordinary dogs, we breed in Houses. Moreover the Hunters of those parts, whensoever they find a wild-bitch, with young whelps, do commonly take away the puppies, and bring them to their houses, where they experiment them, being grown up, to hunt much better then other dogs. But here the Curious Reader, may perad∣venture enquire, from whence or by what accident, came so many wild-dogs into those Islands? The occasion was, that the Spaniards having possessed themselves of these Isles, found them much peopled with Indians. These were a barbarous sort of people, totally given to sensuality, and a brutish custom of life, hating all manner of labour, and only inclined to run from place to place, killing, and making war against their Neighbours; not out of any ambition to reign, but only because they agreed not with themselves, in some common terms of language. Hence perceiving the dominion of the Spaniards did lay a great restriction upon their lazy and brutish customs, they conceived an incredible
odium against them, such as never was to be reconciled. But more especially, because they saw them take possession of their Kingdoms, and dominions. Hereupon they made against them all the resistance, they were capable of, opposing every where their designs to the ut∣most of their power. Until that the Spani∣ards, finding themselves to be cruelly hated by those Indians, and no where secure from their treachery's, resolved to extirpate, and ru∣ine them every one. Especially seeing they could neither tame them by the civilities of their customs, nor conquer them with the Sword. But the Indians, it being their ancient custom to make their Woods their chiefest pla∣ces of defence, at present made these their refuge, whenever they fled from the Spaniards that pursued them. Hereupon, those first Con∣querours of the new World, made use of dogs, to range and search the intricatest thickets of Woods and Forests for those their implaca∣ble, and unconquerable Enemies. By these means, they forced them, to leave their anci∣ent refuge, and submit unto the Sword, seeing no milder usage would serve turn. Here∣upon they killed some of them, and quarter∣ing their bodies, placed them in the high∣ways; to the intent, that others might take warning from such a punishment, not to in∣cur the like danger. But this severity proved
to be of ill consquence. For instead of fright∣ing them and reducing their mindes to a ci∣vil society, they conceived such horrour of the Spaniards, and their proceedings, that they resolved, to detest and fly their sight, for e∣ver. And hence the greatest part dyed in Caves, and subterraneous places, of the Woods and Mountains. In which places, I my self have seen many times, great numbers of human bones. The Spaniards afterwards, finding no more Indians to appear about the Woods, endeavoured to rid themselves of the great number of Dogs, they had in their hou∣ses. From whence these Animals, finding no Masters to keep them, betook themselves un∣to the Woods, and Fields, there to hunt for Food to preserve their Lives. Thus by degrees they became unacquainted with the Houses of their ancient Masters, and at last grew wild. This is the truest account I can give, of the multitudes of wild-dogs, which are seen to this day in these parts. But besides the Wild Mastives abovemen∣tioned, Wild-horses. here are also huge numbers of Wild-Horses, to be seen every where. These run up and down in whole herds, or flocks, all over the Island of Hispaniola. They are but low of Stature, short bodyed, with great Heads, long Necks, and big, or thick legs. In a word they have nothing that is handsome in all
their shape. They are seen to run up and down commonly in troops of two or three hundred together; one of them going always before, to lead the Multitude. When they meet any person, that travelleth through the Woods or fields, they stand still, suffering him to approach, till he can almost touch them; and then suddainly starting they betake them∣selves to flight, running away disorderly, as fast, as they are able. The Hunters catch them with industry, only for the benefit of their Skins. Although sometimes they preserve their flesh likewise which they harden with Smoak; using it for provisions, when they go to Sea. Here would be also Wild-Bulls and Cows, in Wild-Bulls and Cows. greater number, then at present, if by conti∣nuation of hunting, their race were not much diminished. Yet considerable profit is made even to this day, by such as make it their busi∣ness to kill them. The Wild-bulls are of a vast corpulency, or bigness of body; and yet they do no hurt unto any person, if they be not ex∣asperated, but left to their own repose. The hides, which are taken from them, are from e∣leven, to thirteen foot long. The diversity of Birds, inhabiting the Air of this Island, is so great, that I should be troublesom, as well unto the Reader as my self, if I should attempt to Muster up their
Species. Hence leaving aside the prolix Ca∣talogue of their multitude, I shall content my self only to mention some few of the chiefest, Here is a certain species of Pullets, in the woods, which the Spaniards call by the Name of Pin∣tadas, Wood-pul∣lets. the which the Inhabitants find without any distinction, to be as good, as those which are bred in houses. It is already known unto every body, that the Parrots which we Parrots, have in Europe, are transported, unto us, from these parts of the World. From whence may be inferred, that seeing such a number of these talkative Birds, are preserved among us, not∣withstanding the diversity of climates, much grea∣ter multitudes are to be found, where the Air, and temperament is natural unto them. The Parrots make their Nests in holes of Palmito trees Parrots how they build their Nests which holes are before, made to their hand by other Birds. The reason is, for as much as they are not capable of excavating any wood though never so soft, as having their own bills too crook∣ed, and blunt. Hence provident nature hath supplied them with the labour, and industry of another sort of small birds called Carpinteros, or Birds called Carpinters. Carpinters. These are no bigger then sparrows, yet notwithstanding of such hard and piercing bills, that no iron instrument can be made more apt to excavate any tree, though never so solid, and hard. In the holes therefore fabricated be∣fore hand by these Birds, the Parrots get possessi∣on,
and build their Nests, as hath been said. Pigeons of all sorts, are also here, abun∣dantly Pigeons. provided, unto the Inhabitants, by him, that created, in the beginning, and provided all things. For eating of them, those of this Island, observe the same seasons, we said before, speaking of the Isle of Tortuga. Betwixt the Pigeons of both Islands little or no difference is observable; only that these of Hispaniola, are something fatter, and bigger, then those. Another sort of small Birds, here are called Cabreros, or Goat-keepers. These are very like unto others called Heronsetas, and do chiefly Cabreros. feed upon Crabs of the Sea. In these Birds are found seven distinct bladders of Gall, and hence their flesh is as bitter unto the taste, as Aloes. Crows or Ravens, more troublesome un∣to Crows, the Inhabitants, than useful, do here make a hideous noise, through the whole circum∣ference of the Island. Their ordinary food is the flesh of Wild-Dogs, or upon the Carcas∣ses of those Beasts, the Bucaniers kill and throw away. These clamorous Birds do no sooner hear the report of a fowling piece, or mus∣ket, but they gather from all sides, into whole flocks, and fill the Air and Woods, with their unpleasant Notes. They are in nothing diffe∣rent from those, we see, in Europe. It is now high time, to speak of the French Nation, who inhabit a great part of this I∣sland. French Na∣tion in these arts.
VVe have told, at the beginning of this Book, after what manner, they came at first into these parts. At present therefore, we shall only describe their manner of living, cu∣stoms, and ordinary employments. The diffe∣rent callings or professions, they follow, are generally, but three: Either to hunt, or plant, or else to rove on the Sea in quality of Pirats. It is a general, and solemn custom amongst them all, to seek out for a Comrade, or Companion, whom we may call Partner, in their fortunes, with whom, they joyn the whole stock of what they possess, towards a mutual, and reciprocal gain. This is done also by Articles drawn, and signed on both sides; according to what hath been agreed between them. Some of these constitute their surviving companion, absolute heir unto what is left, by the Death of the first of the two. Others, if they be married, leave their estates unto their Wives and Children; others unto other Relations. This being done, every one applieth himself unto his calling; which is always one of the three aforementio∣ned. The Hunters are again subdivided, into two several sorts. For some of these are, only given to hunt wild-Bulls, and Cows; others only hunt Wild-Bores. The first of these two sorts, Bucanier. of Hunters, are called Bucaniers. These not
long ago, were about the number of six hun∣dred upon this Island; but at present, there are not reckoned to be above three hundred more or less. The cause hath been, the great decrease of wild Cattle, through the domini∣ons of the French in Hispaniola; which hath appeared to be so notable, that far from getting any considerable gain, they at present are but poor, in this exercise. When the Bucaniers go into the Woods, to hunt for wild Bulls, and Cows, they commonly, remain there, the space of a whole twelve month, or two years, without returning home. After the hunt is over, and the spoil divided among them, they commonly fail unto the Isle of Tortuga, there to provide themselves with Guns, Powder, Bullets, and small shot, with all o∣ther necessaries, against another going out, or hunting. The rest of their gains they spend with great liberality, giving themselves freely unto all manner of vices, and debauchery. Among which the first is that of drunkenness, which they exercise, for the most part, with Brandy. This they drink as liberally, as the Spaniards do clear fountain Water. Some∣times they buy together a Pipe of Wine; this they stave at the one end, and never cease drinking till they have made an end of it. Thus they celebrate the Festivals of Bacchus so long as they have any mony left. Nei∣ther
do they forget at the same time the God∣dess Venus; for whose beastly delights they find more women, then they can make use of. For all the Tavern keepers and Strumpets, wait for the coming of these lewd Bucaniers, even after the same manner, that they do at Amster∣dam, for the arrival, of the East-India Fleet, at the Texel. The said Bucaniers are hugely cruel, and tyrannical towards their Servants. Insomuch, that commonly these had rather be Gally-slaves in the Streights, or saw Brasil∣wood, in the Rasp-houses of Holland, then serve such barbarous masters. The second sort of Hunters hunt nothing else, but Wild-bores. The flesh of these they salt, and being thus preserved from corruption, they fell it unto the Planters. These Hunters have also the same vicious customs of life, and are as much addicted to all manner of de∣bauchery, as the former. But their manner of hunting is quite different from what is practi∣ced in Europe. For these Bucaniers have certain places, designed for hunting, where they live for the space of three or four months; and sometimes, though not often, a whole year. Such places are called Deza Boulan; and in these with only the company of five, or six friends, who go along with them, they continue all the time abovementioned, in mutual friendship. The first Bucainers, we spoke of many times
make an agreement with certain Planters, to furnish them with meat, all the whole year, at a certain price. The payment hereof is of∣ten made with two or three hundred weight of Tobacco, in the leaf. But the Planters com∣monly into the bargain, furnish them likewise with a Servant; whom they send to help. Un∣to the Servant they afford a sufficient quantity of all necessaries for that purpose, especially of powder, bullets, and small shot, to hunt with∣al. The Planters began to cultivate, and plant the Isle of Tortuga, in the year 1598. The first plantation was of Tobacco, the which grew to admiration; being likewise of very good quality. Notwithstanding, by reason of the small circumference of the Island, they were not then able to plant but little. Especially there being many pieces of Land in that Isle, that were not fit to produce Tobacco. They at∣tempted likewise to make Sugar, but by reason of the great expences necessary to defray the charges, they could not bring it to any effect. So that the greatest part of the Inhabitants, as we said before, betook themselves to the exercise of hunting; and the remaining part unto that of Piracy. At last the Hunters finding them∣selves scarce able to subsist, by their first pro∣fession, began likewise to seek out lands that might be rendred fit for culture; and in these
they also planted Tobacco. The first land, that they chose for this purpose, was Cal de Sac; whose territory extendeth towards the Southern part of the Island. This piece of ground they divided into several quarters, which were called, the great Amea, Niep, Rochelois, the little Grave, the great Grave, and the Augame. Here by little and little, they increased so much, that at present, there are above two thousand Planters, in those fields. At the beginning, they endured very much hardship; seeing that mean while they were busied about their husbandry, they could not go out of the Island, to seek provisions. This hardship was also increased by the necessi∣ty of grubbing, cutting down, burning; and digging, whereby to extirpate the innumera∣ble roots of shrubs, and trees. For when the French possessed themselves of that Island, it was wholly overgrown with Woods extream∣ly thick; these being only inhabited by an ex∣traordinary number of Wild-Bores. The me∣thod they took, to clear the ground was, to divide themselves into small companies of two or three persons together, and these compa∣nies to separate far enough from each other, provided with a few hatchets, and some quan∣tity of course provision. With these things they used to go into the Woods, and there to build Huts for their habitation, only of a few rafters, and boughs of trees. Their first
endeavour, was to root up the shrubs, and lit∣tle trees: Afterwards to cut down the great ones. These they gathered into heaps, with their branches, and then set them on Fire; ex∣cepting the roots, which last of all, they were constrained to grub, and dig up after the best manner, they could. The first seed, they com∣mitted to the ground, was Beans. These in those Countries, both ripen, and dry away, in The first fruit was Beans, the space of six Weeks. The second fruit, necessary unto humane life, which here they tryed, was Potatos. These come not to perfection in lesser time, then Potatos. four, or five months. On these they most commonly make their breakfasts, every mor∣ning. They dress them no otherwise, then boyling them in a kettle, with fair water. Af∣terwards they cover them with a cloath, for the space of half an hour; by which manner of dreing they become as soft as boyled Ches∣nutts. Of the said Potatos, also they use to make a drink, called Maiz. They cut them into small slices, and cover them with hot water. When they are well imbib'd with water, they press them through a course cloth; and the liquor, that cometh out, although something thick, they keep in vessels, made for that purpose. Here after setling two, or three days it begin∣neth to work; and having thrown off its lees, is fit for drink. They use it with great delight
and although the taste hereof is somewhat sower, yet is it very pleasant, substantial, and wholsom. The industry of this composition is owing unto the Indians, as well as of many others, which the ingeniosity of those Barba∣rians caused them to invent, both for the pre∣servation, and pleasure of their own life. The third fruit, the newly cultivated land af∣forded, Mandio was Mandioca, which the Indians, by another name call Cazave. This is a certain root which they plant; but cometh not to per∣fection till after eight, or nine months; yea, sometimes a whole year. Being throughly ripe, it may be left in the ground, the space of eleven, or twelve months, without the least suspition of corruption. But this time being past, the said roots must be converted unto use, some way or another; otherwise they conceive a total putrefaction. Of these roots of Caza∣ve, in those Countries, is made a sort of granu∣lous flower or meal, extreamly dry, and white, which supplieth the want of common bread, made of wheat; whereof the fields are alto∣gether barren in that Island. For this purpose they have in their houses certain graters made either of Copper or Tin, wherewith they grate the aforementioned roots, even just as they use to do Mirick in Holland. By the by, let me tell you, Mirick is a certain root of a ve∣ry biting tast, not unlike unto strong Must∣stard,
wherewith they usually make sauces for some sorts of Fish. When they have gra∣ted as much Cazave roots, as will serve turn, they put the gratings into bags, or Sacks, made of course linnen, and press out all the moisture, until they remain very dry. Af∣terwards they pass the gratings through a sieve, leaving them, after sifting, very like unto saw∣dust. The meal being thus prepared, they lay it upon planches of iron, which are made ve∣ry hot, upon which it is converted into a sort of Cakes very thin. These Cakes are after∣wards placed in the Sun, upon the tops of hou∣ses, where they are throughly, and perfectly dryed. And least they should lose any part of their meal, what did not pass the sieve, is made up into rowles, five or six inches thick. These are placed one upon another, and left in this posture, until they begin to corrupt. Of this corrupted matter, they make a liquor, by them called Veycou, which they find very excellent, and certainly is not inferiour unto our English beer. Bananas are likewise another sort of fruit, of . which is made another excellent liquor, which both in strength, and pleasantness of tast, may be compared unto the best wines of Spain. But this liquor of Bananas, as it easily causeth drunkenness, in such as use it immode∣rately, so doth it likwise, very frequently, in∣flame
the throat, and produce dangerous di∣seases in that part. Guines agudos is also ano∣ther Guines agu∣dos. fruit, whereof they make drink. But this sort of liquour is not so strong, as the pre∣cedent. Howbeit both the one, and the other, are frequently mingled with water, thereby to quench thirst. After they had cultivated these plantations, and filled them with all sorts of roots, and fruts necessary for humane life, they began to plant Manner of planting To∣bacco. Tobacco; for trading. The manner of planting this frequent commodity is, as followeth. They make certain beds of earth, in the field; no lar∣ger then of twelve foot square. These beds they cover very well with Palmite-leaves, to the intent, the rays of the Sun, may not touch the earth wherein Tobacco is sowed. They water them likewise, when it doth not rain, as we do our Gardens in Europe. When it is grown a∣bout the bigness of young lettuce, they trans∣plant it into streight lines, which they make in other spacious fields; setting every plant at the distance of three foot, from each other. They observe likewise, the fittest seasons of the year for these things; which are commonly from Ianuary, until the end of, March; these being the Months, wherein most rains do fall in those countries. Tobacco ought to be weed∣ed very carefully, seeing the least root of a∣ny other Herb, coming near it, is sufficient to
hinder it's growth. When it is grown to the heighth of one foot and a half, or thereabouts, they cut off the tops, thereby to hinder the stalks and leaves, from shooting too high up∣wards, to the intent the whole plant may re∣ceive greater strength from the earth, which affordeth unto it all it's vigour, and taste. Mean while it ripeneth, and cometh to full per∣fection, they prepare in their houses certain a∣partments of fifty, or threescore foot in length, and thirty, or forty, in breadth. These they fill with branches of trees, and rafters, and upon them lay the green Tobacco to dry. When it is throughly dryed, they strip off the leaf from the stalks, and cause it to be rowled up by certain people, who are employed in this work, and no other. Unto these they afford, for their labour, the tenth part of what they make up into Rowles. This property is pe∣culiar Property of the Tobacco∣plant. unto Tobacco, which therefore I shall not omit, that if while it is yet in the ground, the leaf be pulled off from the stalk, it sprou∣teth again, no less then four times in one year. Here I should be glad to give an ac∣count also of the manner of making Sugar, Indigo, and Gimbes; but seeing these things are not planted in those parts, whereof we now speak, I have thought fit to pass them over in silence. The French Planters, of the Isle of His∣paniola Subjection of the planters of Hispaniola.
have always unto this present time been subject unto the Governours of Tortuga. Yet this obedience hath not been rendred, with∣out much reluctancy, and grudging, on their side. In the year 1664, the West-India Com∣pany of France laid the foundations of a Colony in Tortuga; under which Colony the Planters of Hispaniola were comprehended, and nam∣ed, as subjects thereunto. This Decree dis∣gusted the said Planters very much; they taking it very ill to be reputed Subjects unto a private Company of men, who had no authority to make them so. Especially being in a Country, which belonged not unto the dominions of the King of France. Hereupon they resolved, to work no longer, for the said Company. And this resolution of theirs was sufficient to compel the Company to a total dissolution of the Colony. But at last the Governour of Tortuga, who was pretty well stock't with Plan∣ters, conceiving he could, more easily, force them, then the West-India Company, found an invention whereby to draw them unto his obedience. He promised them he would put off their several sorts of Merchandize, and cause such returns to be made, in lieu of their goods from France, as they should best like. Withal, he dealt with the Merchants under hand, that all Ships whatsoever, should come consigned unto him, and no persons should
entertain any correspondence with those Plan∣ters of Hispaniola; thinking thereby to evite many inconveniences, and compel them through necessity, and want of all things, to obey. By these means, he not only obtained the obedience he designed from those people; but also that some Merchants, who had pro∣mised to deal with them, and visit them, now and then, no longer did it. Notwithstanding, what hath been said, in the  arrival of the Hol∣landers at Hispaniola. year 1669, two Ships from Holland hap∣pened to arrive at the Isle of Hispaniola, with all sorts of Merchandize, necessary in those parts. With these Ships presently the Plan∣ters asoresaid resolved to deal, and with the Dutch Nation for the future, thinking hereby to withdraw their obedience from the Gover∣nour of Tortuga, and by frustrating his de∣signs, revenge themselves of what they had endured under his Government. Not long The Planters . after the arrival of the Hollanders, the Go∣vernour of Tortuga came to visit the Planta∣tion of Hispaniola, in a vessel very well arm'd. But the Planters not only forbid him to come a shore, but with their guns, also forced him to weigh anchor, and retire faster then he came. Thus the Hollanders began to trade with these people for all manner of things. But such Relations and friends as the Gover∣nour had in Hispaniola, used all the endea∣vours
they were capable of, to impede the commerce. This being understood by the Plan∣ters, they sent them word, that in case they lay'd not aside their artifices, for the hindrance of the commerce, which was began with the Hollan∣ders, they should every one assuredly, be torn in peices. Moreover to oblige farther the Hol∣landers; and contemn the Governour, and his party, they gave greater ladings unto the two Ships, then they could desire, with many gifts, and presents, unto the Officers, and Mariners; whereby they sent them very well contented to their own Country. The Hol∣landers came again, very punctually, accor∣ding to their promise, and found the Planters under a greater indignation then before, a∣gainst the Governour. Either because of the great satisfaction they had already conceived of this commerce with the Dutch, or that by their means they hoped to subsist by them∣selves, without any further dependance upon the French Nation. However it was sud∣dainly after, they set up another resolution something more strange; then the precedent. The Tenor hereof was; that they would go They resolve to kill the Governour. unto the Island of Tortuga, and cut the Go∣vernour in peices. Hereupon they gathered together, as many Canow's as they could, and set sail from Hispaniola, with design, not on∣ly to kill the Governour, but also to possess
themselves of the whole Island. This they thought, they could more easily perform, by reason of all necessary assistance, which they beleived would at any time, be sent them from Holland. By which means, they were already determined in their minds, to erect themselves into a new Commonwealth, independent of the Crown of France. But no sooner had they be∣gan this great revolution of their little State, when they received news of a war declared be∣tween the two Nations in Europe. This wrought such a consternation in their minds, as caused them to give over that enterprize, and retire without attempting any thing. In the mean while the Governour of Tor∣tuga The Gover∣nour or h aid from the Crown of France. sent into France, for aid towards his own security, and the reduction of those people, unto their former obedience. This was grant∣ed him, and two men of war were sent unto Tortuga with orders, to be at his commands. Having received such a considerable support, he sent them very well equipped, unto the Isle of Hispaniola. Being arrived at the place, they landed part of their forces, with a design to force the people, to the obedience of whom they much hated in their hearts. But the Planters seeing the arrival of those two Fri∣gats, and not being ignorant of their design, fled into the woods; abandoning their houses and many of their goods, which they left be∣hind.
These were immediately rifled, and burnt, by the French without any compassion, nor sparing the least Cottage they found. Af∣terwards the Governour began to relent in his anger; and let them know, by some messen∣gers, that in case they would return unto his obe∣dience; he would give ear unto some accomoda∣tion betwixt them. Hereupon the Planters, The Planters surrender. finding themselves destitute of all human re∣leif, and that they could expect no help from any side; surrendred unto the Governour up∣on Articles, which were made and signed on both sides. But these were not too strictly ob∣serv'd; for he commanded two of the cheifest among them to be hanged. The residue were pardon'd; and withal he gave them free leave, to trade with any Nation, whatsoever they found most fit for their purpose. With the grant of this liberty, they began to recultivate their Plantations, which gave them an huge quanti∣ty of very good Tobacco; they selling year∣ly to the summ of twenty or thirty, thou∣sand rowls. In this Country the Planters have but very few slaves. For want of which, they them∣selves, and some servants they have, are con∣strained to do all the drudgery. These Ser∣vants commonly oblige and bind themselves unto their Masters, for the space of three years. But their Masters forsaking all consci∣ence
and justice, oftentimes traffick with their bodies, as with horses at a Fair; selling them unto other Masters, even just as they sell Ne∣gro's, brought from the coast of Guinea. Yea, to advance this Trade, some persons there are, who go purposely into France, (the same happeneth in England, and other Countries,) Kid-nappers. and Travelling through the Cities, Towns, and Villages, endeavour to pick up young men, or boys, whom they transport, by ma∣king them great promises. These, having once allured and convey'd them into the Islands, I speak of, they force to worklike horses; the toil they impose upon them, being much har∣der, then what they usually enjoyn unto the Negro's, their slaves. For these they endea∣vour, in some manner to preserve, as being their perpetual bond-men; but as for their White Servants, they care not whether they live or die, seeing they are to continue no lon∣ger then three years in their service. These miserable kidnap't people, are frequently sub∣ject unto a certain disease, which in those parts, is called Coma; being a total privation of all their senses. And this distemper is judged to proceed from their hard usage, to∣gether with the change of their native climate into that which is directly opposite. Often∣times it happeneth, that among these trans∣ported people, such are found as are persons of
good quality, and tender education. And these being of a Softer constitution, are more suddainly surprized with the disease above∣mentioned, and with several others belong∣ing to those Countries, then those who have harder bodies, and have been brought up to all manner of fatigue. Besides the hard usage they indure, in their dyet, apparel, and repose; many times they beat them so cruelly, that some of them fall down dead, under the hands of their cruel Masters. This I have of∣ten seen with my own eyes, not without great grief and regret. Of many instances of this nature, I shall only give you the following History, as being somthing more remarkable, in its circumstances. It happened that a certain Planter of those Countries, exercised such cruelty towards one Cruelty of a Planter to∣wards his Servant. of his Servants, as caused him to run away. Having absconded for some days in the woods from the fury of his tyrannical Master, at last he was taken, and brought back to the do∣minion of this wicked Pharao. No sooner had he got him into his hands, but he comman∣ded him to be tyed unto a tree. Here he gave him so many lashes upon his nacked back, as made his body run an entire stream of gore blood, embruing therewith the ground about the Tree. Afterwards to make the smart of his wounds the greater, he anointed them with
juyce of Lemmon mingled with salt, and pepper, being grounded small together. In this miser∣able posture, he left him, tyed unto the tree, for the space of four and twenty hours. These being past, he commenc'd his punishment a∣gain, lashing him as before, with so much cru∣elty, that the miserable wretch, under this torture, gave up the ghost, with these dying words in his mouth: I beseech the Almighty God, Creator of heaven and earth, that he permit the wicked Spirit, to make thee feel as many torments, before thy death, as thou hast caused me to feel before mine. A strange thing and wor∣thy all astonishment, and admiration! Scarce three or four days were past, after this hor∣rible fact, when the Almighty Judge, who had heard the clamours of that tormented wretch, gave permission unto the author of wickedness, suddainly to possess the body of that barbarous and inhumane Amirricide; who tormented him unto death. Insomuch that those tyrannical hands wherewith he had pu∣nished to death his innocent Servant, were the tormentours of his own body. For with them after a miserable manner, he did beat himself, and lacerate his own flesh, till he lost the very shape of man, which nature had given him; not ceasing to howl, and cry without any rest, either by day or night. Thus he continued to do, until he died, in that con∣dition
of raving madness, wherein he surren∣dred his Ghost unto the same spirit of dark∣ness, who had tormented his body. Many other examples of this kind, I could rehearse, but these not belonging unto our present dis∣course, I shall therefore omit them. The Planters that inhabit the Cariby Islands In the Cari∣by Islands they are worse. are rather worser, and more cruel unto their Servants, then the precedent. In the Isle of Saint Christopher dwelleth one, whose name is Bettesa, very well known among the Dutch Merchants, who hath killed above an hundred of his Servants, with blows and strips. The English do the same with their Servants. And the mildest cruelty they exercise towards them, is, that when they have served six years of their time (the years they are bound for among the English, being seven compleat) they use them with such cruel hardship, as forceth them to beg of their Masters to sell them unto others, although it be to begin another ser∣vitude of seven years; or at least three or four. I have known many who after this manner, served fifteen, and twenty years, before they could obtain their freedom. Another thing The English use to sell one another for debts. very rigorous among that Nation, is a Law in those Islands, whereby if any man oweth unto another above five and twenty shillings, English mony, in case he cannot pay, he is liable to be sold for the space of six or eight months.
I shall not trouble the patience of my Reader, any longer with relations of this kind, as be∣longing unto another subject, different from what I have proposed to my self in this history. Whereupon I shall take my beginning, from hence, to describe the famous actions and ex∣ploits, of the greatest Pirates, of my time, du∣ring my residence in those parts. These I shall endeavour to relate without the least note of passion or partiality; yea, with that candor which is peculiar both to my mind and stile. Withal certifying my Reader, I shall give him no stories taken from others, upon trust or hearsay; but only those enterprises, unto which I was my self an eye witness. CHAP. VI. Of the Origen of the most famous Pirates, of the coasts of America. A notable exploit of Pierre le Grand. I have told you in the precedent Chapters of this Book, after what manner I was compell'd to adventure my life, among the Pirates of America. Unto which sort of men, I think my self obliged to give this name, for
no other reason, but that they are not main∣tained, or upheld in their actions, by any So∣veraign Prince. For this is certain, that the Kings of Spain, have upon several occasions, The King of Spain com∣plaineth a∣gainst the Pirates. sent, by their Embassadours, unto the Kings of France and England, complaining of the mo∣lestations and troubles, those Pirates did often cause upon the coasts of America; even in the calm of Peace. Unto whose Embassadours, it hath always been answered: That such men did not commit those acts of hostility and Piracy, as subjects unto their Majesties; and therefore his Catholick Majesty might proceed against them ac∣cording as he should sind fit. The King of France besides what hath been said, added unto this answer: That he had no fortress nor Castle, upon the Isle of Hispaniola; neither did he receive one farthing of tribute from thence. Moreover the King of England adjoyned: That he had never given any Patents, or Commissions, unto those of Jamaica, for committing any hostility against the subjects of his Catholick Majesty. Neither did he only give this bare answer, but also out of his Royal desire to pleasure the Court of Spain, recalled the Governour of Iamaica, placing another in his room. All this was not sufficient to prevent the Pirates of those parts from acting what mischief they could to the contrary. But before I commence the relation of their bold and insolent actions, I shall say som∣thing
of their Origen, and most common ex∣ercises; as also of the chiefest among them; and their manner of arming, before they go out to Sea. The first Pyrate, that was known upon the The rise of Pierre le Grand. Island of Tortuga, was named Pierre le Grand, or Peter the Great. He was born at the Town of Diep in Normandy. That action which ren∣dred him famous, was his taking of the Vice-Admiral of the Spanish Flota, nigh unto the Cape of Tiburon, upon the Western side, of the Island of Hispaniola. This bold exploit he performed alone with one only boat; where∣in he had eight and twenty persons, no more to help him. What gave occasion unto this enterprize, was that until that time, the Spani∣ards had passed, and repassed, with all securi∣ty, and without finding the least opposition, through the Channel of Bahama. So that Pierre le Grand set out to Sea, by the Caycos, where he took this great Ship, with almost all facility imaginable. The Spaniards they found aboard, were all set on Shore, and the Vessel presently sent into France. The manner how this undaunted Spirit attempted, and took, such an huge Ship, I shall give you out of the Journal of a true, and faithful Author, in the same words, I read them. The Boat, saith he, Bold attempt of Pierre le Grand. wherein Pierre le Grand was, with his compani∣ons had now been at Sea, a long time, without
finding any thing, according to his intent of Pi∣racy, sutable to make a prey. And now their pro∣visions beginning to fail, they could keep them∣selves no longer upon the Ocean; or they must of necessity starve. Being almost reduced to despair, they espyed a great Ship, belonging unto the Spa∣nish Flota, which had separated from the rest. This bulkey Vessel they resolved to set upon; and take; or die in the attempt. Hereupon they made sail towards her, with design to view her strength. And although they judged the Vessel to be far above their forces, yet the covetousness of such a prey, and the extremity of fortune, they were reduced unto, made them adventure upon such an enterprize. Being now come so near that they could not escape without danger of being all killed, the Pirates joyntly made an oath unto their Cap∣tain Pierre le Grand, to behave themselves cou∣ragiously in this attempt, without the least fear or fainting. True it is, that these Rovers had concei∣ved an opinion, they should find the Ship unpro∣vided to fight; and that through this occasion they should master her by degrees. It was in the dusk of the Evening, or soon after when this great acti∣on was performed. But before it was begun, they gave orders unto the Chirurgeon of the boat, to bore a hole i'th' sides thereof; to the intent that their own Vessel sinking under them, they might be com∣pelled to attack more vigorously, and endeavour more hastily to run aboard the great Ship. This
was performed accordingly; and without any other arms then a Pistol in one of their hands, and a Sword in the other, they immediately clim∣bed up the sides of the Ship, and ran altogether into the great Cabin; where they found the Captain, with several of his companions, playing at Cards. Here they set a Pistol to his breast, commanding him to deliver up the Ship unto their obedience. The Spaniards seeing the Pirates aboard their Ship, without scarce having seen them at Sea, cryed out, 'Jesus bless us! Are these Divels, or what are they? In the mean while, some of them took possession of the Gun room, and seized the arms and Military affairs they found there; killing as many of the Ship, as made any opposition. By which means the Spaniards presently were compel∣led to surrender. That very day the Captain of the Ship, had been told, by some of the Seamen, that the boat, which was in view cruzing, was a boat of Pirates. Unto whom the Captain slighting their advice, made answer: What then? Must I be afraid of such a pittiful thing, as that is? No, Nor though she were a Ship as big, and as strong as mine is. As soon as Pierre le Grand had taken this Magnisicent prize, he detained in his service, as many of the common Seamen, as he had need of, and the rest he set on shore. This being done, he immediately, set sail for France, carrying with him all the riches, he found in that huge Vessel: There he continued; without ever returning unto the parts of America.
The Planters and Hunters, of the Isle of The Inhabi∣tants of Tor∣tuga begin  follow Piracy Tortuga, had no sooner understood this happy event, and the rich prize those Pirates had ob∣tained, but they resolved to follow their ex∣ample. Hereupon many of them, left their ordinary exercises, and common imploys, and used what means they could, to get either Boats or small Vessels, wherein to exercise Pi∣racy. But being not able either to purchase or build them at Tortuga, at last they resolved to set forth in their Canows, and seek them else∣where. With these therefore, they cruzed at first upon Cape de Alvarez, whereabouts the Spaniards use much to trade from one City to another, in small boats. In these they carry Hides, Tobacco, and other commodities, unto the Port of Havana; which is the Metropolis of that Island; and unto which the Spaniards from Europe do frequently resort. Here abouts it was, that those Pirates at the beginning, took a great number of Boats, la∣den They take a great number of Boats. with the aforesaid commodities. These boats they used to carry to the Isle of Tortuga, and there sell the whole purchase unto the Ships that waited in the Port for their return, or accidentally happened to be there. With the gains of these prizes, they provided them∣selves with necessaries, wherewithal to under∣take other voyages. Some of these voyages were made towards the coast of Campeche, and
others, towards that of New-Spain. In both which places the Spaniards at that time, did frequently exercise much commerce, and trade. Upon those coasts, they commonly found great number of trading vessels, and many times ships of great burthen. Two of the biggest of these vessels, and two great ships, which the Spaniards had laden with plate, in the Port of Campeche, for to go unto Caracas, they took in less then a months time, by cruzing to and fro. Being arrived at Tortuga with these prizes, and the whole people of the Island, admiring their progresses, especially that within the space of two years, the riches of the Country were much increased, the number also of Pirates did augment so fast, that from these beginnings, The number of Pirates increaseth. within a little space of time, there were to be numbered in that small Island and Port, above twenty ships of this sort of people. Hereupon the Spaniards not able to bear their Robberies any longer, were constrained to put forth to Sea two great Men of War, both for the de∣sence of their own coasts, and to cruze upon the enemies.
CHAP. VII. After what manner the Pirates arm their Vessels, and how they regulate their Voyages. BEfore the Pirates go out to Sea, they give notice unto every one, that goeth upon How the Pi∣rates arm their boats. the voyage, of the day on which they ought precisely to imbarque. Intimating also unto them, their obligation of bringing each man in particular, so many pound of powder, and bullet, as they think necessary for that expedi∣tion. Being all come on board, they joyn together in Council, concerning what pce they ought first to go unto, wherein to get pro∣visions? Especially of flesh: seeing they scarce eat any thing else. And of this the most com∣mon Their ordi∣nary food. sort among them is Pork. The next food is Tortoises, which they use to salt a little. Sometimes they resolve to rob such, or such Hog-yards; wherein the Spaniards often have a thousand heads of Swine together. They come unto these places in the dark of the night, and having beset the Keepers lodge, they force him to rise, and give them as many heads as they desire; threatning withal to
kill him in case he disobeyeth their commands, or maketh any noise. Yea, these menaces are oftentimes, put in execution, without giving any quarter unto the miserable Swine keep∣ers, or any other person, that endeavoureth to hinder their Robberies. Having gotten provisions of flesh, sufficient for their Voyage, they return unto their Ship. Here their allowance, twice a day, unto eve∣ry one, is as much as he can eat; without Their allow∣ance unto eve∣ry one. either weight, or measure. Neither doth the Steward of the Vessel give any greater pro∣portion of flesh, or any thing else unto the Captain, then unto the meanest Mariner. The ship being well victuall'd, they call ano∣ther Council, to deliberate, towards what place they shall go, to seek their desperate fortunes? In this Council, likewise they a∣gree upon certain Articles, which are put in writing, by way of bond, or obligation, the Articles they agree upon a∣mong them∣selves. which every one is bound to observe, and all of them, or the chiefest, do set their hands unto. Herein they specifie, and set down ve∣ry distinctly, what sums of Mony each par∣ticular person ought to have for that voyage. The fond, of all the payments, being the com∣mon stock, of what is gotten, by the whole ex∣pedition; for otherwise it is the same law a∣mong these people, as with other Pirates, no prey, no pay. In the first place, therefore they
mention, how much the Captain ought to have for his Ship. Next the salary of the Carpenter, or Shipwright, who careen'd, men∣ded, and rigg'd the Vessel. This common∣ly, Every piece of eight is a∣bout 5s. Ster. amounteth unto one hundred, or an hundred and fifty pieces of eight; being according to the agreement, more or less. Afterwards for provisions and victualling, they draw out of the same common stock, about two hundred pieces of eight. Also a competent salary for the Chyrurgeon, and his Chest of Medicaments, which usually is rated at two hundred, or two hundred and fifty pieces of eight. Lastly they stipulate in writing, what recompence or reward each one ought to have, that is ei∣ther wounded, or maimed in his body, suf∣fering the loss of any Limb, by that voyage. Thus they order for the loss of a right Arm, six hundred pieces of eight, or six slaves: For the loss of a left Arm, five hundred pieces of of eight, or five slaves: For a right leg, five hundred pieces of eight, or five slaves: For the left leg, four hundred pieces of eight, or four slaves: For an eye, one hundred pie∣ces of eight, or one slave: For a Finger of the hand, the same reward, as for the eye. All which sums of Mony, as I have said before, are taken out of the capital sum, or common stock, of what is gotten by their Piracy. For a very exact, and equal, dividend, is made of the
remainder, among them all. Yet herein they have also regard unto qualities, and places. Thus the Captain, or chief Commander, is al∣lotted five, or six portions to what the ordi∣nary Seamen have. The Masters-Mate, only two: And other Officers proportionable to their employ. After whom they draw equal parts from the highest, even to the lowest Ma∣riner; the boys not being omitted. For even these draw half a share; by reason, that when they happen to take a better Vessel, than their own, it is the duty of the Boys, to set fire unto the Ship or boat, wherein they are, and then retire unto the prize, which they have taken They observe among themselves, very good orders. For in the prizes they take, it is se∣verely prohibited, unto every one to usurp any They are ve∣ry faithful among them∣selves. thing in particular, unto themselves. Hence all they take, is equally divided, according to what hath been said before. Yea, they make a solemn Oath to each other, not to abscond, or conceal the least thing they find amongst the prey. If afterwards any one is found unfaith∣ful, and that hath contraven'd the said oath, im∣mediately he is separated, and turned out of the society. Among themselves they are very civil and charitable to each other. Insomuch, that if any wanteth what another hath, with great liberality, they give it one to another. As soon
as these Pirates have taken any Prize of Ship, or Boat, the first thing they en∣deavour is to set on shore the prisoners; detaining only some few for their own help, and service. Unto whom also they give their liberty, after the space of two or three years. They put in very frequently for refreshment, Where they refresh them∣selves. at one Island, or another. But more especial∣ly into those which lie on the Southern side of of the Isle of Cuba. Here they careen their ves∣sels, and i'th mean while, some of them go to hunt, others to cruze upon the Seas, in Ca∣nows, seeking their fortune. Many times they take the poor Fishermen of Tortoises, and car∣rying them to their habitations, they make them work so long, as the Pirates are plea∣sed. In the several parts of America, are found Four species of Tortoises. four distinct species of Tortoises. The first hereof, are so great, that every one reacheth to the weight of two or three thousand pound. The scales of the species, are so soft, as that easily they may be cut with a knife. Yet these Tortoises are not good to be eaten. The se∣cond species is of an indifferent bigness and are green in colour. The scales of these are harder then the first; and this sort is of a very pleasant tast. The third is very little different in size and bigness from the second; unless that it hath the head somthing bigger. This
third species is called by the French Cavana, and is not good for food. The fourth is na∣med Caret, being very like unto the Tor∣toises we have in Europe. This sort keepeth most commonly among the Rocks, from whence they crawl out, to seek their food, which is for the greatest part, nothing but Ap∣ples of the Sea. Those other species, above∣mentioned, feed upon grass, which groweth in the water, upon the banks of the sand. These banks or shelv's for their pleasant green, do here resemble the delightful Meadows of the United Provinces. Their eggs are almost like unto those of the Crocodile; but without any Their eggs. shell, being only covered with a thin mem∣brane, or film. They are found in such pro∣digious quantities, along the sandy shores of those Countries, that were they not frequent∣ly destroyed by birds, the Sea would infinitely abound with Tortoises. These Creatures have certain customary  they  them. places, whither they repair every year, to lay their eggs. The chiefest of these places, are the three Islands called Caymanes, situated in the altitude of twenty degrees, and fifteen minutes, Northern latitude; being at the distance of five and forty leagues, from the Isle of Cuba, on the Northern side thereof. It is a thing much deserving consideration, how the Tortoises can find out these Islands.
For the greatest part of them come from the Gulf of Honduras; distant from thence, the whole space of one hundred and fifty leagues. Certain it is, that many times the ships ha∣ving lost their altitude, through the darkness of the weather, have steered their course only by the noise of the Tortoises, swimming that way, and have arrived unto those Isles. When their season of hatching is past, they retire to∣wards the Island of Cuba; where be many good places that afford them food. But the mean while they are at the Islands of Caymanes, they eat very little or nothing. When they have been about the space of one month in the Seas of Cuba, and are grown fat, the Spaniards go out to fish for them; they being then to be taken in such abundance, that they provide with them sufficiently, their Cities, Towns and Villages. Their manner of taking them is, by making with a great nail a certain kind of dart. This The manner of fishing for Tortoises. they fix at the end of a long stick, or pole; with which they wound the Tortoises, as with a dagger, whensoever they appear above water, to breath fresh air. The Inhabitants of New-Spain, and Cam∣peche, lade their principal sorts of Merchandi∣ses, in Ships of great bulk; and with these they exercise their commerce to and fro. The vessels from Campeche in winter time, set out towards Caracas, Trinity Isles, and that of Mar∣garita.
For in Summer the winds are contrary; though very favourable to return unto Cam∣peche; as they use to do, at the beginning of that season. The Pirates are not ignorant of Places where commonly the Pirates do . these times; as being very dextrous in search∣ing out all places, and circumstances, most sut∣able to their designs. Hence in the places, and seasons aforementioned, they cruze upon the said Ships, for some while. But in case they can perform nothing, and that fortune doth not favour them with some prize, or o∣ther, after holding a Council thereupon, they commonly enterprize things very desperate. Of these their resolutions I shall give you one instance very remarkable. One certain Pirate, Pierre Fran∣cois. whose name was Pierre Francois, or Peter Fran∣cis, happened to be a long time at Sea with his boat, and six and twenty persons, waiting for the Ships that were to return from Maracaibo towards Campeche. Not being able to find any thing, nor get any prey, at last he resolved to direct his course to Rancherias, which is nigh unto the River, called de la Plata, in the alti∣tude of twelve degrees, and a half Northern la∣titude. In this place lieth a rich Bank of Pearl, to the fishery whereof they yearly send from Cartagena, a Fleet of a dozen vessels with a man of war, for their defence. Every Vessel hath at least a couple of Negros in it, who are very dex∣trous in diving, even to the depth of six fa∣thoms,
within the Sea; whereabouts they find good store of Pearls. Upon this Fleet of Vessels though small, called the Pearl Fleet; Pierre Francois resolved to adventure; rather then go home with empty hands. They rid at Anchor, at that time, at the mouth of the Ri∣ver de la Hacha; the Man of War being scarce He goeth unto the River de la Hacha, and setteth upon a fleet of Pearl-fishers. half a league distant, from the small Ships; and the wind very calm. Having espyed them in this posture, he presently pull'd down his sails, and rowed along the coast, dissembling to be a Spanish Vessel, that came from Maracaibo, and only passed that way. But no sooner was he come unto the Pearl bank, when suddain∣ly he assaulted the Vice-admiral of the said Fleet, mounted with eight Guns, and three∣score men well arm'd, commanding them to surrender. But the Spaniards running to their arms, did to what they could to defend them∣selves, fighting for some while; till at last He taketh the Vice Ad∣miral. they were constrained to submit unto the Pi∣rate. Being thus possessed of the Vice-Admiral, he resolved next to adventure with some other stratagem, upon the Man of War; thinking thereby to get strength sufficient, to master the rest of the Fleet. With this intent he presently And design∣eth against the man of War. sunk his own Boat in the River, and putting forth the Spanish Colours, weighed Anchor, with a little wind, which then began to stir; having with promises, and menaces, compelled
most of the Spaniards, to assist him in his de∣sign. But no sooner did the Man of War perceive one of his Fleet to set sail, when he did so too; fearing least, the Mariners should have any design to run away, with the Vessel, and riches they had on board. This caused the Pirates, immediately to give over that dangerous enterprize, as thinking them∣selves unable to encounter force to force, with the said Man of War, that now came against them. Hereupon, they attempted to get out of the River, and gain the open Seas, with the riches they had taken; by making as much sail, as possibly the vessel would bear. This being perceived, by the Man of War, he presently gave them chace. But the Pi∣rates, having laid on too much sail, and a gust of wind suddainly arising, had their Main∣mast They lose their main∣mast. blown down by the board, which dis∣abled them from prosecuting their escape. This unhappy event much encouraged those that were in the Man of War; they ad∣vancing, and gaining upon the Pirates every moment. By which means at last they were overtaken. But these not withstanding, finding themselves still with two and twenty persons found, the rest being either killed or wounded, resolved to defend themselves so long as it were possible. This they performed very couragiously for some while, until being
BARTOLOMEW PORTUGUES. Part. 1. Page. 95.
thereunto forced by the Man of War, they were compelled to surrender. Yet was not They surren∣der unto the man of War. this done without Articles, which the Spani∣ards were glad to allow them, as followeth. That they should not use them as slaves, for∣cing them to carry or bring stones, or em∣ploying Upon Arti∣cles. them in other labours, for three or four years, as they commonly employ their Negros. But that they should set them on shore, upon free land; without doing them any harm in their bodies. Upon these Articles they deliver'd themselves, with all that they had taken; which was worth only in Pearls, to the value of above one hundred thousand peices of eight, besides the vessel, provisions goods, and other things. All which being pu together, would have made unto this Pirate, one of the greatest prizes, he could desire. Which he had certainly obtained, had it not been for the loss of his Main-mast, as was said before. Another bold attempt, not unlike unto that which I have related, nor less remarkable; Bartholo∣mew Por∣tugues. I shall also give you at present. A certain Pirate, born in Portugal, and from the name of his Country, called Bartholomew Portugues, was cruzing in his Boat from Iamaica (where∣in he had only thirty men, and four small guns) upon the Cape de Corriente, in the I∣land of Cuba. In this place he met with a great
ship, that came from Maracaibo, and Cartagena, bound for the Havana, well provided, with twenty great guns, and threescore and ten Men, between passengers and Mariners. This ship he presently assaulted, but found as strong∣ly defended by them that were on board. The The Pirate escaped the first encounter, resol∣ving to attacque her more vigorously then be∣fore, seeing he had sustained no great damage hitherto. This resolution of his, he boldly performed, renewing his assaults so often, till that after a long and dangerous fight, he became Master of the great Vessel. The Por∣tugues He taketh a great Spa∣nish ship. lost only ten men, and had four woun∣ded, so that he had still remaining twenty fighting men, whereas the Spaniards had double the same number. Having possessed them∣selves of such a Ship, and the wind being con∣trary to return unto Iamaica, they resolved to steer their course towards the Cape of Saint Antony, (which lieth on the Western side of the Isle of Cuba) there to repair themselves, and take in fresh water, of which they had great necessity, at that time. Being now very near unto the Cape abovementioned, they unexpectedly met with three great Ships, that were coming from New-Spain, and bound for the Havana. By  tan and oseth his li∣ty. these as not being able to escape, they were easily retaken both Ship, and Pirates. Thus
they were all made prisoners, through the sud∣dain change of fortune, and found themselves poor, oppress'd, and stript of all the riches they had purchased so little before. The Cargo of this Ship consisted in one hundred, and twenty thousand weight of Cacao-nuts, the cheifest ingredient of that rich liquor called Chocolate, and threescore and ten thousand peices of eight. Two days after this misfor∣tune, there happened to arise an huge and dangerous tempest, which largely separated the the Ships from one another. The great Ves∣sel, wherein the Pirates were, arrived at Cam∣peche; where many considerable Merchants came to salute, and welcom the Captain thereof. These presently knew the Portugues Pirate, as being him who had committed innumera∣ble excessive insolences upon those coasts, not only infinite Murthers and Robberies, He is brought unto Cam∣pche. but also lamentable incendiums, which those of Campeche, still preserved very fresh in their memory. Hereupon the next day after their arrival, the Magistrates of the City sent several of their Officers, to demand and take into custody, the criminal prisoners, from on board the ship, with intent to punish them, according to their deserts. Yet fearing least the Cap∣tain of those Pirates should escape out of their hands on shore (as he had formerly done,
being once their prisoner in the City before,) they judg'd it more convenient to leave him safely guarded on board the Ship, for that present. In the mean while they caused a  condemned to the Gal∣lows. Gibbet to be erected, whereupon to hang him the very next day, without any other form of process, then to lead him from the Ship, un∣to the place of punishment. The rumour of this future tragedy, was presently brought unto Bartholomew Portugues his ears, whereby he sought all the means, he could to escape that night. With this design he took two ear∣then Jars, wherein the Spaniards usually car∣ry wine from Spain unto the West-Indies, and stopp'd them very well; intending to use them for swimming, as those, who are unskil∣ful in that art, do calabacas, a sort of pumkins in Spain; and in other places empty bladders. Having made this necessary preparation, he wait∣ed for the night, when all should be at sleep; even the Centry that guarded him. But He killeth his Centry, and escapeth. seeing he could not escape his vigilancy, he secretly purchased a knife, and with the same gave him such a mortal stab, as suddainly depriv'd him of life, and the possibility of ma∣king any noise. At that instant, he commit∣ted himself to Sea, with those two earthen jarrs aforementioned, and by their help and support, though never having learn'd to swim, he reached the shore. Being arri∣ved
upon land, without any delay, he took his refuge in the Woods, where he hid himself for three days, without daring to appear, nor eat∣ing any other food then wild herbs. Those of the City failed not the next day, to make a diligent search for him in the woods, They seek after him in vain. where they concluded him to be. This strict enquiry Portugues had the convenience to e∣spy from the hallow of a Tree, wherein he lay absconded. Hence perceiving them to re∣turn without finding, what they sought for, he adventur'd to sally forth towards the coasts, called del Golfo triste, forty leagues distant from the City of Campeche. Hither he ar∣rived within a fortnight after his escape from He goeth to the coasts of Golfo iste. the Ship. In which space of time, as also afterwards, he endured extream hunger, thirst, and fears, of falling again into the hands of the Spaniards. For during all this journy he had no other provision with him, then a small Calabaca, with a little water: Neither did he eat any thing else, then a few shell fish, which he found among the Rocks, nigh the Sca∣shore. Besides that, he was compell'd to pass as yet some Rivers, not knowing well to swim. Being in this distress, he found an old board, which the waves had thrown upon the shore, wherein did stick a few great nailes. These he took and with no small labour, whet∣ted against a stone, until that he had made
them capable of cutting like unto knives, tho very imperfectly. With these, and no better instruments, he cut down some branches of Trees, the which with twigs, and Osiers he joyn'd together, and made as well as he could, a boat, or rather a wafte, wherewith he waf∣ted over the Rivers. Thus he arrived finally at the Cape of Golfo triste, as was said before; where he happened to find a certain Vessel of Pirates, who were great Comrades of his own, and were lately come from Iamaica. Unto these Pirates, he instantly related all his adversities, and misfortunes. And withal He getteth   bot. demanded of them, they would fit him with a boat, and twenty men. With which com∣pany alone, he promised to return unto Cam∣peche, and assault the Ship, that was in the River, by which he had been taken, and e∣scaped fourteen days before. They easily granted his request, and equipped him a boat, with the said number of Men. With this small company he set forth towards the execution of his design; which he bravely performed eight days after he separated from his Com∣rades at the Cape of Golfo triste. For being arrived at the River of Campeche, with an un∣daunted courage, and without any rumour of noise, he assaulted the Ship aforementioned. Those that were on board, were perswaded, this was a boat from land, that came to bring
contra banda goods; and hereupon were not in any posture of defence. Thus the Pirates lay∣ing hold on this occasion, assaulted them without any fear of ill success, and in short And retaketh the Ship by which he was taken. space of time, compelled the Spaniards to sur∣render. Being now Masters of the Ship, they im∣mediatly weighed Anchor, and set sail, deter∣mining to fly from the Port, least they should be pursued by other Vessels. This they did with extremity of joy, seeing themselves pos∣sessours of such a brave Ship. Especially Por∣tugues, their Captain, who now by a second turn of fortunes wheel, was become rich, and powerful again, who had been so lately in that same Vessel, a poor miserable prisoner, and condemned to the Gallows. With this great purchase he designed in his mind grea∣ter things; which he might well hope to ob∣tain, seeing he had found in the Vessel great quantity of rich Merchandise, still remaining on board, altho the plate had been transpor∣ted into the City. Thus he continued his Voyage towards Iamaica for some days. But coming nigh unto the Isle of Pinos on the South-side of the Island of He loseth the Ship in a storm. Cuba, fortune suddainly turned her back unto him once more, never to shew him her countenance again. For a horrible storm a∣rising at Sea occasion'd the Ship to split a∣gainst
the Rocks or Banks called Iardines. In∣somuch that the Vessel was totally lost, and Portugues, with his Companions, escaped in a Canow. After this manner he arrived at Ia∣maica, And escapeth in a Canow. where he remained no long time. Being only there, till he could prepare himself to seek his fortune anew, which from that time proved alwayes adverse unto him. Nothing less rare and admirable than the Roche Brasiliano. precedent, are the Actions of another Pirate; who at present liveth at Iamaica, and who hath, on sundry occasions, enterprized and atcheived, things very strange. The place of his birth was the City of Groninghen, in the United Provinces; but his own proper Name is not known: The Pirates, his Companions, having only given him that of Roche Brasili∣ano, by reason of his long residence in the Country of Brasil. From whence he was for∣ced to flie, when the Portuguises retook those Countries, from the West India Company of Amsterdam; several Nations then inhabiting at Brasil (as English, French, Dutch, and others) being constrained to seek new Fortunes. This Fellow at that conjuncture of time re∣tired unto Iamaica. Where being at a stand how to get a livelyhood, he entred himself into the Society of Pirates. Under these, he served in quality of a private Mariner for some while. In which degree he behaved
ROCK BRASILIANO Part. 1. Page. 102.
himself so well, as made him both beloved and respected by all; as one that deserved to be their Commander for the future. One day certain Mariners happen'd to engage in a dis∣sention with their Captain; the effect whereof Is chosen Captain. was that they left the Boat. Brasiliano fol∣lowed the rest, and by these was chosen for their Conductor and Leader; who also fitted him out a Boat, or small Vessel, wherein he re∣ceived the Title of Captain. Few days were past, from his being cho∣sen He taketh a great Ship. Captain, when he took a great Ship, that was coming from New-Spain. On board of which he found great quantity of plate; and both one and the other, he carried unto Ia∣maica. This action gave him renovvn, and caused him to be both esteemed and feared; e∣very one apprehending him much abroad. Howbeit, in his domestick, and private affairs, he had no good behaviour, nor government, over himself; for in these he would oftentimes shew himself either brutish, or foolish. Many times being in drink, he would run up and down the streets, beating or wounding whom he met; no person daring to oppose him, or make any resistance. Unto the Spaniards he always shewed him∣self very barbarous, and cruel; only out of an inveterate hatred, he had against that Na∣tion. Of these he commanded several to be
rosted alive upon wooden spits; for no other crime, than that they would not shew him the places, or Hog-yards, where he might steal He seth his Ship, and es∣peth in a . Swine. After many of these cruelties, it hap∣pened as he was cruzing upon the coasts of Campeche, that a dismal tempest suddainly sur∣prized him. This proved to be so violent, that at last his Ship was wrackt, upon the coasts; the Mariners only escaping with their Mus∣quets, and some few bullets, and powder, which were the only things they could save, of all that was in the Vessel. The place where the Ship was lost, was precisely between Cam∣peche, and the Golfo triste. Here they got on shore in a Canow, and marching along the coast, with all the speed they could, they di∣rected their course towards Golfo triste; as be∣ing a place where the Pirates commonly use to repair, and refresh themselves. Being upon this Journy, and all very hungry, and thir∣sty, as is usual in desert places, they were pur∣sued Is pursued by a Tp of Spaniards. by some Spaniards; being a whole troop of an hundred horsemen. Brasiliano no sooner perceived this imminent danger, then he ani∣mated his companions, telling them: We had better fellow Soldiers, choose to die under our arms sighting, as it becometh men of courage, then sur∣render unto the Spaniards; who in case they over∣come us, will take away our lives with cruel tor∣ments. The Pirates were no more then thirty
in number; who notwithstanding, seeing their brave Commander oppose himself with cou∣rage, unto the enemy, resolved to do the like. Hereupon they faced the troop of Spaniards, and discharged their Musquets against them; with such dexterity, as they almost kill'd one horseman with every shot. The fight conti∣nued for the space of an hour, till at last the Spaniards were put to flight, by the Pirates. They stripp'd the dead, and took from them Putteth  to flight. what they thought most convenient for their use. But such as were not already dead; they helped to quit the miseries of life, with the ends of their Musquets. Having vanquished the Enemy, they all mounted on several horses, they found in the field, and continued the Journy aforemen∣tioned; Brasiliano having lost but two of his Companions in this bloody fight, and had two other wounded. As they prosecuted their way, before they came unto the Port, they es∣pyed a boat from Campeche, well man'd, that rid at anchor, protecting a small number of Canows, that were lading wood. Hereupon, they sent a detachment of six of their Men, to watch them; and these the next morning by a wild possessed themselves of the Canows. Ha∣ving given notice unto their Companions, they went all on board, and with no great difficulty, took also the Boat, or little Man of War, their
Convoy. Thus having rendred themselves Masters of the whole Fleet, they wanted only provisions, which they found but very small They take a Fleet of Ca∣nows and a  of War. aboard those Vessels. But this defect was sup∣plied by the horses, which they instantly kil∣led, and salted; with Salt, which, by good for∣tune, the Wood-cutters had brought with them. Upon which victuals they made shift to keep themselves, until such time, as they could purchase better. These very same Pirates, I mean Brasiliano, and his companions, took also another Ship, They take a Ship from New-Spain. that was going from New-Spain unto Mara∣caibo; laden with divers sorts of Merchandize, and a very considerable number of peices of eight, which were design'd to buy Cacao-nuts, for their lading home. All these prizes they carried into Iamaica, where they safely arri∣ved, and according to their custom, wasted in a few days, in Taverns and Stews, all they had gotten, by giving themselves to all man∣ner of debauchery, with Strumpets, and Pirates will spend 2000, o 3000  of eight in  night. Wine. Such of these Pirates are found who will spend two or three thousand peices of eight, in one night, not leaving themselves peradventure a good shirt to wear, on their backs, in the morning. Thus upon a certain time, I saw one of them give unto a com∣mon Strumpet, five hundred peices of eight, only that he might see her naked. My
own Master would buy, in like occasions, a whole pipe of wine, and placing it in the street, would force every one, that pas∣sed by to drink with him; threatning also to Pistol them, in case they would not do it. At other times he would do the same, with Barrels of Ale, or Beer. And very often, with both his hands, he would throw these liquors about the streets, and wet the cloathes of such as walked by, with∣out regarding, whether he spoil'd their Apparrel, or not, were they Men, or Wo∣men. Among themselves, and to each other, these Pirates are extreamly liberal, and free. If any one of them hath lost all his goods, which often happeneth in their manner of life, they freely give him, and make him partaker of what they have. In Taverns, and Ale-houses, they always have great credit; but in such houses at Iamai∣ca, they ought not to run very deep in debt, seeing the inhabitants of that Island, do easily sell one another for debt. Thus it happened unto my Patron, or Master, to be sold for a debt of a Tavern, where∣in he had spent the greatest part of his mony. This Man had within the space of three months before, three thousand peices
of eight in ready cash; all which he wa∣sted in that short space of time, and became so poor, as I have told you. But now to return unto our discourse, I Brasiliano goeth to Sea. must let my Reader know, that Brasiliano, after having spent all that he had robb'd, was constrained to go to Sea again, to seek his fortune once more. Thus he set forth towards the coast of Campeche, his common place of rendezvous. Fifteen days after his arrival there, he put himself into a Canow, with intent to espy the Port of that City, and see if he could rob any Spanish Vessel. But his fortune was so bad, that both he and all his Men, were taken prisoners, and carried unto the presence of the Governour. This Man immediately, And is made prisoner with all his men. cast them into a dungeon, with full inten∣tion to hang them every person. And doubtless he had performed his intent, were it not for a Stratagem, that Brasiliano u∣sed, which proved sufficient to save their lives. He writ therefore a Letter unto the Governour, making him believe it came from other Pirates, that were abroad, at Sea; and withal telling him: He should have a care, how he used those persons he had in his custody. For in case he caused them any harm, they did Swear unto him, they would
never give quarter, unto any person of the Spanish Nation, that should fall into their hands. Because these Pirates had been many times at Campeche, and in many other Towns and Villages, of the West-Indies, belonging to the Spanish dominions, the Governour began to fear, what mischeif they might cause by the means of their companions abroad, in case he should pu∣nish them. Hereupon he released them out of prison, exacting only an Oath of them, Is set at li∣berty, and sent into Spain. before hand, that they would leave their ex∣ercise of Piracy for ever. And withal he sent them as common Mariners, or Pas∣sengers, in the Galoon's, to Spain. They got in this Voyage all together five hun∣dred peices of eight; whereby they tar∣ried not long there, after their arrival. But providing themselves with some few ne∣cessaries, they all returned unto Iamaica, within a little while. From whence they set forth again to Sea, committing greater Robberies and cruelties, then ever they had done before. But more especially, abusing the poor Spaniards, that happened to fall into their hands, with all sorts of cruelty imaginable. The Spaniards perceiving they could
gain nothing upon this sort of people, nor diminish their number, which rather increased dayly, resolved to diminish the number of their Ships, wherein they exer∣cised trading to and fro. But neither this resolution was of any effect, or did them any good service. For the Pirates finding not so many Ships at Sea, as before, began The Pirates begin to make land inva∣sions. to gather into greater Companies, and land upon the Spanish Dominions, ruining whole Cities, Towns, and Villages; and withal pillaging, burning, and carrying away, as much as they could possible. The first Pirate, who gave a beginning unto these invasions by Land, was named Lewis Scot. Lewis Scot, who Sack't and Pillag'd the City of Campeche. He almost ruin'd the Town, Robbing and destroying all he could; and after he had put it to the ran∣some of an excessive summ of mony, he left it. After Scot, came another named Mansvelt. Mansvelt, who enterprised to set footing in Granada, and penetrate with his Piracies, even unto the South Sea. Both which things he effected, till that at last for want of provision, he was constrained to go back. He assaulted Isle of Saint Ca∣therine, which was the first land he took,
and upon it some few prisoners. These shewed him the way towards Cartagena, which is a principal City, situate in the Kingdom of Nueva Granada. But the bold attempts and actions, of Iohn Davis, John Davis. born at Iamaica, ought not to be forgotten in this History, as being some of the most remarkable thereof. Especially his rare prudence and valour, wherewith he beha∣ved himself in the aforementioned King∣dom of Granada. This Pirate having cru∣zed a long time in the Gulf of Pocatauro, upon the Ships, that were expected from Cartagena, bound for Nicaragua, and not being able to meet any of the said Ships, resolved at last, to land in Nicaragua, leaving his Ship concealed about the coast. This design he presently put in execu∣tion. He landeth in Nicaragua. For taking fourscore men, out of fourscore and ten, which he had in all, (the rest being left to keep the Ship) he di∣vided them equally into three Canows. His intent was to Rob the Churches, and rifle the Houses of the chiefest Citizens of the aforesaid Town of Nicaragua. Thus in the obscurity of the night, they mounted the River, which leadeth to that City, Rowing with Oars in their Canows. By day they
concealed themselves, and boats, under the branches of Trees, that were upon the banks. These grow very thick, and in∣tricate, along the sides of the Rivers, in those Countries, as also along the Sea coast. Under which likewise those, who remained behind, absconded their Vessel, least they should be seen, either by Fishermen, or Indians. After this manner, they ar∣rived at the City the third night, where the Centry, who kept the post of the Ri∣ver, thought them to be Fishermen that had been fishing in the Lake. And as the greatest part of the Pirates are skilful in the Spanish Tongue, so he never doubted thereof, as soon as he heard them speak. They had in their Company an Indian, who was run away from his Master, be∣cause he would make him a slave, after having served him a long time. This In∣dian They kill the Centry of the City. went the first on shore, and rushing at the Centry, he instantly killed him. Being animated with this success, they entred into the City, and went directly unto three or four Houses of the chiefest And enter it. Citizens, where they knocked with dis∣simulation. These beleiving them to be friends, opened the doors, and the Pirates suddainly possessing themselves of the Hou∣ses,
robb'd all the mony and plate, they could find. Neither did they spare the They spare not the Chur∣ches. Churches, and most sacred things, all which were pillaged and prophan'd, with∣out any respect, or veneration. In the mean while great cries and lamen∣tation were heard about the Town, of some, who had escaped their hands; by which means the whole City was brought into an uproar, and alarm. From hence the whole number of Citizens rallied to∣gether, intending to put themselves in de∣fence. This being perceived by the Pirates, they, instantly, put themselves to flight, They get a∣way with many riches. carrying with them all that they had robb'd, and likewise some Prisoners. These they led away; to the intent, that if any of them should happen to be taken by the Spaniards, they might make use of them, for ransom. Thus they got unto their Ship, and with all speed imaginable put out to Sea; for∣cing the Prisoners, before they would let them go, to procure them as much flesh, as they thought necessary, for their Voyage to Ia∣maica. But no sooner had they weighed Anchor, when they saw on shore a Troop Are pursued by 500. Spa∣niards. of about five hundred Spaniards, all being very well armed, at the Sea-side. Against these, they let flie several Guns, wherewith
they forced them to quit the sands, and retire towards home, with no small regret, But all in in. to see those Pirates carry away so much plate of their Churches, and Houses, tho distant at least forty leagues from the Sea. These Pirates Robb'd in this occasion, above four thousand peices of eight in rea∣dy mony. Besides great quantity of plate uncoyned, and many Jewels. All which was computed to be worth the sum of fifty They brought away 50000. peices of eight. thousand peices of eight, or more. With this great purchase, they arrived a Iamaica, soon after the exploit. But as this sort of people, are never Masters of their mony, but a very little while, so were they soon constrained to seek more, by the same means, they had used before. This ad∣venture, caused Captain Iohn Davis, pre∣sently John Davis is made Ad∣miral of the Pirates. after his return, to be chosen Admi∣ral of seven or eight Boats of Pirates; he being now esteemed by common consent, an able Conductor for such enterprizes as these were. He began the exercise of this new Command by directing his Fleet to∣wards the coasts of the North of Cuba, there to wait for the Fleet, which was to pass from New-Spain. But, not being able to find any thing by this design, they de∣termined
to go towards the coasts of Flo∣rida. Being arrived there, they landed part He ransack∣eth the City of Saint Augustine. of their Men, and Sacked a small City, named Saint Augustine of Florida. The Castle of which place, had a Garrison of two hundred Men. The which notwith∣standing, could not prevent the pillage of the City; they effecting it without receiv∣ing the least damage from either Soldiers, or Townsmen. Hitherto we have spoken in the first part of this Book, of the constitution of the Islands of Hispaniola, and Tortuga, their proprieties, and Inhabitants, as also of the fruits to be found in those Countries. In the second part of this Work, we shall bend our discourse to describe the actions of two of the most famous Pirates, who com∣mitted many horrible crimes, and inhu∣man cruelties, against the Spanish Na∣tion. The End of the First Part.
FRANCIS LOLONOIS. Part. 2. Page. 1.
BUCANIERS OF AMERICA. PART II. CHAP. I. Origine of Francis Lolonois, and begin∣ning of his Robberies. FRancis Lolonois was Native of that Territo∣ry Francis Lo∣lonois. in France, which is called Les Sables d' Olone. or the Sands of Olone. In his Youth he was transported unto the Caribby Islands, in quality of a Servant or Slave, according to the custom of France and other Countries; of which we have already spoken in the first part of this Book. Being out of his time, when he had ob∣tained his Freedom, he came unto the Isle of Hi∣spaniola. Here he placed himself for some while among the Hunters, before he began his Robbe∣ries against the Spaniards; whereof I shall make mention at present, until his unfortunate Death.
At first he made two or three Voyages in qua∣lity He serveth the Pyrats. of a common Mariner; wherein he beha∣ved himself so couragiously, as to deserve the fa∣vour and esteem of the Governour of Tortuga, who was then Monsieur de la Place. Insomuch, that this Gentleman gave him a Ship, and made him Captain thereof, to the intent he might seek Is soon ad∣vanced to be  Captain. his fortune. This Dame shewed herself very fa∣vourable unto him at the beginning: for in a short while he purchased great Riches. But withal, his Cruelties against the Spaniards were such, as that the very fame of them made him known through the whole Indies. For which reason the Spaniards, in his time, whensoever they were attacked by Sea, would chuse rather to die or sink fighting, than surrender; as knowing they should have no Mercy nor Quarter at his hands. But as Fortune is seldom constant, so after some time, she turned her back unto him. The beginning of whose Disasters was, that in a huge Storm he lost his Ship upon the Coasts of Campeche. The men were all saved; but com∣ing Loseth his Ship, and is wounded. upon dry Land, the Spaniards pursued them, and killed the greatest part, wounding also Lo∣lonois their Captain. Not knowing how to e∣scape, he thought to save his life by a Stratagem. Hereupon he took several handfuls of Sand and Escapes by a Stratagem. mingled them with the Bloud of his own Wounds, with which he besmeared his face and other parts
of his body. Then hiding himself dexterously a∣mong the Dead, he continued there till the Spa∣niards had quitted the Field. After they were gone, he retired into the He retireth unto the Woods. Woods, and bound up his Wounds as well as he could. These being by the help of Nature pret∣ty well healed, he took his way to the City of Campeche, having perfectly disguised himself in Spanish Habit. Here he spoke with certain Slaves, unto whom he promised their liberty, in case they would obey him, and trust in his Con∣duct. They accepted his Promises, and stealing one night a Canow from one of their Masters, they went to Sea with the Pyrat. The Spaniards in the mean while had made Prisoners several of his Companions, whom they kept in close Dun∣geons in the City, while Lolonois went about the Town and saw all that passed. These were of∣ten asked by the Spaniards, What is become of your Captain? Unto whom they constantly ans∣wered, He was dead. With which news the Spaniards were hugely gladded, and made great The Spani∣ards believe him dead. demonstrations of joy, kindling Bonfires, and, as them that knew nothing to the contrary, giving thanks to God Almighty for their deliverance from such a cruel Pyrat. Lolonois having seen these Joys for his death, made haste to escape with the Slaves above-mentioned, and came safe to Tortuga, the common place of Refuge of all
sort of Wickedness, and the Seminary, as it were, of all manner of Pyrats and Thieves. Though now his Fortune was but low, yet he failed not of means to get another Ship; which with Craft He goeth to Sea again. and Subtilty he obtained, and in it one and twen∣ty persons. Being well provided with Arms and other necessaries, he set forth towards the Isle of Cuba, on the South-side whereof lieth a small Vil∣lage which is called de los Cayos. The Inhabi∣tants of this Town drive a great Trade in To∣bacco, Sugar, and Hides; and all in Boats, as not being able to make use of Ships, by reason of the little depth of that Sea. Lolonois was greatly perswaded he should get here some considerable Prey; but by the good His Enter∣prize at the Village de los Cayos. fortune of some Fishermen who saw him, and the mercy of the Almighty, they escaped his ty∣rannical hands. For the Inhabitants of the Town of Cayos dispatched immediately a Messenger over Land unto the Havana, complaining unto the Governour that Lolonois was come to destroy them, with two Canows. The Governour could very hardly be perswaded unto the truth of this story, seeing he had received Letters from Cam∣peche that he was dead. Notwithstanding, at the importunity of the Petitioners he sent a Ship to their relief, with ten Guns, and fourscore and ten Persons well armed; giving them withal this ex∣press Command: They should not return unto his
presence, without having totally destroyed those Pi∣rats. Unto this effect he gave them also a Negro, who might serve them for a Hangman; his Or∣ders being such, as They should immediately hang every one of the said Pirats, excepting Lolonois their Captain, whom they should bring alive unto the Havana. This Ship arrived at Cayos; of whose coming the Pirats were advertised before∣hand; and instead of flying, went to seek the said Vessel in the River Estera, where she rid at Anchor. The Pirats apprehended some Fisher∣men, and forced them, by night, to shew the en∣try of the Port, hoping soon to obtain a greater Vessel than their two Canows, & thereby to mend their Fortune. They arrived, after two of the clock in the morning, very nigh unto the Ship. And the Watch on board the Ship asking them From whence they came, and if they had seen any Pirats abroad? They caused one of the Prisoners to an∣swer, They had seen no Pirats, nor any thing else. Which answer brought them into perswasion that they were fled away, having heard of their coming. But they experimented very soon the contra∣ry: For about break of day the Pirats began to assault the Vessel on both sides with their two Canows. This Attaque they performed with such vigour, that although the Spaniards behaved themselves as they ought, and made as good de∣fence
as they could, shooting against them like∣wise some great Guns; yet they were forced to surrender, after being beaten by the Pirats, with Swords in hands, down under the Hatches. From hence Lolonois commanded them to be brought up one by one, and in this order caused their heads to be struck off. Among the rest, came His Cruelty. up the Negro, designed to be the Pirats Executio∣ner by the Governor of Havana. This Fellow implored mercy at his hands very dolefully, de∣siring not to be killed, and telling Lolonois he was constituted Hangman of that Ship; and that in case he would spare him, he would tell him faith∣fully all that he should desire to know. Lolonois made him confess as many things as he thought fit to ask him; and having done, commanded him to be murthered with the rest. Thus he cruelly and barbarously put them all to death, reserving of the whole number onely one alive; whom he sent back unto the Governour of Havana, with this Message given him in writing: I shall never henceforward give Quarter unto any Spaniard what∣soever: And I have great hopes I shall execute on your own person the very same punishment I have done upon them you sent against me. Thus I have retaliated the kindness you designed unto me and my Companions. The Governour was much trou∣bled to understand these sad and, withal, inso∣lent News; which occasioned him to swear, in
the presence of many, he would never grant Quarter unto any Pirat that should fall into his hands. But the Citizens of the Havana desi∣red him not to persist in the execution of that rash and rigorous Oath, Seeing the Pirats would certainly take occasion from thence to do the same; and they had an hundred times more opportunity of Revenge than he: That being necessitated to get their Livelihood by Fishery, they should hereafter always be in danger of losing their lives. By these Reasons he was perswaded to bridle his Anger, and remit the severity of his Oath aforemen∣tioned. Now Lolonois had got himself a good Ship, but withal very few Provisions and People in it. Here∣upon, to purchase both the one and the other, he re∣solved to use his customary means of cruzing from one Port to another. Thus he did for some while, till at last not being able to purchase any thing, He taketh a Ship of Ma∣racaibo. he determined to go unto the Port of Maracaibo. Here he took, by surprize, a Ship that was laden with Plate and other Merchandize, being outward bound to buy Cacao-nuts. With these Prizes he returned unto Tortuga; where he was received with no small Joy by the Inhabitants, they con∣gratulating his happy Success, and their own pri∣vate Interest. He continued not long there, but pitched upon new designes, of equipping a whole Fleet sufficient to transport five hundred men,
with all other necessaries. With these Prepara∣tions he resolved to go unto the Spanish Domi∣nions, and pillage both Cities, Towns, and Vil∣lages; and finally, take Maracaibo it self. For this purpose, he knew the Island of Tortuga would afford him many resolute and couragious men, very fit for such Enterprizes. Besides, that he had in his service several Prisoners who exactly were acquainted with the ways and places he de∣signed upon. CHAP. II. Lolonois equippeth a Fleet, to land upon the Spanish slands of America, with intent to rob, sack, and burn whatever he met. OF this his designe Lolonois gave notice unto all the Pirats, who at that conjuncture of time were either at home or abroad. By which means he got together, in a little while, above 400 men. Besides which, there was at that present in the Isle of Tortuga another Pirat, whose name was Michael de Basco. This man by his Piracy had Lolonois   Pirat unto him. gotten Riches sufficient to live at ease, and go no more abroad to Sea; having withal the Office of
Major of the Island. Yet seeing the great Prepa∣rations that Lolonois made for this Expedition, he entred into a streight League of Friendship with him, and proffered unto him, that in case he would make him his chief Captain by Land (see∣ing he knew the Country very well, and all its Avenues) he would take part in his Fortunes, and go along with him. They both agreed up∣on Articles, with great joy of Lolonois, as know∣ing that Basco had performed great Actions in Eu∣rope, and had gained the repute of a good Soul∣dier. He gave him therefore the Command he desired, and the Conduct of all his People by Land. Thus they all embarqued in eight Ves∣sels; that of Lolonois being the greatest, as having ten Guns of indifferent carriage. All things being in a readiness, and the whole They set sail and come to Bayala. Company on board, they set sail together about the end of April, having a considerable number of men for those parts, that is in all, six hundred and threescore persons. They directed their course towards that part which is called Bayala, scitua∣ted on the North-side of the Island of Hispanio∣la. Here they also took into their company a certain number of French Hunters, who volunta∣rily offered themselves to go along with them. And here likewise they provided themselvs with Victuals and other Necessaries for that Voy∣age.
From hence they set sail again the last day of They sail a∣gain, & take a Spanish Ship. Iuly, and steered directly towards the Eastern Cape of the Isle, called Punta de Espada. Here∣abouts they suddenly espied a Ship that was co∣ming from Puerto Rico, and bound for New Spain, being laden with Cacao-nuts. Lolonois, the Ad∣mital, presently commanded the rest of the Fleet they should wait for him nigh unto the Isle of Savona, scituate on the Eastern side of Cape Pun∣ta de Espada, forasmuch as he alone intended to go and take the said Vessel. The Spaniards, al∣though they had been in sight now full two hours, and knew them to be Pirats, yet would they not flie, but rather prepared to fight; as being well armed, and provided of all things necessary there∣unto. Thus the Combat began between Lolo∣nois and the Spanish Vessel, which lasted three hours; and these being past, they surrendred un∣to him. This Ship was mounted with sixteen Guns, and had fifty fighting men on board. They found in her One hundred and twenty thousand weight of Cacao, forty thousand Pieces of Eight, and Lading of the Ship. the value of ten thousand more in Iewels. Lolonois sent the Vessel presently unto Tortuga to be un∣laded, with orders to return with the said Ship as soon as possible unto the Isle of Savona, where he would wait for their coming. In the mean while the rest of the Fleet, being arrived at the said Island of Savona, met with another Spanish
Vessel that was coming from Comana with Mili∣tary Provisions unto the Isle of Hispaniola; and also with Money to pay the Garisons of the said Island. This Vessel also they took without any resistance, though mounted with eight Guns. Here were found seven thousand weight of Pow∣der, great number of Muskets, and other things of this kind, together with twelve thousand Pieces of Eight in ready money. These forementioned Events gave good en∣couragement unto the Pirats, as judging them ve∣ry good beginnings unto the business they had in hand. Especially finding their Fleet pretty well recruited within a little while. For the first Ship that was taken being arrived at Tortuga, the Governour ordered to be instantly unladen, and soon after sent her back with fresh Provisions, and other Necessaries, unto Lolonois. This Ship he chose for his own, and gave that which he com∣manded, unto his Comrade Antony du Puis. Thus having received new recruits of men, in lieu of them he had lost in taking the Prizes abovemen∣tioned, and by sickness, he found himself in a good condition to prosecute his Voyage. All being well animated and full of courage, they set sail for Maracaibo, which Port is scituated in the Province of Nueva Venezuela, in the Altitude of twelve degrees and some minutes of Northern Latitude. This Island is in length twenty leagues,
and twelve in breadth. Unto this Port also do belong the Islands of Onega and Monges. The East-side thereof is called Cape St. Roman, and the Western side Cape of Caquibacoa. The Gulf is called by some, the Gulf of Venezuelo; but the Pirats usually call it the Bay of Maracaibo. At the beginning of this Gulf are two Islands, which extend for the greatest part from East to West. That that lieth towards the East is cal∣led Isla de las Vigilia, or the Watch-Isle; because in the middle thereof is to be seen an high Hill, upon which standeth a house wherein dwelleth perpetually a Watchman. The other is called Isla de la Palomas, or the Isle of Pigeons. Be∣tween these two Islands runneth a little Sea, or ra∣ther a Lake, of fresh water, being threescore Lake of Ma∣racaibo. leagues in length, and thirty in bredth; which disgorgeth into the Ocean, and dilateth it self a∣bout the two Islands aforementioned. Between them is found the best passage for Ships, the Cha∣nel of this passage being no broader than the flight of a great Gun of eight pound carriage, more or less. Upon the Isle of Pigeons standeth a Castle, Castle. to impede the entry of any Vessels; all such as will come in, being necessitated to approach very nigh unto the Castle, by reason of two Banks of Sand that lie on the other side, with onely four∣teen foot water. Many other Banks of Sand Sand-bank. there be also found in this Lake, as that which is
called el Tablazo, or the great Table, which is no deeper than ten foot; but this lieth forty leagues within the Lake. Others there be that have no more than six, seven, or eight foot in depth. All of them are very dangerous, especially unto such Mariners as are little acquainted with this Lake. On the West-side hereof is situated the Citie of Situation of Maracaibo. Maracaibo, being very pleasant to the view, by reason its Houses are built along the shore, having delicate Prospects every-where round about. The City may possibly contain three or four thousand persons, the Slaves being included in this num∣ber; all which do make a Town of a reasonable bigness. Among these are judged to be eight hundred persons more or less, able to bear Arms, all of them Spaniards. Here are also one Parish-Church, of very good Fabrick, and well adorn∣ed; four Monasteries, and one Hospital. The City is governed by a Deputy-Governour, who is substituted here by the Governour of Caracas, as being his Dependency. The Commerce or Trading here exercised, consisteth for the great∣est Commerce of Maracaibo. part in Hides and Tobacco. The Inhabi∣tants possess great numbers of Cattel, and many Plantations, which extend for the space of thirty leagues within the Country; especially on that side that looketh towards the great and populous Town of Gibraltar. At which place are gather∣ed huge quantities of Cacao-nuts, and all other
sorts of Garden-fruits; which greatly serve for the regale and sustenance of the Inhabitants of Maracaibo, whose Territories are much drier than those of Gibraltar. Unto this place, those of Maracaibo send great quantities of Flesh; they making returns in Orenges, Lemons, and several other Fruits. For the Inhabitants of Gibraltar have great scarcity of Provisions of Flesh, their Fields being not capable of feeding Cows nor Sheep. Before the City of Maracaibo lieth a very spa∣cious and secure Port, wherein may be built all The Port. sort of Vessels; as having great convenience of Timber, which may be transported thither at ve∣ry little charge. Nigh unto the Town lieth al∣so a small Island called Borrica, which serveth them to feed great numbers of Goats. Of which Isle of Bor∣rica. Cattel the Inhabitants of Maracaibo make greater use for their Skins, than for their Flesh or Milk; they making no great account of these two, un∣less while they are as yet but tender and young Kids. In the Fields about the Town are fed some numbers of Sheep, but of a very small size. In some of the Islands that belong unto the Lake, and in other places hereabouts, do inhabit many Savage Indians, whom the Spaniards call Bravos, or Wild. These Indians could never agree as Wild Indi∣ans. yet, nor be reduced to any Accord with the Spa∣niards, by reason of their brutish and untamable
nature. They dwell for the most part towards the Western side of the Lake, in little Huts that are built upon Trees which grow in the water. The cause hereof being onely to exempt them∣selves as much as possible from the innumerable quantity of Mosquito's, or Gnats, that infest those parts, and by which they are tormented night and day. Towards the East-side of the said Lake are also to be seen whole Towns of Fishermen, who likewise are constrained to live in Huts, built upon Trees, like unto the former. Another rea∣son of thus dwelling, is the frequent Inundations of Waters: for after great Rains, the Land is often overflowed for the space of two or three leagues; there being no less than five and twen∣ty great Rivers that feed this Lake. The Town of Gibraltar is also frequently drowned by these Inundations, insomuch as the Inhabitants are con∣strained Inundations of Gibraltar. to leave their houses, and retire unto their Plantations. Gibraltar is situated at the side of the Lake, forty leagues or thereabouts within it, and recei∣veth Its Situa∣tion. its necessary Provisions of Flesh, as hath been said, from Maracaibo. The Town is inhabited by fifteen hundred persons, more or less; where∣of four hundred may be capable of bearing Arms. The greatest part of the Inhabitants keep open Shops, wherein they exercise one mechanick Trade or other. All the adjacent Fields about
this Town are cultivated with numerous Planta∣tions of Sugar and Cacao; in which are many tall and beautiful Trees, of whose Timber Houses may be built, and also Ships. Among these Trees are found great store of handsome and proportionable Cedars, being seven or eight foot Cedars. in circumference, which serve there very common∣ly to build Boats and Ships. These they build after such manner as to bear one onely great Sail; and such Vessels are called Piragua's. The whole Country round about is sufficiently fur∣nished with Rivers and Brooks, which are very useful to the Inhabitants in time of Drowths, they opening in that occasion many little Cha∣nels, through which they lead the Rivolets to wa∣ter their Fields and Plantations. They plant in like manner great quantitie of Tobacco, which is much esteemed in Europe; and for its goodness, is called there, Tabaco de Sacerdotes, or Priests Tobacco. They enjoy nigh twenty leagues of  , so cal∣led. Jurisdiction; which is bounded and defended by very high Mountains that are perpetually cover∣ed with Snow. On the other side of these Mountains is situated a great City called Merida, unto which the Town of Gibraltar is subject. All Merida. sort of Merchandize is carried from this Town unto the aforesaid City, upon Mules; and that but at one season of the year, by reason of the excessive Cold endured in those high Mountains.
Upon the said Mules great returns are made in Flour of Meal, which cometh from towards Peru, by the way of Estaffe. Thus far I thought it convenient to make a short description of the aforesaid Lake of Mara∣caibo, and its Situation; to the intent my Reader might the better be enabled to comprehend what I shall say concerning what was acted by the Pirats in this place. The History whereof, I shall presently begin. As soon as Lolonois arrived at the Gulf of Vene∣zuela, Arrival of Lolonois to the Gulf. he cast Anchor with his whole Fleet, out of sight of the Watch-tower of the Island of Vigi∣lia, or Watch-Isle. The next day very early he set sail from hence, with all his Ships, for the Lake of Maracaibo; where being arrived, they cast An∣chor the second time. Soon after, they landed all their men, with designe to attack, in the first place, the Castle or Fortress that commanded the Bar, and is therefore called de la Barra. This Fort consisteth onely of several great Baskets of Earth placed upon a rising ground, upon which are planted sixteen great Guns, with several other heaps of Earth round about, for covering the men within. The Pirats having landed at the distance of a league from this Fort, began to advance by degrees towards it. But the Governour thereof having espied their landing, had placed an Am∣buscade of some of his men, with designe to cut
them off behind, while he meaned to attack them in the front. This Ambuscade was found out by the Pirats; and hereupon getting before, they assaulted and defeated it so entirely, that not one man could retreat unto the Castle. This Obstacle being removed, Lolonois with all his Com∣panions advanced in great haste towards the Fort. And after a Fight of almost three hours, wherein they behaved themselves with desperate Cou∣rage, such as this sort of people use to shew, they became Masters thereof, having made use They take the Fort. of no other Arms than their Swords and Pistols. In the mean while they were fighting, those who were routed in the Ambuscade, not being able to get into the Castle, retired towards the City of Maracaibo in great confusion and disorder, cry∣ing, The Pirats will presently be here with two thou∣sand men and more. This City having formerly been taken by such kind of people as these were, and sack'd even to the remotest corners thereof, preserved still in its memory a fresh Idaea of that misery. Hereupon, as soon as they heard these dismal News, they endeavoured to escape as fast as they could towards Gibraltar in their Boats and Canows, carrying with them all the Goods and money they could. Being come unto Gibraltar, they dispersed the rumour, that the Fortress was taken, and that nothing had been saved, nor any persons able to escape the fury of the Pirats.
The Castle being taken by the Pirats, as was They call the Fleet. said before, they presently made signe unto the Ships of the Victory they had obtained; to the end they should come farther in, without appre∣hension of any danger. The rest of that day was spent in ruining and demolishing the said Demolish the Fort. Castle. They nailed the Guns, and burnt as much as they could not carry away: burying al∣so the dead, and sending on board the Fleet such as were wounded. The next day very early in the morning, they weighed Anchor, and directed their course all together towards the City of Ma∣racaibo, And march to Maracai∣bo. distant onely six leagues, more or less, from the Fort. But the wind being very scarce, that day they could advance but little, as being forced to expect the flowing of the Tyde. The next morning they came within sight of the Town, and began to make preparations for lan∣ding under the protection of their own Guns; being perswaded the Spaniards might have laid an Ambuscade among the Trees and Woods. Thus they put their men into Canows, which for that purpose they brought with them, and lan∣ded where they thought most convenient, shoo∣ting They land. in the mean while very furiously with their great Guns. Of the people that were in the Canows, half onely went on shore, the other half remained on board the said Canows. They fired with their Guns from the Ships as fast as was
sible towards the woodie part of the shore; but could see, nor were answered by, no body. Thus they marched in good order into the Town, whose Inhabitants, as I told you before, were all retired into the Woods, and towards Gibral∣tar, The Inhabi∣ retire with their Wives, Children, and Families. Their houses they left well provided with all sort of Victuals, such as Flour, Bread, Pork, Brandie, Wines, and good store of Poultry. With these ngs the Pirats fell to banqueting, and making good Cheer: for in four weeks before, they had  . had no opportunity of filling their stomacks with such plenty. They instantly possessed themselves of the best houses in the Town, and placed Centries every∣where they thought convenient. The great Church served them for their main Corps du Gard. They form a Corps du Gard. The next day they sent a body of one hundred and sixty men to find out some of the Inhabi∣tants of the Town, whom they understood were hidden in the Woods not far from thence. These returned that very night, bringing with them Make a great  abroad. twenty thousand Pieces of Eight, several Mules laden with Houshold-goods and Merchandize, and twenty Prisoners, between men, women, and children. Some of these Prisoners were put to the Rack, onely to make them confess where they had hidden the rest of their Goods; but they could extort very little from them. Lolo∣nois,
who never used to make any great account of murthering, though in cold bloud, ten or twelve Spaniards, drew his Cutlass and hacked one to pieces in the presence of all the rest, say∣ing, Lolonois cutteth a Spaniard  pieces. If you do not confess and declare where you have hidden the rest of your Goods, I will do the like unto all your Companions. At last, amongst these horrible Cruelties and inhumane Threats, one was found who promised to conduct him, and shew the place where the rest of the Spa∣niards were hidden. But those that were fled, having intelligence that one had discovered their lurking Holes unto the Pirats, changed place, and buried all the remnant of their Riches under ground; insomuch that the Pirats could not find They go out to seek more. them out, unless some other person of their own Party should reveal them. Besides, that the Spaniards flying from one place to another every But the Spa∣niards flie. day, and often changing Woods, were jealous even of each other; insomuch as the Father scarce presumed to trust his own Son. Finally, after that the Pirats had been fifteen days in Maracaibo, they resolved to go towards Gibraltar. But the Inhabitants of this place ha∣ving received intelligence thereof before-hand, as also that they intended afterwards to go to Merida, gave notice of this designe unto the Go∣vernour They call the Governour of Merida. thereof, who was a valiant Souldier, and had served his King in Flanders in many Military
Offices. His answer was, He would have them take no care: for he hoped in a little while to exter∣minate the said Pirats. Whereupon he trans∣ferred himself immediately unto Gibraltar, with 400 men well armed, ordering at the same time, He cometh with 400 men. the Inhabitants of the said Town to put them∣selves in Arms; so that in all he made a body of eight hundred fighting men. With the same And armeth in all 800. speed he commanded a Battery to be raised to∣wards the Sea; whereon he mounted twenty Guns, covering them all with great Baskets of Earth. Another Battery likewise he placed in a∣nother place, mounted with eight Guns. After this was done, he barricado'd an High-way or narrow Passage unto the Town, through which the Pirats of necessity ought to pass; opening at the same time another, through much dirt and mud in the Wood, which was totally unknown unto the Pirats. The Pirats, not knowing any thing of these They come within sight of Gibraltar Preparations, having imbarked all their Priso∣ners and what they had robb'd, took their way towards Gibraltar. Being come within sight of the place, they perceived the Royal Standard hanging forth, and that those of the Town had a mind to fight, and defend their houses. Lolonois seeing this resolution, called a Council of War to deliberate what he ought to do in such case: Propounding withal unto his Officers and Mari∣ners,
that the difficulty of such an Enterprize was very great, seeing the Spaniards had had so much time to put themselves in a posture of defence, and had gotten a good body of men together, with many Martial Provisions. But notwithstan∣ding (said he) have a good courage. We must The Speech of Lolonois to his Comrades either defend our selves like good Souldiers, or lose our lives with all the riches we have gotten. Do as I shall do, who am your Captain. At other times we have fought with fewer men than we have in our company at present, and yet we have overcome grea∣ter numbers than there possibly can be in this Town. The more they are, the more glory we shall attribute unto our Fortune, and the greater Riches we shall increase unto it. The Pirats were under this sus∣pition, that all those Riches which the Inhabi∣tants of Maracaibo had absconded, were transpor∣ted unto Gibraltar; or at least the greatest part thereof. After this Speech, they all promised to follow him; and obey very exactly his Com∣mands. Unto whom Lolonois made answer, 'Tis well: but know ye withal, that the first man who shall shew any fear, or the least apprehension thereof, I will pistol him with my own hands. With this resolution they cast Anchors nigh the shore, at the distance of one quarter of a league from the Town. The next day, before Sun-rising, they were all landed, being to the number of three hundred and fourscore men,
well provided, and armed every one with a Cut∣lass, and one or two Pistols; and withal, suffici∣ent Powder and Bullet for thirty charges. Here, upon the shore, they all shaked hands with one another, in testimony of good courage, and began their march, Lolonois speaking these words unto They march  land to Gibraltar. them: Come, my Brothers, follow me, and have a good courage. They followed their way with a Guide they had provided. But he, believing he led them well, brought them to the way which the Governour had obstructed with Barricado's. Through this not being able to pass, they went unto the other; which was newly made in the Wood among the Mire; unto which the Spa∣niards could shoot at pleasure. Notwithstan∣ding, the Pirats being full of courage, cut down They cut branches of Trees to pass  the Mud. multitude of branches of Trees, and threw them in the dirt upon the way, to the end they might not stick so fast in it. In the mean while, those of Gibraltar fired at them with their great Guns so furiously, that they could scarce hear nor see one another, through the noise and smoak. Be∣ing now past the Wood, they came upon firm ground, where they met with a Battery of six Guns, which immediately the Spaniards dischar∣ged against them, all being loaded with small Bul∣lets  Spani∣ards  at them. and pieces of Iron. After this, the Spani∣ards allying forth, set upon them with such fu∣ry, as caused the Pirats to give way and retire;
very few of them daring to advance towards the Fort. They continued still firing against the Pirats, of whom they had already killed and wounded many. This made them go back to seek some other way through the middle of the Wood; but the Spaniards having cut down ma∣ny Trees to hinder the passage, they could find none, and thus were forced to return unto that they had left. Here the Spaniards continued to fire, as before; neither would they sally out of They continue firing. their Batteries to attack the Pirats any more. Hereby Lolonois and his Companions, not being able to grimp up the Baskets of Earth, were com∣pelled to make use of an old Stratagem; where∣with at last they deceived and overcame the Spa∣niards. Lolonois retired suddenly with all his men, making shew as if he fled. Hereupon the Spa∣niards, crying out, They flie, they flie, let us follow Stratagem of Lolonois. them, sallied forth with great disorder, to pursue the fugitive Pirats. After they had drawn them some distance from their Batteries, which was their onely designe, they turned upon them un∣expectedly with Swords in hand, and killed above two hundred men. And thus fighting their way Wherewith he getteth in∣to Gibraltar. through those who remained alive, they posses∣sed themselves of the Batteries. The Spaniards that remained abroad, gave themselves for lost, and consequently took their flight unto the
Woods. The other part that was in the Batte∣ry of eight Guns, surrendred themselves upon conditions of obtaining quarter for their lives. The Pirats being now become Masters of the whole Town, pulled down the Spanish Colours, and set up their own, taking Prisoners at the same They pull own the Spanish Co∣lours. time as many as they could find. These they carried unto the great Church, whither also they transferred many great Guns, wherewith they raised a Batterie to defend themselves; fearing left the Spaniards that were sled, should rally more of their own Partie, and come upon them again. But the next day, after they were all fortified, all their fears disappeared. They ga∣thered all the dead, with intent to allow them They gather the dead and wounded. burial, finding the number of above five hundred Spaniards kill'd; besides those that were woun∣ded within the Town, and those that died of their Wounds in the Woods, where they sought for refuge. Besides which, the Pirats had in their cu∣stodie above one hundred and fiftie Prisoners, and nigh five hundred Slaves, many Women and Children. Of their own Companions the Pirats found onely fortie dead, and almost as many more wounded. Whereof the greatest part died af∣terwards, through the constitution of the Air, which brought Fevers and other Accidents upon them. They put all the Spaniards that were
slain, into two great Boats, and carrying them They throw them into the Sea. one quarter of a league within the Sea, they sank the Boats. These things being done, they ga∣thered all the Plate, Houshold-stuff, and Merchan∣dize, And rob all they could find. they could rob, or thought convenient to carry away. But the Spaniards who had any thing as yet left unto them, hid it very carefully. Soon after, the Pirats, as if they were unsatisfied with the great Riches they had gotten, began to seek for more Goods and Merchandize, not spa∣ring those who lived in the Fields, such as Hunters and Planters. They had scarce been eighteen days upon the place, when the greatest part of the The Prisoners die for hun∣ger. Prisoners they had taken, died for hunger. For in the Town very few Provisions, especially of Flesh, were to be found. Howbeit, they had some quantitie of Flour of Meal, although perhaps something less than what was sufficient. But this the Pirats had taken into their custodie to make Bread for themselves. As to the Swine, Cows, Sheep, and Poultrie that were found upon the place, they took them likewise for their own sustenance, without allowing any share thereof unto the poor Prisoners. For these they onely provided some small quantitie of Mules and Asses flesh, which they killed for that pur∣pose. And such as could not eat of that loath∣some Provision, were constrained to die for hun∣ger, as many did, their stomacks not being ac∣customed
to such unusual sustenance. Onely some women were found, who were allowed better Chear by the Pirats, because they served them in their sensual delights, unto which those Robbers are hugely given. Among those wo∣men, some had been forced, others were volun∣teers; though almost all had rather taken up that Vice, through Poverty and Hunger, more than any other cause. Of the Prisoners many also died under the torments they sustain'd, to They tortu∣red many Prisoners. make them confess where they had hidden their Money or Jewels. And of these, some, because they had none nor knew of none, and others for denying what they knew, endured such horrible deaths. Finally, after having been in possession of the Town four entire weeks, they sent four of the Prisoners, remaining alive, unto the Spaniards that were fled into the Woods, demanding of them a Ransom for not burning the Town. The They demand 10000 pie∣ces of Eight of them that were fled. sum hereof they constituted, ten thousand Pieces of Eight; which unless it were sent unto them, they threatned to fire and reduce into ashes the whole Village. For bringing in of this Money, they allow'd them onely the space of two days. These being past, and the Spaniards not having been able to gather so punctually such a sum, the Pirats began to set fire to many places of the Town. Thus the Inhabitants perceiving the They  .
Pirats to be in earnest, begged of them to help to extinguish the fire; and withal, promised the Ransom should be readily paid. The Pirats con∣descended to their Petition, helping as much as they could to stop the progress of the fire. Yet though they used the best endeavours they pos∣sibly could, one part of the Town was ruined, especially the Church belonging to the Mona∣stery, The Church of a Mona∣stery is burns to ashes. which was burnt even to dust. After they had received the sum above-mentioned, they car∣ried on board their Ships all the Riches they had robb'd, together with a great number of Slaves which had not, as yet, paid their Ransom. For all the Prisoners had sums of Money set upon them, and the Slaves were also commanded to be redeemed. From hence they returned to Mara∣caibo; They return to Maracai∣bo. where being arrived, they found a gene∣ral Consternation in the whole City. Unto which they sent three or four Prisoners to tell the Governour and Inhabitants, They should bring And demand 30000 Pie∣ces of Eight. them thirty thousand Pieces of Eight on board their Ships, for a Ransom of their Houses; otherwise they should be entirely sack'd anew and burnt. Among these Debates, a certain party of Pi∣rats came on shore to rob, and these carried away They  Imag Bells  Cath the Images, the Pictures, and Bells of the great Church, on board the Fleet. The Spaniards, who were sent to demand of those that were fled the sum asorementioned, returned with orders to
make some agreement with the Pirats. This they performed, and concluded with the Pirats they would give for their Ransom and liberty, the sum of twenty thousand Pieces of Eight, and five They give them 20000 Pieces of Eight, and 500 Cows. hundred Cows. The condition hereof being such, as they should commit no farther acts of Hostility against any person, but should depart from thence presently after payment of the mo∣ney and Cattel. The one and the other being delivered, they set sail with the whole Fleet, They depart from thence. causing great joy unto the Inhabitants of Mara∣caibo to see themselves quit of this sort of people. Notwithstanding, three days after they resumed their fears and admiration, seeing the Pirats to appear again, and re-enter the Port they had left with all their Ships. But these apprehensions soon vanished, by onely hearing one of the Pi∣rats Errand, who came on shore to tell them from Lolonois, They should send him a skilful Pilot to But return to get a Pilot. conduct one of his greatest Ships over the dangerous Bank that lieth at the entry of the Lake. Which Petition, or rather Command, was instantly gran∣ted. The Pirats had now been full two months in those Towns; wherein they committed those cruel and insolent Actions we have told you of. Departing therefore from thence, they took their They arrive at Hispanio∣la. course towards the Island Hispaniola, and ar∣rived thither in eight days, casting Anchors in a
Port called Isla de la Vaca, or Cow-Island. This Isle is inhabited by French Bucaniers, who most commonly sell the Flesh they hunt, unto Pirats, and others who now and then put in there with intent of victualling or trading with them. Here they unladed the whole Cargazon of Riches they had robbed; the usual Store-house of the Pirats, being commonly under the shelter of the Buca∣niers. Here also they made a Dividend amongst them of all their Prizes and Gains, according to And make a Dividend of what they had got. that order and degree which belonged unto every one, as hath been mentioned above. Having cast up the account, and made exact calculation of all they had purchased, they found in ready Money two hundred and threescore thousand 260000 Pieces of Eight found in ready Mo∣ney. Pieces of Eight. Whereupon this being divided, every one received to his share in Money, and also in pieces of Silk, Linen, and other Commo∣dities, the value of above one hundred Pieces of Eight. Those who had been wounded in this Expedition, received their part before all the rest; I mean, such Recompences as I spoke of in the first Book, for the loss of their Limbs, which many sustained. Afterwards they weigh∣ed all the Plate that was uncoined, reckoning af∣ter the rate of ten Pieces of Eight for every Besides Iew∣els and P. pound. The Jewels were prized with much variety, either at too high, or too low rates; being thus occasioned by their own ignorance.
This being done, every one was put to his Oath again, that he had not concealed any thing, nor subtracted from the common stock. Hence they proceeded to the Dividend of what shares be∣longed to such as were dead amongst them, ei∣ther in battel or otherwise. These shares were given to their Friends to be kept entire for them, and to be delivered in due time unto their nea∣rest Relations, or whosoever should appear to be their lawful Heirs. The whole Dividend being entirely finished, they set sail from thence for the Isle of Tortuga. They    . Here they arrived, one month after, to the great joy of most that were upon the Island. For as to the common Pirats, in three weeks they had scarce any money left them; having spent it all in things of little value, or at play either of Cards or Dice. Here also arrived, not long before them, two French Ships laden with Wine and Brandy, and other things of this kind: Whereby these Liquors, at the arrival of the Pirats, were sold indifferent cheap. But this lasted not long: for soon after they were enhanced extremely, a gallon of Brandy being sold for four Pieces of Eight. The Governour of the Island bought of The Gover∣nour bu the Ship of Cacao. the Pirats the whole Cargo of the Ship laden with Cacao; giving them for that rich Commodity, scarce the twentieth part of what it was worth. Thus they made shift to lose and spend the
Riches they had gotten, in much less time than they were purchased by robbing. The Taverns and Stews, according to the custom of Pirats, got the greatest part thereof: Insomuch that soon after they were constrained to seek more, by the same unlawful means they had obtained the pre∣cedent. CHAP. III. Lolonois maketh new preparations to take the City of St. James de Leon. As also that of Nicaragua, where he mi∣serably perisheth. LOlonois had got himself very great Esteem and Repute at Tortuga, by this last Voyage, by reason he brought them home such conside∣rable New Prepa∣rations. profit. And now he needed take no great care how to gather men to serve under his Co∣lours, seeing more came in voluntarily to proffer their service unto him, than he could employ. Every one reposing such great confidence in his conduct for seeking their Fortunes, that they judged it a matter of the greatest security imagi∣nable, to expose themselves in his company, to the hugest dangers that might possibly occur.
He resolved therefore, for a second Voyage, to go with his Officers and Souldiers towards the They resolve to go to Ni∣caragua. parts of Nicaragua, and pillage there as many Towns as he could meet. Having published his new Preparations, he had all his men together at the time appointed, be∣ing about the number of seven hundred, more Lolonois gathereth . or less. Of these he put three hundred on board the Ship he took at Maracaibo, and the rest in o∣ther Vessels of lesser burthen, which were five more: So that the whole number were in all six Ships. The first Port they went unto, was in the Island of Hispaniola, to a place called Bayaha; They go to Bayaha. where they determined to victual the Fleet, and take in Provisions. This being done, they set sail from hence, and steered their course to a Port called Matamana, lying on the South-side of the And from thence to Cuba. Isle of Cuba. Their intent was to take here all the Canows they could meet; these Coasts be∣ing frequented by an huge number of Fishermen of Tortoises, who carry them from thence unto Havana. They took as many of the said Ca∣nows, to the great grief of those miserable peo∣ple, as they thought necessary for their designs. For they had great necessity of these small bot∣toms, by reason the Port whither they designed to go, was not of depth sufficient to bear Ships of any burthen. From hence they took their course towards the Cape called Gracias à Dios,
situate upon the Continent in the altitude of fifteen degrees, Northern latitude; at the di∣stance of one hundred leagues from the Island de los Pinos. But being out at Sea, they were taken with a sad and tedious Calm; and by the agitation of the Waves alone, were thrown into the Gulf of Honduras. Here they laboured very much to regain what they had lost, but all in vain; both the Waters, in their course, and the Winds being contrary to their endeavours. Be∣sides, that the Ship wherein Lolonois was embar∣qued, could not follow the rest; and what was worse, they wanted already Provisions. Here∣upon they were forced to put into the first Port or Bay they could reach, to revictual their Fleet. Thus they entred with their Canows into a Ri∣ver called Xagua, inhabited by Indians, whom They enter the River Xagua, and rob the Indi∣ans. they totally robb'd and destroy'd; they finding amongst their Goods great quantity of Millet, ma∣ny Hogs, and Hens. Not contented with what they had done, they determined to remain there while the bad weather was over, and to pillage all the Towns and Villages lying along the coast of the Gulf. Thus they passed from one place to another, seeking, as yet, more Provisions; by They pass a∣long to other places. reason they had not what they wanted for the accomplishment of their designes. Having sear∣ched and rifled many Villages, where they found no great matter, they came at last unto Puerto
Cavallo. In this Port the Spaniards have two And arrive at Puerto Cavallo. several Storehouses, which serve to keep the Merchandizes that are brought from the inner parts of the Country, until the arrival of the Ships. There was in the Port at that occasion, a Spanish Ship mounted with four and twenty Guns, and sixteen Pedrero's, or Morterpieces. This Ship was immediately seized by the Pirats; and They take a great Spa∣nish Ship. They burn & ruine all they find. then drawing nigh the shore, they landed, and burnt the two Storehouses, with all the rest of of the houses belonging to the place. Many In∣habitants likewise they took Prisoners, and com∣mitted upon them the most insolent and inhu∣mane cruelties that ever Heathens invented, put∣ting them to the cruellest tortures they could i∣magine or devise. It was the custom of Lolonois, that having tormented any persons, and they not confessing, he would instantly cut them in pieces with his Hanger, and pull out their Tongues; desiring to do the same, if possible, unto every Spaniard in the World. Oftentimes it happened that some of these miserable Priso∣ners, They exercise all manner of cruelty a∣gainst the Spaniards. being forced thereunto by the Rack, would promise to discover the places where the fugitive Spaniards lay hidden; which being not able af∣terwards to perform, they were put to more E∣normous and cruel Deaths, than they who were dead before. The Prisoners being all dead and annihilated
of Lolonois Lolonois
(excepting onely two, whom they reserved to shew them what they desired) they marched They march to the Town of St. Pedro. from hence unto the Town of San Pedro, or St. Peter, distant ten or twelve leagues from Puerto Cavallo, having in their company three hundred men, whom Lolonois led, and leaving behind him Moses van Vin for his Lieutenant to govern the rest in his absence. Being come three leagues upon their way, they met with a Troop of Spa∣niards, who lay in Ambuscade for their coming. And mt with an Am∣buscade of Spaniards. These they set upon with all the courage imagi∣nable, and at last totally defeated; howbeit they behaved themselves very manfully at the beginning of the Fight. But not being able to resist the fury of the Pirats, they were forced to give way, and save themselves by flight, leaving many Pirats dead upon the place, and wounded; as also some of their own Party maimed by the way. These Lolonois put to death without mer∣cy, having asked them what questions he thought fit for his purpose. There were still remaining some few Prisoners who were not wounded. These were asked by Lolonois, if any more Spaniards did lie farther on in Ambuscade? Unto whom they answered, there were. Then he commanded them to be brought before him, one by one, and asked, if there was no other way to be found to the Town but that? This he did, out of a designe to ex∣cuse,
if possible, those Ambuscades. But they all constantly answered him, they knew none. Having asked them all, and finding they could shew him no other way, Lolonois grew outragi∣ously passionate; insomuch that he drew his Cutlass, and with it cut open the breast of one of those poor Spaniards, and pulling out his heart with his sacrilegious hands, began to bite and gnaw it with his teeth, like a ravenous Wolf, saying unto the rest, I will serve you all alike, if you shew me not another way. Hereupon those miserable Wretches promised to shew him another way: But withal, they told him, it was extremely difficult and laborious. Thus, to satisfie that cruel Tyrant, they began to lead him and his Army. But finding it not for his purpose, even as they told him, he was con∣strained to return unto the former way, swear∣ing with great choler and indignation, Mort Dieu, les Espagnols me le payeront: By Gods death, the Spaniards shall pay me for this. The next day he fell into another Ambuscade; the which he assaulted with such horrible fury, They meet a∣nother Am∣buscade. that in less than an hours time, he routed the Spa∣niards, and killed the greatest part of them. The Spaniards were perswaded that by these Ambus∣cades they should better be able to destroy the Pirats, assaulting them by degrees; and for this reason had posted themselves in several places.
At last he met with a third Ambuscade, where was placed a Party of Spaniards, both stronger They meet a third. and to greater advantage than the former. Yet notwithstanding, the Pirats, by throwing with their hands little Firebals in great number, and continuing to do so for some time, forced this Party, as well as the precedent, to flie. And this with such great loss of men; as that before they could reach the Town, the greatest part of the Spaniards were either killed or wounded. There was but one path which led unto the Town. This path was very well barricado'd with good defences: And the rest of the Town round about was planted with certain Shrubs or Trees named Raqueltes, very full of thorns, and these very sharp-pointed. This sort of Fortifica∣tion seemed stronger than the Triangles which are used in Europe, when an Army is of necessity to pass by the place of an Enemy; it being almost impossible for the Pirats to traverse those Shrubs. The Spaniards that were posted behind the said defences, seeing the Pirats come, began to shoot at them with their great Guns. But these perceiving them ready to fire, used to stoop down, and when the shot was made, fall upon the Defendants with Fire-balls in hands, and naked Swords, killing with these Weapons many of the Town. Yet notwithstanding, not being able to advance any farther, they were constrained to
retire for the first time. Afterwards they re∣turned to the attaque again, with fewer men than before; and observing not to shoot till they were very nigh, they gave the Spaniards a charge so dexterously, that with every shot they killed an Enemy. The Attaque continuing thus eager on both They ap∣proach the Town. sides till night, the Spaniards were compelled to hang forth a white Flag, in token of Truce, and that they desired to come to a rly. The one∣ly Conditions they required for delivering the Town, were, That the Pirats should give the In∣habitants quarter for two hours. This short space Which is ta∣ken upon Con∣ditions. of time they demanded, with intent to carry away and abscond as much of their Goods and Riches as they could; as also to flie unto some other neighbouring Town. Upon the agreement of this Article they entred the Town, and conti∣nued there the two hours abovementioned, with∣out committing the least act of hostility, nor cau∣sing any trouble to the Inhabitants. But no sooner that time was past, than Lolonois ordered the Inhabitants should be follow'd and robb'd of all they had carried away; and not onely Goods, but their Persons likewise to be made all Priso∣ners. Notwithstanding, the greatest part of their Merchandize and Goods were in such manner ab∣sconded, as the Pirats could not find them; they meeting onely a few hern Sacks that were fill'd with Anil or
Having staid at this Town some few days, and according to their usual customs committed there They commi∣horrid Inso lencies and . most horrid Insolencies, they at last quitted the place, carrying away with them all that they possibly could, and reducing the Town totally Burn the Town. into ashes. Being come unto the Sea-side, where they left a party of their own Comrades, they found these had busied themselves in cruzing up∣on the Fishermen that lived thereabouts, or came Go to the River of Guatimala. that way from the River of Guatimala. In this River also was expected a Ship that was to come from Spain. Finally, they resolved to go to∣wards the Islands that lie on the other side of the Gulf, there to cleanse and careen their Vessels. But in the mean while they left two Canows be∣fore the coast, or rather the mouth of the River of Guatimala, to the intent they should take the Ship which, as I said before, was expected from Spain. But their chief intention of going unto those Islands, was to seek Provisions, as knowing the And from thence to o∣ther Islands. Tortoises of those places are very excellent and pleasant food. As soon as they arrived there, they divided into Troops, each party chusing a fit post for that Fishery. Every one of them un∣dertook to knit a Net with the Rinds of certain Trees, called in those parts, Macoa. Of these Rinds they make also Ropes and Cables for the service of Ships: Insomuch that no Vessel can be
in need of such things, whensoever they can but find the said Trees. There be also in those parts many places where they find Pitch; which is ga∣thered thereabouts in great abundance. The Pitch in great quan∣tities. quantity hereof is so great, that running down the Sea-coasts, being melted by the heat of the Sun, it congealeth in the water into great heaps, and representeth the shape of small Islands. This Pitch is not like unto that we have in the Coun∣tries of Europe; but is hugely like, both in co∣lour and shape, unto that froth of the Sea which is called by the Naturalists, Bitumen. But in my judgment, this matter is nothing else than Wax, which stormy weather hath cast into the Sea; being part of that huge quantity which in the Which others call Bitu∣men. neighbouring Territories is made by the Bees. Thus from places far distant from the Sea, it is also brought unto the Sea-coast by the Winds and rowling Waves of great Rivers; being like∣wise mingled with sand, and having the smell of black Ambar, such as is sent us from the Orient. In those parts are found great quantities of the said Bees, who make their Honey in Trees; from whence it happeneth that the Honey-combs be∣ing fixed unto the bodies of the Trees, when Tempests arise they are torn away, and by the fury of the Winds carried into the Sea, as hath  say it  the mat∣ter of Am∣bar. been said before. Some Naturalists are willing to say, that between the Honey and the Wax is
made a separation by means of the salt water; from whence proceedeth also the good Ambar. This opinion is rendred the more probable, be∣cause the said Ambar being found and tasted, it affordeth the like taste as Wax doth. But now, returning unto my discourse, I shall let you know, that the Pirats made in those I∣slands all the haste to equip their Vessels they could possible, by reason they had news the Spanish Ship was come which they expected. They spent some time in cruzing upon the coasts of Iucatan, whereabouts inhabit many Indians, who seek for the Ambar abovementioned in those Seas. But seeing we are come to this place, I Indians of the coast of Jucatan. shall here, by the by, make some short Remarks on the manner of living of these Indians, and the divine Worship which they practise. The Indians of the coasts of Iucatan have now been above one hundred years, under the domi∣nion Of their Cu∣stoms and Religion. of the Spaniards. Unto this Nation they performed all manner of Service: for whensoe∣ver any of them had need of a Slave or Servant, they sent to seek one of these Indians to serve them as long as they pleased. By the Spaniards they were initiated at first in the Principles of Christian Faith and Religion. Being thus made a part of Christianity, they used to send them every Sunday and Holiday through the whole year, a Priest to perform divine Service among
them. Afterwards, for what reasons are not known, but certainly, through evil temptations of the Father of Idolatry the Devil, they sud∣denly cast off Christian Religion again, and a∣bandoned They cast off Christian Religion. the true divine Worship; beating withal and abusing the Priest was sent them. This provoked the Spaniards to punish them ac∣cording to their deserts; which they did by ca∣sting many of the chiefest of these Indians into Prison. Every one of those Barbarians had, and hath still, a God to himself, whom he serveth Every one hath his God. and worshippeth. It is a thing that deserveth all admiration, to consider how they use in this par∣ticular a Child that is newly born into the world. As soon as this is issued from the Womb Ceremonies performed with new∣born Infants. of the Mother, they carry it unto the Temple. Here they make a circle or hole, which they fill with ashes, without mingling any thing else with them. Upon this heap of ashes they place the Child naked, leaving it there a whole night alone, not without great danger; no body da∣ring to come neer it. In the mean while the Temple is open on all sides, to the intent all sorts of Beasts may freely come in and out. The next day the Father and Relations of the Infant return thither, to see if the tract or step of any Animal appeareth to be printed in the ashes. Not find∣ing any, they leave the Child there, until that some Beast hath approached the Infant, and left
behind him the mark of his feet. Unto this A∣nimal, whatsoever it be, they consecrate the Crea∣ture newly born, as unto its God; which he is bound to worship and serve all his life, esteem∣ing the said Beast as his Patron and Protector in all cases of danger or necessity. They offer unto their Gods Sacrifices of Fire, wherein they burn a certain Gum called by them Copal; whose smoak affordeth a very delicious smell. When the Infant is grown up, the Parents thereof tell him and shew him whom he ought to worship, serve, and honour, as his own proper God. This being known, he goeth unto the Temple, where he maketh Offerings unto the said Beast. After∣wards, if in the course of his life any one hath in∣jur'd him, or any evil happeneth unto him, he complaineth thereof unto that Beast, and sacrifi∣ceth unto it for revenge. From whence many times cometh, that those who have done the in∣jury of which he complaineth, are found to be bitten, killed, or otherwise hurt by such Ani∣mals. After this superstitious and idolatrous manner, do live those miserable and ignorant Indians, that inhabit all the Islands of the Gulf of Honduras; as also many of them that dwell upon the Conti∣nent of Iucatan. In the Territories of which Country are found most excellent Ports for the safety of Ships, where those Indians most com∣monly
love to build their houses. These Peo∣ple are not very faithful one to another; and likewise use strange Ceremonies at their Marri∣ages. Whensoever any one pretendeth to mar∣ry a young Damsel, he first applieth himself un∣to her Father, or nearest Relation. He then ex∣amineth him very exactly concerning the manner of cultivating their Plantations, and other things at his pleasure. Having satisfied the Questions that were put unto him by the Father-in-Law, he giveth the young man a Bow and Arrow. With these things he repaireth unto the young maid, and presenteth her with a Garland of green Leaves, interweaved with sweet-smelling Flow∣ers. This she is obliged to put upon her head, and lay aside that which she wore before that time; it being the custom of the Country, that all Virgins go perpetually crown'd with Flowers. This Garland being received and put upon the head, every one of the Relations and Friends go to advise with others, among themselves, whether that Marriage will be useful, and of likely happi∣ness, or not. Afterwards, the aforesaid Relati∣ons and Friends meet together at the house of the Damsels Father, and there they drink of a certain Liquor made of Maiz, or Indian Wheat. And here, before the whole company, the Fa∣ther giveth his Daughter in marriage unto the Bridegroom. The next day the newly-married
Bride cometh unto her Mother, and in her pre∣sence pulleth off the Garland, and teareth it in pieces, with great cries and bitter lamentations, according to the custom of the Country. Ma∣ny other things I could relate at large of the man∣ner of living, and customs of those Indians; but these I shall omit, thereby to follow my dis∣course. Our Pirats therefore had many Canows of the Indians in the Isle of Sambale, five leagues di∣stant from the coasts of Iucatan. In the afore∣said Island is found great quantity of Ambar, but more especially when any storm ariseth from to∣wards the East; from whence the Waves bring many things, and very different. Through this Sea no Vessels can pass, unless very small, the waters being too shallow. In the Lands that are surrounded by this Sea, is found huge quantity of Campeche-wood, and other things of this kind, that serve for the Art of Dying; which occasio∣neth them to be much esteemed in Europe: And doubtless, would be much more, in case we had the Skill and Science of the Indians; who are so industrious, as to make a Dye or Tincture that never changeth its colour, nor fadeth away. After that the Pirats had been in that Gulf three entire months, they received advice that the Spanish Ship was come. Hereupon they ha∣stened unto the Port, where the Ship lay at An∣chor
unlading the Merchandize it brought, with designe to assault her as soon as it were possible. But before this attempt, they thought it conveni∣ent to send away some of their Boats from the mouth of the River, to seek for a small Vessel which was expected; having notice that she was very richly laden, the greatest part of the Cargo being Plate, Indigo, and Cochineel. In the mean while, the people of the Ship that was in the Port had notice given that the Pirats designed up∣on them. Hereupon they prepared all things very well for the defence of the said Vessel; which was mounted with forty two Guns, had many Arms on board, and other necessaries, to∣gether with one hundred and thirty fighting men. Unto Lolonois all this seemed but little; and thus he assaulted her with great courage, his own Ship carrying onely twenty two Guns, and having no more than a small Stia or Flyboat for help. But the Spaniards defended themselves after such manner, as they forced the Pirats to retire. Not∣withstanding, while the smoak of the Powder continued very thick, as amidst a dark Fog or Mist, they sent four Canows very well man'd, and boarded the Ship with great agility; where∣by they compell'd the Spaniards to surrender. The Ship being taken, they found not in her . what they thought, as being already almost wholly unladed. All the Treasure they here
got, consisted onely in fifty bars of Iron, a small parcel of Paper, some earthen Jarrs full of Wine, and other things of this kind; all of small im∣portance. Presently after, Lolonois called a Council of the A Council call'd about going to Guatimala. whole Fleet, wherein he told them, he intended to go to Guatimala. Upon this point they di∣vided into several sentiments; some of them li∣king the Proposal very well, and others disliking it as much. Especially a certain party of them, who were but new in those exercises of Piracy, Divers opi∣nions. and who had imagined at their setting forth from Tortuga, that Pieces of Eight were gathered as easi∣ly as Pears from a Tree. But having found at last most things contrary to their expectation, they quitted the Fleet, and returned from whence they set out. Others on the contrary, affirmed they had rather die for hunger, than return home without a great deal of money. But the major part of the company judging the propounded Voyage little fit for their pur∣pose; separated from Lolonois and the rest. A∣mong these was Ringleader one Moses Vanclein, Many leave Lolonois. who was Captain of the Ship taken at Puerto Ca∣vallo. This Fellow took his course towards Tor∣tuga, designing to cruze to and fro in those Seas. With him also joyned another Comrade of his own, by name Pierre le Picard; who seeing the rest to leave Lolonois, thought fit to do the same.
These run-a-ways having thus parted company, steered their course homewards, coasting along the Continent, till they came at last unto Costa Rica. Here they landed a strong Party of men They go to Costa Rica. And take Veraguas. nigh unto the River of Veraguas, and marched in good order unto the Town of the same name. This place they took and totally pillaged, not∣withstanding that the Spaniards made a strong and warlike resistance. They brought away some of the Inhabitants as Prisoners, with all that they had robb'd, which was of no great impor∣tance. Rob the place, but find little. The reason hereof, being the poverty of the place, which exerciseth no manner of Trade than onely working in the Mines, where some of the Inhabitants do constantly attend. Yet no other persons seek for the Gold, than onely Mines of Gold. Slaves. These they compel to dig, whether they live or die, and wash the earth that is taken out, in the nighbouring Rivers; where oftentimes they find pieces of Gold as big as Peas. Finally, the Pirats found in this Robbery no greater value than seven or eight pounds weight of Gold. Hereupon they returned back, giving over the designe they had, to go farther on to the Town of Nata, situated upon the coasts of the South-Sea. Hitherto they designed to march, know∣ing the Inhabitants to be rich Merchants, who had their Slaves at work in the Mines of Vera∣guas. But from this Enterprize they were de∣terr'd
by the multitude of Spaniards, whom they saw gather on all sides to fall upon them; where∣of they had timely advice beforehand. Lolonois thus abandoned by his Companions, remained alone in the Gulf of Honduras, by rea∣son Lolonois re∣maineth. his Ship was too great to get out at the time of the reflux of those Seas, which the smaller Ves∣sels could more easily do. There he sustained great want of all sorts of Provisions: Insomuch Wanteth Provisions. as they were constrained to go ashore every day, to seek wherewithal to maintain themselves. And not finding any thing else, they were forced to kill Monkies and other Animals, such as they could find, for their sustenance. At last having found, in the altitude of the Cape of Gracias à Dios, certain little Islands cal∣led de las Pertas: Here, nigh unto these Isles, his Isles de las Pertas. Ship fell upon a bank of sand, where it stuck so fast, as no Art could be found to get her off into deep water again. Notwithstanding, they unla∣ded all the Guns, Iron, and other weighty things as much as possibly they could: but all they could do, was to little or no effect. Hereupon they They lose their Ship. were necessitated to break the Ship in pieces, and with some of the Planks and Nails build them∣selves a Boat, wherewith to get away from those And intend to build a Boat. Islands. Thus they began their work; and mean while they are employed about it, I shall pass to describe succinctly the Isles aforemention∣ed, and their Inhabitants.
The Islands called de las Pertas, are inhabited by Indians, who are properly Savages, as not ha∣ving Indians of these Islands. at any time known or conversed with any civil People. They are tall in stature, and very nimble in running, which they perform almost as fast as horses. At diving also in the Sea, they are very dexterous and hardy. From the bot∣tom of the Sea I saw them take up an Anchor that weighed six hundred pound, by tying a Ca∣ble unto it with great dexterity, and pulling it from a Rock. They use no other Arms than such as are made of Wood, without any Iron, unless that some instead thereof do fix a Crocodiles tooth, which serveth for a point. They have neither Bows nor Arrows among them, as other Indians have; but their common Weapon is a sort of Lances, that are long a fathom and a half. In these Islands there be many Plantations surroun∣ded Plantations. with Woods, from whence they gather great abundance of Fruits. Such are Potato's, Bana∣nas, Racoven, Ananas, and many others, which the constitution of the Soil affordeth. Nigh unto these Plantations they have no houses to dwell in, as in other places of the Indies. Some are of opinion that these Indians eat humane Whether they eat humane flesh. flesh; which seemeth to be confirmed by what happened when Lolonois was there. Two of his Companions, the one being a Frenchman, and the other a Spaniard, went into the Woods,
where having stragled up and down some while, they met with a Troop of Indians that began to pursue them. They defended themselves as well as they could with their Swords; but at last were forced to flie. This the Frenchman per∣formed with great agility; but the Spaniard be∣ing not so swift as his Companion, was taken by those Barbarians, and heard of no more. Some days after, they attempted to go into the Woods to see what was become of their Companion. Unto this effect twelve Pirats set forth very well arm'd, amongst whom was the French-man, who con∣ducted them, and shewed them the place where he left his Companion. Here they found, nigh unto the place, that the Indians had kindled fire; and at a small distance from thence, they found the bones of the said Spaniard very well roasted. From hence they inferr'd, that they had roasted the miserable Spaniard, of whom they found more, some pieces of flesh ill scraped off from the bones; and one hand, which had on∣ly two fingers remaining. They marched farther on, seeking for Indians. They seek for Indians, and find some. Of these they found a great number together, who endeavour'd to escape, seeing the Pirats so strong and well arm'd. But they overtook some of them, and brought on board their Ships five men and four women. With these they used all the means they could invent to make them∣selves
be understood, and gain their affections; giving them certain small trifles, as Knives, Beads, and the like things. They gave them also Vi∣ctuals and Drink; but nothing of either would they taste. It was also observable, that all the while they were Prisoners on board the Ships, they spoke not one word to each other among themselves. Thus the Pirats seeing these poor They  them tris, and  tm . Indians were much afraid of them, presented them again with some small things, and let them go. When they departed, they made signes, giving them to understand, they would come a∣gain. But they soon forgot their Benefactors, and were never heard nor seen more. Neither could any notice afterwards be had of these Indi∣ans, or any others, in the whole Island, after that time. Which occasioned the Pirats to suspect that both those that were taken, and all the rest of the Island, did all swim away by night unto some other little neighbouring Islands: Especi∣ally considering they could never set eyes on any Indian more; neither was there ever seen any All th In∣dians . Boat or other Vessel in the whole circumference of the Island. In the mean while, the Pirats were very desi∣s to s their long-Boat finished, which they were building with the timber of the Ship that  up the . Yet considering their wor would be bu long, they began to cultivate
some pieces of ground. Here they sowed French Beans, which came to maturity in six weeks time; & many other Fruits. They had good provision of Spanish Wheat, Bananas, Racovent, and other things. With the Wheat they made Bread, and bak'd it in portable Ovens, which they had brought with them to this effect. Thus they feared not hun∣ger in those desert places. After this manner they employed themselves for the space of five The Pirats were here five or s months. or six months. Which time being past, and the long-Boat finished, they determined to go unto the River of Nicaragua, to see if they could take some few Canows, and herewith return unto the said Islands and fetch away their Companions that remained behind, by reason the Boat they had built was not capable of transporting so ma∣ny men together. Hereupon, to evite any dis∣putes that might arise, they cast Lots among They cast Lots among themselves. themselves, determining thereby who should go, or stay in the Island. The Lot fell onely upon one half of the peo∣ple of the lost Vessel; who embarked upon the Long-boat they had built, and also the Skiff which they had before; the other half remain∣ing on shore. Lolonois having set sail, arrived in few days at the mouth of the River of Nicaragua. Here suddenly his ill fortune assailed him, which Misfortunet of Lolonoi of long time had been reserved for him, as a pu∣nishment due unto the multitude of horrible
Crimes, which in his licentious and wicked life he had committed. Here he met with both Spa∣niards and Indians, who joyntly together set up∣on him and his Companions, and used them so roughly, that the greatest part of the Pirats were killed upon the place. Lolonois, with those that remained alive, had much ado to escape on board their Boats aforementioned. Yet notwithstand∣ing this great loss of men, he resolved not to Which pre∣ceded his death. return to seek those he had left at the Isle of Pertas, without taking some Boats, such as he looked for. Unto this effect he determined to go farther on to the coasts of Cartagena, with designe to seek for Canows. But God Almigh∣ty, the time of his divine Justice being now al∣ready come, had appointed the Indians of Da∣rien to be the Instruments and Executioners thereof. These Indians of Darien are esteemed Death of Lolonois. as Bravo's, or wild savage Indians, by the neigh∣bouring Spaniards, who never could reduce them to civility. Hither Lolonois came (being rather brought by his evil Conscience that cried for pu∣nishment of his Crimes) thinking to act in that Country his former cruelties. But the Indians within a few days after his arrival took him Pri∣soner, and tore him in pieces alive, throwing his Body limb by limb into the fire, and his Ashes in∣to the air; to the intent no trace nor memory might remain of such an infamous inhumane
Creature. One of his Companions gave me an exact account of the aforesaid Tragedy; affirming withal, that he himself had escaped the same pu∣nishment, not without the greatest of difficul∣ties. He believed also, that many of his Com∣rades who were taken Prisoners in that Ren∣counter And of his Companions. by the Indians of Darien, were after the same manner as their cruel Captain, torn in pie∣ces, and burned alive. Thus endeth the History of the life and miserable death of that infernal Wretch Lolonois. Who full of horrid, execra∣ble, and enormous deeds, and also debtor to so much innocent bloud, died by cruel and butcher∣ly hands, such as his own were in the course of his life. Those that remained in the Island de las Per∣tas, How they got away who remain∣ed behind. waiting for the return of them who got a∣way onely to their great misfortune, hearing no news of their Captain, nor Companions, at last embarked themselves upon the Ship of a certain Pirat, who happened to pass that way. This Fellow was come from Iamaica with intent to land at the Cape of Gracias à Dios; and from hence to mount the River with his Canows, and take the City of Cartagena. These two parcels of Pirats being now joyned together, were infi∣nitely gladded at the presence and society of one another. Those, because they found themselves delivered from their miseries, poverty, and ne∣cessities,
wherein now they had lived the space of ten entire months. These, because they were now considerably strengthened, whereby to effect with greater satisfaction their intended designes. Hereupon, as soon as they were arrived unto the aforesaid Cape of Gracias à Dios, they all put They arrive at the Cape of Gracias à Dios. themselves into Canows, and with these Vessels mounted the River, being in number five hun∣dred men; leaving onely five or six persons in every Ship, to keep them. They took no Provi∣sions with them, as being perswaded they should find every-where sufficient. But these their own With intent to go to Car∣tagena. hopes were found totally vain, as not being grounded in God Almighty. For he ordained it so, that the Indians having perceived their co∣ming, were all fled before them, not leaving in their houses nor Plantations, which for the most part do border upon the sides of Rivers, any thing of necessary Provisions or Victuals. Here∣by, in few days after they had quitted their Ships, they were reduced to such necessity and hunger, as nothing could be more extreme. Notwith∣standing, the hopes they had conceived of ma∣king They endure extreme hun∣gr. their fortunes very soon, did animate them for the present. Being contented in this affli∣ction with a few green Herbs, such as they could gather as they went upon the banks of the Ri∣ver. Yet all this courage and vigour of mind could
not last above a fortnight. After which, their hearts, as well as their bodies, began to fail for hunger: Insomuch as they found themselves con∣strained to quit the River, and betake themselves unto the Woods, seeking out some small Villa∣ges They go to the Woods to seek relief. where they might find relief for their neces∣sity. But all was in vain: For having ranged up and down the Woods for some days, without finding the least comfort to their hungry desires, they were forced to return again unto the River. Where being come, they thought it convenient to descend unto the Sea-coasts where they had left their Ships, not being able to find in the pre∣sent Enterprize what they sought for. In this laborious journey they were reduced to such ex∣tremity, Are reduced to great ex∣tremity. that many of them devoured their own Shoes, the Sheaths of their Swords, Knives, and other things of this kind. Being almost ravenous, and fully desirous to meet some Indians, inten∣ding to sacrifice them unto their teeth. At last they arrived at the coast of the Sea, where they found some comfort and relief to their former miseries, and also means to seek more. Yet not∣withstanding, the greatest part of them perished through faintness, and other Diseases contracted by hunger; which occasioned also the remaining part to disperse. Till at last, by degrees, many They disperse or most of them fell into the same Pit that Lolo∣nois did. Of him, and of his Companions, I
have hitherto given my Reader a compendious Narrative; which now I shall continue with the Actions and Exploits of Captain Henry Morgan. Who may not undeservedly be called the second Lolonois; as not being unlike or inferiour unto him, either in Atchievements against the Spani∣ards, or in Robberies of many innocent People. CHAP. IV. Of the Origine and Descent of Capt. Henry Morgan. His Exploits, and a Conti∣nuation of the most remarkable Actions of his Life. CAptain Henry Morgan was born in the Kingdom of England, and there in the Origine of Capt. Mor∣gan. Principality of Wales. His Father was a rich Yeoman or Farmer, and of good quality in that Country, even as most who bear that name in Wales, are known to be. Morgan being as yet young, had no inclinations to follow the Calling of his Father; and therefore left his Country, and came towards the Sea-coasts to seek some o∣ther Employ more suitable to his humour, that aspired to something else. There he found en∣tertainment in a certain Port where several Ships
Sr. HEN: MORGAN Part. 2. Page. 60.
did lie at Anchor, that were bound for the Isle of Barbadas. With these Ships he resolved to go He goeth to Barbadas. in the service of one, who, according to what is commonly practised in those parts by the English and other Nations, sold him as soon as he came on shore. He served his time at Barbadas; and when he had obtained his liberty, thence trans∣ferred himself unto the Island of Iamaica, there And thence to Jamaica. to seek new fortunes. Here he found two Ves∣sels of Pirats that were ready to go to Sea. Be∣ing destitute of Employ, he put himself into one of these Ships, with intent to follow the exercises He serveth the Pirats. of that sort of people. He learn'd in a little while their manner of living; and so exactly, that having performed three or four Voyages with some profit and good success, he agreed with some of his Comrades, who had gotten by the same Voyages a small parcel of money, to joyn stocks and buy a Ship. The Vessel being bought, they unanimously chose him to be the Captain and Commander thereof. With this Ship, soon after, he set forth from Iamaica to cruze upon the coasts of Campeche; in which Voyage he had the fortune to take seve∣ral Ships, with which he returned triumphant to the same Island. Here he found at the same time an old Pirat, named Mansvelt, (of whom Mansvelt, an old Pirat. we have already made mention in the first part of this book) who was then busied in equip∣ping
a considerable Fleet of Ships, with designe to land upon the Continent, and pillage whate∣ver came in his way. Mansvelt seeing Captain Morgan return with so many Prizes, judged him, from his actions, to be of undaunted courage; and hereupon was moved to chuse him for his Vice-Admiral Maketh Morgan Vice-Admi∣ral. in that Expedition. Thus having fit∣ted out fifteen Ships, between great and small, they set sail from Iamaica with five hundred men, both Walloons and French. With this Fleet they arrived not long after at the Isle of St. Ca∣tharine, They go to the Isle of St. Catha∣rine. situated nigh unto the Continent of Costa Rica, in the altitude of twelve degrees and a half, Northern latitude, and distant thirty five leagues from the River of Chagre, between North and South. Here they made their first descent, lan∣ding most of their men presently after. Being now come to try their Arms and For∣tune, they in a short while forced the Garison And take it. that kept the Island to surrender and deliver into their hands all the Forts and Castles belonging thereunto. All these they instantly demolished, reserving onely one; wherein they placed one hundred men of their own Party, and all the Slaves they had taken from the Spaniards. With the rest of their men they marched unto another  small Island nigh unto that of St. Catharine, and adjoyning so near unto it, that with a Bridge they could get over. In few days they made a Bridge,
and passed thither, conveying also over it all the pieces of Ordance which they had taken upon the great Island. Having ruined and destroyed, with Sword and Fire, both the Islands, leaving what Orders were necessary at the Castle abovemen∣tioned, they put forth to Sea again, with the They put ou to Sea again. Spaniards they had taken Prisoners. Yet these they set on shore, not long after, upon the firm Land, nigh unto a place called Puerto Velo. Af∣ter this, they began to cruze upon the coasts of Costa Rica, till that finally they came unto the River of Colla, designing to rob and pillage all the Towns they could find in those parts, and And come to the River of Colla. afterwards to pass unto the Village of Nata, to do the same. The President or Governour of Panama ha∣ving had advice of the arrival of these Pirats, and the Hostilities they committed every-where, thought it his duty to set forth to their encoun∣ter The Gover∣nour of Pa∣nama com∣eth to meet them. with a body of men. His coming caused the Pirats to retire suddenly with all speed and care. Especially seeing the whole Country alarmed at their arrival, and that their designes were known, and consequently could be of no great effect at that present. Hereupon they returned unto the They return to St. Cath. Isle of St. Catharine, to visit the hundred men they had left in garrison there. The Governour of these men was a certain French-man named le Sieur Simon; who behaved himself very well in
that charge, mean while Mansvelt was absent. Insomuch that he had put the great Island in a very good posture of defence; and the little And find all things in good posture. one he had caused to be cultivated with many fertile Plantations, which were sufficient to re∣victual the whole Fleet with Provisions and Fruits, not onely for present refreshment, but al∣so in case of a new Voyage. Mansvelt's inclina∣tions were very much bent to keep these two I∣slands Mansvelt is desirous to  S. Cath. in perpetual possession, as being very com∣modious, and profitably situated for the use of the Pirats. Chiefly because they were so near unto the Spanish Dominions, and easily to be defended against them; as I shall represent in the third part of this History more at large, in a Copper Plate, delineated for this purpose. Hereupon Mansvelt determined to return un∣to He returneth to Jamaica for Recruits. Iamaica, with designe to send some Recruit unto the Isle of St. Catharine, that in case of any invasion of the Spaniards, the Pirats might be provided for a defence. As soon as he arrived, he propounded his mind and intentions unto the Governour of that Island; but he liked not the Propositions of Mansvelt, fearing lest by grant∣ing    him. such things, he should displease his Master the King of England. Besides, that giving him the men he desired, and other necessaries for that purpose, he must of necessity diminish and wea∣ken the Forces of that Island whereof he was
Governour. Mansvelt seeing the unwillingness of the Governour of Iamaica, and that of his own accord he could not compass what he desi∣red, with the same intent and designs went unto Goeth to Tortuga for the same purpose, and dieth. the Isle of Tortuga. But there, before he could accomplish his desires, or put in execution what was intended, Death suddenly surprized him, and put a period to his wicked life; all things here∣by remaining in suspense, until the occasion which I shall hereafter relate. Le Sieur Simon, who remained at the Isle of St. Catharine in quality of Governour thereof, re∣ceiving no news from Mansvelt his Admiral, was greatly impatient, and desirous to know what might be the cause thereof. In the mean while, Don Iohn Perez de Guzman, being newly come to The Gover∣nour of Co∣sta Rica. the government of Costa Rica, thought it no ways convenient for the interest of the King of Spain, that that Island should remain in the hands of the Pirats. And hereupon he equipped a con∣siderable Fleet, which he sent unto the said Island to retake it. But before he came to use any great violence, he writ a Letter unto le Sieur Si∣mon, Writeth un∣to him of St. Catharine. wherein he gave him to understand, if he would surrender the Island unto his Catholick Majesty, he should be very well rewarded; but in case of refusal, severely punished when he had forced him to do it. Le Sieur Simon seeing no appearance or probability of being able to defend
it alone, nor any emolument that by so doing could accrew either unto him or his People; after some small resistance, delivered up the Island in∣to the hands of its true Lord and Master, under the same Articles they had obtained it from the Spaniards. Few days after the surrendry of the Island, there arrived from Iamaica an English Ship which the Governour of the said Island had sent under-hand, wherein was a good supply of people, both men and women. The Spaniards from the Castle having espied this Ship, put forth the English Colours, and perswaded le Sieur Simon to go on board, and conduct the said Ship into a Port they assigned him. This he performed immediately with dissimulation, whereby they were all made Prisoners. A certain Spanish Engi∣nier A Spaniard describeth the retaking of St. Cath. hath published, before me, an exact Account and Relation of the retaking of the Isle of St. Catharine by the Spaniards; which printed Paper being fallen into my hands, I have thought it fit to be inserted here. A true Relation and particular Account of the Vi∣ctory obtained by the Arms of his Catholick Ma∣jesty against the English Pirats, by the direction and valour of Don John Perez de Guzman, Knight of the Order of St. James, Governour and Captain-General of Tierra Firme, and the Pro∣vince of Veraguas.
THe Kingdom of Tierra Firme, which of it self is sufficiently strong to repulse and extirpate great Fleets, but more especially the Pirats of Iamaica, had several ways notice, under several hands, imparted to the Governour there∣of, that fourteen English Vessels did cruze upon the Coasts belonging to his Catholick Majesty. The 14th day of Iuly, 1665. news came unto Panama, that the English Pirats of the said Fleet were arrived at Puerto de Naos, and had forced the Spanish Garrison of the Isle of St. Catharine, whose Governour was Don Estevan del Campo; and that they had possessed themselves of the said Island, taking Prisoners the Inhabitants, and destroying all that ever they met. Moreover, a∣bout the same time Don Iohn Perez de Guzman received particular information of these Robbe∣ries from the relation of some Spaniards who e∣scaped out of the Island, (and whom he order'd to be conveyed unto Puerto Velo) who more di∣stinctly told him, That the aforementioned Pi∣rats came into the Island the second day of May, by night, without being perceived by any body: And that the next day, after some disputes by Arms, they had taken the Fortresses, and made Prisoners all the Inhabitants and Souldiers, not one excepted, unless those that by good fortune had escaped their hands. This being heard by
Don Iohn, he called a Council of War, wherein he declared the great progress the said Pirats had made in the Dominions of his Catholick Majesty. Here likewise he propounded, That it was abso∣lutely necessary to send some Forces unto the Isle of St. Catharine, sufficient to retake it from the Pirats; the Honour and Interest of his Majesty of Spain be∣ing very narrowly concerned herein. Otherwise the Pirats by such Conquests might easily, in course of time, possess themselves of all the Countries there∣abouts. Unto these Reasons some were found, who made answer, That the Pirats, as not being able to subsist in the said Island, would of necessity consume and waste themselves, and be forced to quit it, without any necessity of retaking it. That con∣sequently it was not worth the while to engage in so many expences and troubles, as might be foreseen this would cost. Notwithstanding these Reasons to the contrary, Don Iohn, as one who was an ex∣pert and valiant Souldier, gave orders that quan∣tity of Provisions should be conveyed unto Puerto Velo, for the use and service of the Militia. And neither to be idle nor negligent in his Masters Affairs, he transported himself thither, with no small danger of his life. Here he arrived the se∣venth day of Iuly, with most things necessary to the expedition in hand; where he found in the Port a good Ship, called St. Vincent, that belong∣ed unto the Company of the Negro's. This Ship
being of it self a strong Vessel, and well mounted with Guns, he manned and victualled very well, and sent unto the Isle of St. Catharine, constitu∣ting Captain Ioseph Sanchez Ximenez, Major of the City of Puerto Velo, Commander thereof. The people he carried with him were two hun∣dred threescore and ten Souldiers, and thirty se∣ven Prisoners of the same Island: Besides four and thirty Spaniards belonging to the Garrison of Puerto Velo, nine and twenty Mulato's of Pa∣nama, twelve Indians very dexterous at shooting with Bows and Arrows, seven expert and able Gunners, two Lieutenants, two Pilots, one Chi∣rurgeon, and one Religious man of the Order of St. Francis, for their Chaplain. Don Iohn soon after gave his orders unto e∣very one of the Officers, instructing them how they ought to behave themselves; telling them withal, that the Governour of Cartagena would assist and supply them with more Men, Boats, and all things else they should find necessary for that Enterprize; to which effect he had already writ∣ten unto the said Governour. On the 24th day of the said month, Don Iohn commanded the Ship to weigh Anchor, and sail out of the Port. Then seeing a fair Wind to blow, he called be∣fore him all the People designed for that Expe∣dition, and made them a Speech, encouraging them to fight against the Enemies of their Coun∣try
and Religion; but more especially against those inhumane Pirats, who had heretofore com∣mitted so many horrid and cruel actions against the Subjects of his Catholick Majesty. Withal, promising unto every one of them most liberal Rewards; but especially unto such as should be∣have themselves as they ought in the service of their King and Country. Thus Don Iohn bid them farewel; and immediately the Ship weighed Anchor, and set sail under a favourable gale of Wind. The 22th of the said month they arrived at Cartagena, and presented a Letter unto the Governour of the said City from the noble and valiant Don Iohn; who received it, with testimonies of great affection unto the per∣son of Don Iohn, and his Majesty's service. And seeing their resolute Courage to be conformable to his desires and expectation, he promised them his assistance, which should be with one Frigat, one Galeon, one Boat, and one hundred and twenty six men, the one half out of his own Ga∣rison, and the other half Mulato's. Thus all of them being well provided with necessaries, they set forth from the Port of Cartagena, the second day of August; and the 10th of the said month they arrived within sight of the Isle of St. Catha∣rine, towards the Western point thereof. And although the Wind was contrary, yet they rea∣ched the Port, and came to an Anchor within it;
having lost one of their Boats, by foul weather, at the Rock called Quita signos. The Pirats seeing our Ships come to an An∣chor, gave them presently three Guns with Bul∣lets; the which were soon answered in the same coin. Hereupon the Major Ioseph Sanchez Xi∣menez sent on shore, unto the Pirats, one of his Officers, to require them, in the name of the Ca∣tholick King his Master, to surrender the Island, seeing they had taken it in the midst of Peace between the two Crowns of Spain and England; and that in case they would be obstinate, he would certainly put them all to the Sword. The Pirats made answer, That Island had once before belonged unto the Government and Dominions of the King of England; and that instead of sur∣rendring it, they preferred to lose their lives. On Friday the 13th of the said month, three Negro's, from the Enemy, came swimming aboard our Admiral. These brought intelligence, that all the Pirats that were upon the Island were on∣ly threescore and twelve in number; and that they were under a great consternation, seeing such considerable Forces come against them. With this intelligence the Spaniards resolved to land, and advance towards the Fortresses; the which ceased not to fire as many great Guns a∣gainst them, as they possibly could; which were corresponded in the same manner on our side, till
dark night. On Sunday the 15th of the said month, which was the day of the Assumption of our Lady, the weather being very calm and clear, the Spaniards began to advance thus. The Ship named St. Vincent, which rid Admiral, discharged two whole broad-sides upon the Battery called the Conception. The Ship called St. Peter, that was Vice-Admiral, discharged likewise her Guns a∣gainst the other Battery named St. Iames. In the mean while, our People were landed in small Boats, directing their course towards the point of the Battery last mentioned, and from thence they marched towards the Gate called Cortadur. The Lieutenant Francis de Cazeres, being desirous to view the strength of the Enemy, with onely fif∣teen men, was compelled to retreat in all haste, by reason of the great Guns which played so fu∣riously upon the place where he stood. They shooting not onely pieces of Iron and small Bul∣lets, but also the Organs of the Church, dischar∣ging in every shot, threescore Pipes at a time. Notwithstanding this heat of the Enemy, Cap∣tain Don Ioseph Ramirez de Leyva, with three∣score men, made a strong Attack, wherein they fought on both sides very desperately, till that at last he overcame, and forced the Pirats to sur∣render the Fort he had taken in hand. On the other side, Captain Iohn Galeno, with fourscore and ten men, passed over the Hills, to
advance that way towards the Castle of St. Te∣resa. In the mean while, the Major Don Ioseph Sanchez Ximenez, as Commander in chief, with the rest of his men, set forth from the Battery of St. Iames, passing the Port with four Boats, and landing in despite of the Enemy. About this same time, Captain Iohn Galeno began to advance with the men he led unto the forementioned Fortress. So that our men made three Attacks upon the Enemy, on three several sides, at one and the same time, with great courage and va∣lour. Thus the Pirats seeing many of their men already kill'd, and that they could in no man∣ner subsist any longer, retreated towards Corta∣dura, where they surrendred themselves, and likewise the whole Island, into our hands. Our People possessed themselves of all, and set up the Spanish Colours, as soon as they had rendred thanks to God Almighty for the Victory obtain∣ed on such a signalized day. The number of dead were six men of the Enemies, with many wounded, and threescore and ten Prisoners. On our side was found onely one man kill'd, and four wounded. There was found upon the Island eight hun∣dred pound of Powder, two hundred and fifty pound of small Bullets, with many other Mili∣tary Provisions. Among the Prisoners were ta∣ken also two Spaniards, who had born Arms
under the English against his Catholick Majesty. These were commanded to be shot to death the next day by order of the Major. The 10th day of September arrived at the Isle an English Vessel, which being seen at a great distance by the Ma∣jor, he gave order unto le Sieur Simon, who was a French-man, to go and visit the said Ship, and tell them that were on board, the Island belonged still unto the English. He performed the com∣mands, and found in the said Ship onely fourteen men, one woman, and her daughter; who were all instantly made Prisoners. The English Pirats were all transported unto Puerto Velo; excepting onely three, who by or∣der of the Governour were carried to Panama, there to work in the Castle of St. Ierom. This Fortification is an excellent piece of Workman∣ship, and very strong; being raised in the middle of the Port, of quadrangular form, and of very hard stone. Its elevation or heighth is of eighty eight geometrical feet; the Walls being of four∣teen, and the Curtains of seventy five feet dia∣meter. It was built at the expences of several private persons, the Governour of the City fur∣nishing the greatest part of the money; so that it did not cost his Majesty any sum at all.
CHAP. V. Some account of the Island of Cuba. Capt. Morgan attempteth to preserve the Isle of St. Catharine, as a Refuge and Nest unto Pirats; but faileth of his de∣signes. He arriveth at and taketh the Village of el Puerto del Principe. CAptain Morgan seeing his Predecessour and Admiral Mansvelt was dead, endeavour'd, Capt. Mor∣gan attemp∣teth to keep St. Cath. as much as he could, and used all the means that were possible, to preserve and keep in perpetual possession the Isle of St. Catharine, seated nigh un∣to that of Cuba. His principal intent was to consecrate it as a Refuge and Sanctuary unto the Pirats of those parts; putting it in a sufficient condition of being a convenient Receptacle or Store-house of their Preys and Robberies. Un∣to this effect he left no stone unmov'd whereby to compass his designes, writing for the same pur∣pose unto several Merchants that lived in Virginia and New England, and perswading them to send him Provisions and other necessary things, to∣wards the putting the said Island in such a posture
of defence, as it might neither fear any external dangers, nor be moved at any suspitions of inva∣sion from any side, that might attempt to dis∣quiet it. At last all his thoughts and cares pro∣ved But faileth in the de∣signe. ineffectual, by the Spaniards retaking the said Island. Yet notwithstanding, Captain Mor∣gan retained his ancient courage, which instantly put him upon new designes. Thus he equipped at first a Ship, with intention to gather an entire He equippeth another Fleet. Fleet, both as great and as strong as he could compass. By degrees he put the whole matter in execution, and gave order unto every mem∣ber of his Fleet, they should meet at a certain Port of Cuba. Here he determined to call a Council, and deliberate concerning what were best to be done, and what place first they should fall upon. Leaving these new preparations in this condition, I shall here give my Reader some small account of the aforementioned Isle of Cuba, in whose Ports this expedition was hatched, see∣ing I omitted to do it in its proper place. The Island of Cuba lieth from East to West, Description of the Island of Cuba. in the altitude and situation of twenty unto three and twenty degrees, Northern latitude; being in length one hundred and fifty German leagues, and about forty in breadth. Its Ferti∣lity is equal unto that of the Island of Hispaniola. Besides which, it affordeth many things proper for Trading and Commerce, such as are Hides
of several Beasts, particularly those that in Europe are called Hides of Havana. On all sides it is surrounded with a great number of small Islands, which go all together under the name of Cayos. Islands cal∣led Cayos, the refuge of Pirats. Of these little Islands the Pirats make great use, as of their own proper Ports of refuge. Here most commonly they make their Meetings, and hold their Councils, how to assault more easily the Spaniards. It is thorowly irrigated on all sides with the streams of plentiful and pleasant Rivers, Rivers. whose entries do form both secure and spacious Ports. Besides many other Harbours for Ships, which along the calm shores and coasts do adorn many parts of this rich and beautiful Island. All which, contribute very much unto its happiness, by facilitating the exercise of Trade; whereunto they invite both Natives and Aliens. The chie∣fest of these Ports are San Tiago, Bayame, Santa Ports. Maria, Espiritu Santo, Trinidad, Xagoa, Cabo de Corrientes, and others; all which are seated on the South-side of the Island. On the Northern side hereof are found these following: La Ha∣vana, Puerto Mariano, Santa Cruz, Mata Ricos, and Barracoa. This Island hath two principal Cities, by which Cities. the whole Country is governed, and unto which all the Towns and Villages thereof do give obe∣dience. The first of these is named San Tiago, or St. Iames, being seated on the South-side, and
having under its jurisdiction one half of the I∣sland. The chief Magistrates hereof are a Bi∣shop Government. and a Governour, who command over the Villages and Towns belonging to the half above∣mentioned. The chiefest of these are, on the Southern side, Espiritu Santo, Puerto de el Prin∣cipe, and Bayame. On the North-side it hath Barracoa, and the Town called de los Cayos. The greatest part of the Commerce driven at the a∣forementioned Their Com∣merce with the Canaries City of San Tiago, cometh from the Canary-Islands; whither they transport great quantity of Tobacco, Sugar, and Hides: which sorts of Merchandize are drawn to the head-City from the subordinate Towns and Villages. In former times this City of San Tiago was miserably sack'd by the Pirats of Iamaica and Tortuga; San Tiago sack'd by Pi∣rats. notwithstanding that it is defended by a conside∣rable Castle. The City and Port de la Havana lieth between the North and West-side of the Island. This is Havana. one of the renownedst and strongest places of all the West Indies. Its jurisdiction extendeth over  Jurisdi∣ction. the other half of the Island; the chiefest places under it being Santa Cruz on the Northern side, and la Trinidad on the South. From hence is transported huge quantity of Tobacco; which is . sent in great plenty unto New Spain and Costa Rica, even as far as the South-Sea. Besides ma∣ny Ships laden with this Commodity, that are
signed into Spain, and other parts of Europe, not onely in the leaf, but also in rowls. This City is defended by three Castles, very great and strong; two of which lie towards the Port, and Castles. the other is seated upon a hill that commandeth the Town. 'Tis esteemed to contain ten thou∣sand Families, more or less; among which num∣ber of people, the Merchants of this place trade Inhabitants. in New Spain, Campeche, Honduras, and Horida. All the Ships that come from the parts aforemen∣tioned, as also from Caracas, Cartagena, and Costa Rica, are necessitated to take their Provisions in at Havana, wherewith to make their Voyage for Spain; this being the necessary and streight Convenient Situation. course they ought to steer for the South of Europe, and other parts. The Plate-Fleet of Spain, which the Spaniards call Flôta, being homeward bound, toucheth here yearly, to take in the rest of their full Cargo, as Hides, Tobacco, and Campeche∣wood. Captain Morgan had been no longer than two months in the abovementioned Ports of the South of Cuba, when he had got together a Fleet of Capt. Mor∣gan soon getteth a good Fleet. twelve sail, between Ships and great Boats; wherein he had seven hundred fighting men, part of which were English, and part French. They called a Council; and some were of opinion, They designe against Ha∣vana. 'twere convenient to assault the City of Havana, under the obscurity of the night. Which En∣terprize,
they said, might easily be performed; especially if they could but take any few of the Ecclesiasticks, and make them Prisoners. Yea, that the City might be sack'd, before the Castles could put themselves in a posture of defence. Others propounded, according to their several Diversity of opinions. opinions, other attempts. Notwithstanding, the former Proposal was rejected, because many of the Pirats had been Prisoners at other times in the said City; and these affirmed, nothing of consequence could be done, unless with fifteen hundred men. Moreover, that with all this num∣ber of people, they ought first to go unto the I∣sland de los Pinos, and land them in small Boats about Matamano, fourteen leagues distant from the aforesaid City, whereby to accomplish by these means and order their designes. Finally, they saw no possibility of gathering so great a Fleet; and hereupon, with that they had, they concluded to attempt some other place. Among the rest was found, at last, one who propounded, they should go and assault the They pitch upon  Pu∣erto del Principe. Town of el Puerto de el Principe. This Propo∣sition he endeavoured to perswade, by saying, he knew that place very well; and that being at a distance from the Sea, it never was sack'd by a∣ny Pirats; whereby the Inhabitants were rich, as A ing a  . exercising their Trade for ready money, with those of Havana, who kept here an established
The Towne of Puerto del Principe taken & sackt Part 2 Page. 80.
Commerce, which consisted chiefly in Hides. This Proposal was presently admitted by Captain Mor∣gan, and the chiefest of his Companions. And hereupon they gave order unto every Captain to weigh Anchor and set sail, steering their course towards that coast that lieth nearest unto el Pu∣erto de el Principe. Hereabouts is to be seen a Bay, named by the Spaniards, el Puerto de Santa Maria. Being arrived at this Bay, a certain Spa∣niard, Port of St. Mary. who was Prisoner on board the Fleet, swam ashore by night, and came unto the Town of Puerto del Principe, giving account unto the Inhabitants of the designe the Pirats had against them. This he affirmed to have over-heard in their discourse, mean while they thought he did Their designe betrayed. not understand the English Tongue. The Spa∣niards, as soon as they received this fortunate ad∣vice, began instantly to hide their Riches, and carry away what Movables they could. The Governour also immediately raised all the people of the Town, both Freemen and Slaves; and The Spani∣ards prepare themselves. with part of them took a Post by which of ne∣cessity the Pirats were to pass. He commanded likewise many Trees to be cut down and laid a∣midst the ways, to hinder their passage. In like manner he placed several Ambuscades, which were strengthened with some pieces of Cannon, Ambuscades to play upon them on their march. He gather∣ed in all, about eight hundred men, of which he
distributed several into the aforementioned Am∣buscades, and with the rest he begirt the Town; displaying them upon the plain of a spacious Field, from whence they could see the coming of the Pirats at length. Captain Morgan, with his men, being now upon the march, found the avenues and passages unto the Town impenetrable. Hereupon they took their way through the Wood, traversing it with great difficulty, whereby they escaped They escape the Ambus∣cades. divers Ambuscades. Thus at last they came in∣to the Plain aforementioned; which, from its fi∣gure, is called by the Spaniards, la Savana, or the Sheet. The Governour seeing them come, made a detachment of a Troop of Horse; which he sent to charge them in the front, thinking to disperse them, and by putting them to flight, pursue them with his main Body. But this de∣signe succeeded not as it was intended. For the Pirats marched in very good rank and file, at the sound of their Drums, and with flying Colours. When they came nigh unto the Horse, they drew into the form of a Semicircle, and thus ad∣vanced towards the Spaniards; who charged them like valiant and couragious Souldiers for some while. But seeing that the Pirats were ve∣ry dexterous at their Arms, and their Governour, with many of their Companions, killed, they be∣gan to retreat towards the Wood. Here they
designed to save themselves with more advan∣tage; but before they could reach it, the greatest part of them were unfortunately killed by the hands of the Pirats. Thus they left the Victory Many Spa∣niards kill'd. unto these new-come Enemies, who had no con∣siderable loss of men in this Battel, and but very few wounded, howbeit the Skirmish continued for the space of four hours. They entred the The Town taken. Town, though not without great resistance of such as were within; who defended themselves as long as was possible, thinking by their defence to hinder the pillage. Hereupon, many seeing the Enemy within the Town, shut themselves up in their own houses, and from thence made several shot against the Pirats. Who perceiving the mischief of this disadvantage, presently be∣gan to threaten them, saying, If you surrender not voluntarily, you shall soon see the Town in a Flame, and your wives and children torn in pieces before your faces. With these Menaces the Spaniards Entire sur∣rendry of the Townsmen. submitted entirely unto the discretion of the Pi∣rats; believing they could not continue there long, and would soon be forced to dislodge. As soon as the Pirats had possessed themselves of the Town, they enclosed all the Spaniards, both men, women, children, and slaves, in seve∣ral Churches; and gathered all the Goods they could find by way of pillage. Afterwards they searched the whole Country round about the
Town, bringing in, day by day, many Goods and Prisoners, with much Provision. With this they fell to banquetting among themselves, and ma∣king great Chear, after their customary way; without remembring the poor Prisoners, whom they permitted to starve in the Churches for hun∣ger. In the mean while they ceased not to tor∣ment them dayly after an inhumane manner, thereby to make them confess where they had hid their Goods, Moneys, and other things; though little or nothing was left them. Unto this effect they punished also the women and lit∣tle children, given them nothing to eat; whereby the greatest part perished. When they could find no more to rob, and that Provisions began to grow scarce, they thought it convenient to depart, and seek new fortunes They con∣clude to go away. The Town put to ran∣som. in other places. Hence they intimated to the Prisoners, They should find moneys to ransom them∣selves, else they should be all transported to Jamaica. Which being done, if they did not pay a second Ran∣som for the Town, they would turn every house in∣to ashes. The Spaniards hearing these severe Menaces, nominated among themselves four fel∣low-Prisoners Messengers sent to ga∣ther it. to go and seek for the abovemen∣tioned Contributions. But the Pirats, to the in∣tent they should return speedily with the Ran∣soms prescribed, tormented several in their pre∣sence, before they departed, with all the rigour
imaginable. After few days, the Spaniards re∣turned from the fatigue of their unreasonable Commissions, telling Captain Morgan, We have ran up and down, and searched all the neighbouring Woods and places we most suspected, and yet have not been able to find any of our own Party, nor con∣sequently any fruit of our Embassie. But if you are pleased to have a little longer patience with us, we shall certainly cause all that you demand, to be paid within the space of fifteen days. Captain Morgan was contented, as it should seem, to grant them this Petition. But not long after, there came in∣to the Town seven or eight Pirats, who had been ranging in the Woods and Fields, and got there∣abouts some considerable Booty. These brought among other Prisoners, a certain Negro, whom they had taken with Letters about him. Cap∣tain Morgan having perused them, found they Letters in∣tercepted from San Tiago. were from the Governour of San Tiago, being written unto some of the Prisoners; wherein he told them, They should not make too much haste to pay any Ransom for their Town or Persons, or any other Pretext. But on the contrary, they should put off the Pirats as well as they could with excuses and delays; expecting to be relieved by him within a short while, when he would certainly come to their aid. This intelligence being heard by Captain Morgan, he immediately gave orders, that all they had robb'd should be carried on board the Ships.
And withal, he intimated to the Spaniards, that the very next day they should pay their Ransoms; forasmuch as he would not wait one moment longer, but reduce the whole Town to ashes, in Which cause the Pirats to retreat. case they failed to perform the sum he deman∣ded. With this intimation, Captain Morgan made no mention unto the Spaniards of the Letters he had intercepted. Whereupon they made him answer, That it was totally impossible for them to give such a sum of money in so short a space of time; seeing their fellow-Townsmen were not to be found in all the Country thereabouts. Captain Morgan knew full well their intentions; and withal, thought it not convenient to remain there any longer time. Hence he demanded of them onely five hundred Oxen or Cows, toge∣ther with sufficient Salt wherewith to salt them. Hereunto he added onely this condition, that they should carry them on board his Ships: which they 500 Beeves granted. promised to do. Thus he departed with all his men, taking with him onely six of the principal Prisoners, as Pledges of what he intended. The next day the Spaniards brought the Cattle and Salt unto the Ships, and required the Prisoners. But Captain Morgan refused to deliver them, till such time as they had helped his men to kill and salt the Beeves. This was likewise performed in great haste, he not caring to stay there any lon∣ger,
lest he should be surprized by the Forces that were gathering against him. Having received all on board his Vessels, he set at liberty the Priso∣ners he had kept as Hostages of his demands. Mean while these things were in agitation, there happened to arise some dissentions between the English-men and the French. The occasion of their discord was, as followeth: A certain French-man Discord be∣tween the French and English. being employed in killing and salting one of the Beeves, an English Pirat came to him and took away the Marrow-bones he had taken out of the Ox; which sort of meat these people e∣steem very much. Hereupon they challenged one another. Being come unto the place of duel, the English-man drew his Sword treache∣rously against the French-man, wounding him in the back, before he had put himself into a just posture of defence; whereby he suddenly fell dead upon the place. The other French-men, desirous to revenge this base action, made an In∣surrection against the English. But Captain Mor∣gan soon extinguished this flame, by command∣ing the Criminal to be bound in Chains, and thus carried to Iamaica; promising to them all, he would see justice done upon him. For al∣though it were permitted unto him to challenge his Adversary, yet was it not lawful to kill him treacherously, as he did. As soon as all things were in a readiness, and
on board the Ships, and likewise the Priso∣ners set at liberty, they sailed from thence, dire∣cting They depart. their course to a certain Island, where Cap∣tain Morgan intended to make a Dividend of what they had purchased in that Voyage. Being arrived at the place assigned, they found nigh the value of fifty thousand Pieces of Eight, both in 50000 Pie∣ces of Eight robbed here. money and goods. The sum being known, it caused a general resentment and grief, to see such a small purchase; which was not sufficient to pay their Debts at Iamaica Hereupon Captain Morgan propounded unto them, they should think upon some other Enterprize and Pillage, before they returned home. But the French-men not being able to agree with the English, separated from their company, leaving Captain The French separate from the English. Morgan alone with those of his own Nation; not∣withstanding all the perswasions he used to re∣duce them to continue in his company. Thus they parted with all external signes of friendship; Captain Morgan reiterating his promises unto them, he would see justice done upon that Cri∣minal. This he performed: for being arrived at Iamaica, he caused him to be hang'd; which was all the satisfaction the French Pirats could expect.
CHAP. VI. Captain Morgan resolveth to attack and plunder the City of Puerto Velo. Unto this effect he equippeth a Fleet, and, with little Expence and small Forces, ta∣keth the said place. SOme Nations may think, that the French ha∣ving deserted Captain Morgan, the English A new Fleet equipped. alone could not have sufficient courage to attempt such great Actions, as before. But Captain Morgan, who always communicated Vigour with his words, infused such Spirits into his men, as were able to put every one of them instantly upon new designes: They being all perswaded by his Reasons, that the sole execution of his Or∣ders, would be a certain means of obtaining great Riches. This perswasion had such influence up∣on their minds, that with unimitable courage they all resolved to follow him. The same like∣wise did a certain Pirat of Campeche; who in An old Pi∣rat of Cam∣peche. this occasion joyned with Captain Morgan, to seek new fortunes under his conduct, and greater advantages than he had found before. Thus Captain Morgan, in a few days, gathered a
Fleet of nine sail, between Ships and great Boats; wherein he had four hundred and threescore mi∣litary 460 men in all. men. After that all things were in a good posture of readiness, they put forth to Sea, Captain Mor∣gan imparting the designe he had in his mind un∣to They st forth to∣wards Pu∣erto Velo. no body for that present. He onely told them on several occasions, that, he held as indu∣bitable, he should make a good fortune by that Voyage, if strange occurrences altered not the course of his designes. They directed their course towards the Continent; where they arrived in few days upon the coast of Costa Rica, with all their Fleet entire. No sooner had they dis∣covered land, but Captain Morgan declared his in∣tentions to the Captains, and presently after un∣to all the rest of the company. He told them, he intended in that Expedition to plunder Puerto Velo, and that he would perform it by night, be∣ing resolved to put the whole City to the sack, not the least corner escaping his diligence. More∣over, to encourage them, he added, This Enter∣prize could not fail to succeed well, seeing he had kept it secret in his mind, without revealing it to any body; whereby they could not have notice of his coming. Unto this proposition some made answer, They had not a sufficient number of men wherewith to assault so strong and great a City. But Captain Morgan replied, If our number is Sph f Capt. Morg.
small, our hearts are great. And the fewer per∣sons we are, the more union and better shares we shall have in the spoil. Hereupon, being stimulated with the ambition of those vast Riches they pro∣mised themselves from their good success, they unanimously concluded to venture upon that de∣signe. But now, to the intent my Reader may better comprehend the incomparable boldness of this Exploit, it may be necessary to say something before-hand of the City of Puerto Velo. The City, which beareth this name in America, Description of Puerto Velo. is seated in the Province of Costa Rica, under the altitude of ten degrees Northern latitude, at the distance of fourteen leagues from the Gulf of Darien, and eight Westwards from the Port cal∣led Nombre de Dios. It is judged to be the stron∣gest place that the King of Spain possesseth in all the West-Indies, excepting two, that is to say, Hava∣na and Cartagena. Here are two Castles, almost in∣expugnable, that defend the City, being situated at the entry of the Port; so that no Ship nor Boat can pass without permission. The Garison con∣sisteth of three hundred Souldiers, and the Town constantly inhabited by four hundred Families, more or less. The Merchants dwell not here, but onely reside for a while, when the Galeons come or go from Spain; by reason of the un∣healthiness of the Air, occasioned by certain Va∣pours that exhale from the Mountains. Not∣withstanding,
their chief Warehouses are at Pu∣erto Velo, howbeit their Habitations be all the year long at Panama. From whence they bring the Plate upon Mules, at such times as the Fair begin∣neth; and when the Ships, belonging to the Company of Negro's, arrive here to sell Slaves. Captain Morgan, who knew very well all the Avenues of this City, as also all the neighbour∣ing Coasts, arrived in the dusk of the evening at They arrived at Puerto de Naos. the place called Puerto de Naos, distant ten leagues towards the West of Puerto Velo. Being come unto this place, they mounted the River in their Ships, as far as another Harbour called Puerto Pontin; where they came to an Anchor. Here they put themselves immediately into Boats and Canows, leaving in the Ships onely a few men to keep them, and conduct them the next day unto the Port. About midnight they came to a cer∣tain place called Estera longa Lemos, where they all went on shore, and marched by land to the first Posts of the City. They had in their com∣pany a certain English-man, who had been for∣merly And from thence at Pu∣erto Velo. a Prisoner in those parts, and who now ser∣ved them for a Guide. Unto him and three or four more, they gave commission to take the Centry, if possible, or kill him upon the place. But they laid hands on him and apprehended him The Centry taken. with such cunning, as he had no time to give war∣ning with his Musket, or make any other noise.
Thus they brought him, with his hands bound, unto Captain Morgan, who asked him, How things went in the city, and what Forces they had: with many other circumstances, which he was desirous to know. After every question, they made him a thousand menaces to kill him, in case he de∣clared not the truth. Thus they began to ad∣vance towards the City, carrying always the said Centry bound before them. Having marched about one quarter of a league, they came unto the Castle that is nigh unto the City; which pre∣sently they closely surrounded, so that no per∣son could get either in or out of the said For∣tress. First Castle surrounded. Being thus posted under the walls of the Ca∣stle, Captain Morgan commanded the Centry, whom they had taken Prisoner, to speak unto those that were within, charging them to surren∣der, and deliver themselves up to his discretion; otherwise they should be all cut in pieces, with∣out giving quarter to any one. But they would hearken to none of these threats, beginning in∣stantly to fire; which gave notice unto the Ci∣ty, and this was suddenly alarm'd. Yet not∣withstanding, although the Governour and Soul∣diers of the said Castle made as great resistance as could be performed, they were constrained to surrender unto the Pirats. These no sooner had taken the Castle, but they resolved to be as good
as their words, in putting the Spaniards to the Sword, thereby to strike a terrour into the rest of the City. Hereupon, having shut up all the Souldiers and Officers, as Prisoners, into one Room, they instantly set fire unto the Powder (whereof they found great quantity) and blew up the whole Castle into the air, with all  tken and  up. the Spaniards that were within. This being done, they pursued the course of their Victory, falling upon the City, which as yet was not in or∣der The City en∣tred. to receive them. Many of the Inhabitants cast their precious Jewels and Moneys into Wells and Cisterns, or hid them in other places under ground, to excuse, as much as were possi∣ble, their being totally robb'd. One party of the Pirats being assigned to this purpose, ran im∣mediately to the Cloisters, and took as many They run to the Cloisters. Religious men and women as they could find. The Governour of the City not being able to rally the Citizens, through the huge confusion of the Town, retired unto one of the Castles re∣maining,  Gover∣ . and from thence began to fire incessant∣ly at the Pirats. But these were not in the least negligent either to assault him, or defend them∣selves with all the courage imaginable. Thus it was observable, that amidst the horrour of the Assault, they made very few shot in vain. For aiming with great dexterity at the mouths of the Guns, the Spaniards were certain to lose one or
two men every time they charged each Gun a∣new. The assault of this Castle where the Gover∣nour was, continued very furious on both sides, from break of day until noon. Yea, about this The Assault continueth till noon. time of the day, the case was very dubious which party should conquer or be conquered. At last the Pirats perceiving they had lost many men, and as yet advanced but little towards the gain∣ing either this or the other Castles remaining, thought to make use of Fire-balls, which they threw with their hands, designing, if possible, to burn the doors of the Castle. But going about to put this in execution, the Spaniards from the Strong de∣fence of the Spaniards. Walls let fall great quantity of stones, and ear∣then pots full of Powder, and other combustible matter, which forced them to desist from that attempt. Captain Morgan seeing this generous defence made by the Spaniards, began to despair of the whole success of the Enterprize. Here∣upon many saint and calm meditations came in∣to his mind; neither could he determine which way to turn himself in that straitness of affairs. Being involved in thse thoughts, he was sudden∣ly animated to continue the Assault, by seeing the English Colours put forth at one of the lesser Another Ca∣stle taken. Castles, then entred by his men. Of whom he presently after spied a Troop that came to meet him, proclaiming Victory with loud shouts of
joy. This instantly put him upon new resolu∣tions of making new efforts to take the rest of the Castles that stood out against him: Especi∣ally seeing the chiefest Citizens were fled unto them, and had conveyed thither great part of their Riches, with all the Plate belonging to the Churches, and other things dedicated to Divine Service. Unto this effect therefore he ordered ten or Twelve Lad∣ders made. twelve Ladders to be made, in all possible haste, so broad, that three or four men at once might asnd by them. These being finished, he com∣manded all the Religious men and women whom he had taken Prisoners, to fix them against the walls of the Castle. Thus much he had before∣hand Stratagem of Capt. Morg. threatned the Governour to perform, in case he delivered not the Castle. But his answer was, He would never surrender himself alive. Cap∣tain Morgan was much perswaded that the Gover∣nour would not employ his utmost Forces, seeing Religious women, and Ecclesiastical persons, us   in the Assault. exposed in the front of the Souldiers to the grea∣test dangers. Thus the Ladders, as I have said, were put into the hands of Religious persons of both Sexes; and these were forced, at the head of the Companies, to raise and apply them to the Walls. But Captain Morgan was fully deceived in his judgment of this designe. For the Go∣vernour, who acted like a brave and couragious
Souldier, refused not, in performance of his du∣ty, to use his utmost endeavours to destroy who∣soever came near the Walls. The Religious men and women ceased not to cry unto him and beg of him by all the Saints of Heaven, he would deliver the Castle, and hereby spare both his and their own lives. But nothing could prevail with the obstinacy and fierceness that had possessed the Governour's mind. Thus many of the Re∣ligious men and Nuns were killed before they could fix the Ladders. Which at last being done, though with great loss of the said Religi∣ous Many of them killed. people, the Pirats mounted them in great numbers, and with no less valour; having Fire-balls in their hands, and Earthen-pots full of Powder. All which things, being now at the The Castle taken. top of the Walls, they kindled and cast in a∣mong the Spaniards. This effort of the Pirats was very great: In∣somuch as the Spaniards could no longer resist nor defend the Castle, which was now entred. Hereupon they all threw down their Arms, and craved quarter for their lives. Onely the Go∣vernour of the City would admit nor crave no The Gover∣nour would not surrender mercy; but rather killed many of the Pirats with his own hands, and not a few of his own Souldiers, because they did not stand to their Arms. And although the Pirats asked him if he would have quarter, yet he constantly answer'd,
By no means: I had rather die as a valiant Soul∣dier, than be hanged as a Coward. They endea∣voured, as much as they could, to take him Pri∣soner. But he defended himself so obstinately, as that they were forced to kill him; notwith∣standing all the cries and tears of his own Wife  killed. and Daughter, who begged of him upon their knees he would demand quarter and save his life. When the Pirats had possessed themselves of the Castle, which was about night, they en∣closed therein all the Prisoners they had taken, placing the women and men by themselves, with some Guards upon them. All the wounded were put into a certain apartment by it self, to the intent their own complaints might be the cure of their diseases; for no other was afforded them. This being done, they fell to eating and drin∣king, after their usual manner; that is to say, They fall to their usual . committing in both these things all manner of de∣bauchery and excess. These two vices were immediately followed by many insolent actions of Rape and Adultery committed upon many very honest women, as well married as Virgins: Who being threatned with the Sword, were con∣strained to submit their bodies to the violence of those lewd and wicked men. After such man∣ner they delivered themselves up unto all sort of debauchery of this kind, that if there had been
found onely fifty courageous men, they might easily have retaken the City, and killed all the Pirats. The next day, having plundred all they could find, they began to examine some of the prisoners (who had been perswaded by their Companions to say, they were the richest of the Town) charging them severely, to discover where they had hidden their Riches and Goods. But not being able to extort any thing out of them, as who were not the right persons that pos∣sessed any wealth, they at last resolved to tor∣ture They torture the Prisoners them. This they performed with such cru∣elty, that many of them died upon the Rack, or presently after. Soon after, the President of Panama had news brought him of the pillage and ruine of Puerto Velo. This intelligence caused him to employ all his care and industry to raise Forces, with designe to pursue and cast out the Pirats from thence. But these cared little for what extraordinary means the President used, as having their Ships nigh at hand, and being deter∣mined to set fire unto the City, and retreat. They had now been at Puerto Velo fifteen days, in which space of time they had lost many of their men, both by the unhealthiness of the Coun∣try, and the extravagant Debaucheries they had committed. Hereupon they prepared for a departure, car∣rying on Board their Ships all the Pillage they They prepare to depart.
had gotten. But before all, they provided the Fleet with sufficient Victuals for the Voyage. While these things were getting ready, Captain Morgan sent an Injunction unto the Prisoners, that they should pay him a Ransom for the City, or else he would by fire consume it to ashes, and blow up all the Castles into the air. Withal, he commanded them to send speedily two per∣sons to seek and procure the sum he demanded, which amounted unto one hundred thousand Pieces of Eight. Unto this effect, two men were sent to the President of Panama, who gave him an account of all these Tragedies. The Pre∣sident having now a body of men in a readiness, The Gover∣nour of Pa∣nama cometh against them. set forth immediately towards Puerto Velo, to en∣counter the Pirats before their retreat. But these people hearing of his coming, instead of flying away, went out to meet him at a narrow passage through which of necessity he ought to pass. Here they placed an hundred men very well arm'd; the which, at the first Encounter, put to flight a good party of those of Panama. But in vain. This Accident obliged the President to retire for that time, as not being yet in a posture of strength to proceed any farther. Presently after this Rencounter, he sent a Message unto Captain Morgan, to tell him, That in case he departed not suddenly with all his Forces from Puerto Velo, he ought to expect no quarter for himself nor his Com∣panions,
when he should take them, as he hoped soon to do. Captain Morgan, who feared not his threats, as knowing he had a secure retreat in his Ships which were nigh at hand, made him an∣swer, He would not deliver the Castles, before he had received the Contribution-money he had de∣manded. Which in case it were not paid down, he would certainly burn the whole City, and then leave it; demolishing before-hand the Castles, and kil∣ling the Prisoners. The Governour of Panama perceived by this Answer, no means would serve to mollifie the hearts of the Pirats, nor reduce them to reason. Hereupon he determined to leave them; as also those of the City, whom he came to relieve, in∣volved in the difficulties of making the best a∣greement they could with their Enemies. Thus in few days more, the miserable Citizens gather∣ed the Contribution wherein they were fined, and brought the entire sum of one hundred thou∣sand A huge Ran∣som paid for the City. Pieces of Eight unto the Pirats, for a Ran∣som of the cruel Captivity they were fallen into. But the President of Panama, by these transacti∣ons, was brought into an extream admiration, considering that four hundred men had been a∣ble to take such a great City, with so many strong Castles: especially seeing they had no pieces of Cannon, nor other great Guns, wherewith to raise Batteries against them. And what was
more, knowing that the Citizens of Puerto Velo had always great repute of being good Souldiers themselves, and who had never wanted courage in their own defence. This astonishment was so great, that it occasion'd him, for to be satisfied herein, to send a Messenger unto Captain Mor∣gan, A Mssage to Cap. Mor∣gan. desiring him to send him some small pattern of those Arms wherewith he had taken with such violence so great a City. Captain Morgan recei∣ved this Messenger very kindly, and treated him with great civility. Which being done, he gave him a Pistol and a few small Bullets of lead, to carry back unto the President his Master, telling him withal, He desired him to accept that slender He sendeth back a Pistol. pattern of the Arms wherewith he had taken Puerto Velo, and keep them for a twelvemonth; after which time, he promised to come to Panama and fetch them away. The Governour of Panama returned the Present very soon unto Captain Mor∣gan, giving him thanks for the favour of lending him such Weapons as he needed not, and with∣al sent him a Ring of Gold, with this Message, That he desired him not to give himself the labour of coming to Panama, as he had done to Puerto Ve∣lo; for he did certifie unto him, he should not speed so well here as he had done there. After these transactions, Captain Morgan (ha∣ving provided his Fleet with all necessaries, and taken with him the best Guns of the Castles, nai∣ling
the rest which he could not carry away) set sail from Puerto Velo with all his Ships. With He departeth for Cuba. these he arrived in few days unto the Island of Cuba, where he sought out a place wherein with all quiet and repose he might make the Dividend of the Spoil they had gotten. They found in The Divi∣dend made. ready money two hundred and fifty thousand Pieces of Eight; besides all other Merchandizes, as Cloth, Linnen, Silks, and other Goods. With this rich Purchase they sailed again from thence unto their common place of Rendezvouz, Ia∣maica. Being arrived, they passed here some time in all sorts of Vices and Debauchery, accor∣ding to their common manner of doing, spen∣ding with huge prodigality what others had gain∣ed with no small labour and toil.
CHAP. VII. Captain Morgan taketh the City of Ma∣racaibo on the Coast of Nueva Ve∣nezuela. Piracies committed in those Seas. Ruine of three Spanish Ships, that were set forth to hinder the Robberies of the Pirats. NOt long after the arrival of the Pirats at Iamaica, being precisely that short time A new Ex∣pedition ta∣ken in d. they needed to lavish away all the Riches above∣mentioned, they concluded upon another Enter∣prize whereby to seek new fortunes. Unto this effect, Captain Morgan gave orders to all the Commanders of his Ships to meet together at the Island called de la Vaca, or Cow-Isle, seated on the South-side of the Isle of Hispaniola; as hath been mentioned above. As soon as they came to this place, there flocked unto them great numbers of other Pirats, both French and English, by reason the name of Captain Morgan was now rendred fa∣mous in all the neighbouring Countries, for the great Enterprizes he had perform'd. There was at that present at Iamaica, an English Ship newly
come from New England, well mounted with thirty six Guns. This Vessel likewise, by order of the Governour of Iamaica, came to joyn with Captain Morgan to strengthen his Fleet, and give him greater courage to attempt things of huge consequence. With this supply Captain Mor∣gan judged himself sufficiently strong, as having a Ship of such port, being the greatest of his Fleet, in his Company. Notwithstanding, there being in the same place another great Vessel that carried twenty four iron Guns, and twelve of brass, belonging unto the French, Captain Mor∣gan endeavoured as much as he could to joyn this Ship in like manner unto his own. But the French not daring to repose any trust in the En∣glish, of whose actions they were not a little jea∣lous, denied absolutely to consent unto any such thing. The French Pirats belonging to this great Ship had accidentally met at Sea an English Vessel: And being then under an extream necessity of Victuals, they had taken some provisions out of the English Ship, without paying for them, as having peradventure no ready money on board. Onely they had given them Bills of Exchange, for Iamaica and Tortuga, to receive money there for what they had taken. Captain Morgan ha∣ving notice of this Accident, and perceiving he could not prevail with the French Captain to
follow him in that Expedition, resolved to lay hold on this occasion, as a pretext to ruine the French, and seek his own revenge. Hereupon he invited, with dissimulation, the French Com∣mander and several of his men to dine with him on board the great Ship that was come from Ia∣maica, as was said before. Being come thither, he made them all Prisoners, pretending the inju∣ry aforementioned done to the English Vessel, in taking away some few provisions without pay. This unjust action of Captain Morgan was soon followed by divine punishment, as we may very rationally conceive. The manner I shall instant∣ly relate. Captain Morgan, presently after he had taken the French prisoners abovesaid, called a Council to deliberate what place they should first pitch upon, in the course of this new Expe∣dition. At this Council it was determined to go to the Isle of Savona; there to wait for the Flota which was then expected from Spain, and take any of the Spanish Vessels that might chance to straggle from the rest. This resolution being taken, they began on board the great Ship to feast one another for joy of their new Voyage and happy Council, as they hoped it would prove. In testimony hereof, they drank many Healths, and discharged many Guns, as the com∣mon signe of mirth among Seamen used to be. Most of the men being drunk, by what accident
is not known, the Ship suddenly was blown up into the air, with three hundred and fifty English-men, A great Ship blown up. 320 men lt besides the French prisoners abovemention∣ed that were in the Hold. Of all which num∣ber, there escaped onely thirty men, who were in the great Cabin, at some distance from the main force of the powder. Many more, 'tis thought, might have escaped, had they not been so much overtaken with Wine. The loss of such a great Ship brought much consternation and conflict of mind upon the En∣glish. They knew not whom to blame; but at last the accusation was laid upon the French The whole matter im∣puted to the French. prisoners, whom they suspected to have fired the powder of the Ship wherein they were, out of designe to revenge themselves, though with the loss of their own lives. Hereupon they sought to be revenged on the French anew, and accumu∣late new accusations unto the former, whereby to seize the Ship and all that was in it. With this designe they forged another pretext against the said Ship, by saying the French designed to commit piracy upon the English. The grounds of this Accusation were given them by a Commis∣sion from the Governour of Barracoa, found on board the French Vessel, wherein were these words: That the said Governour did permit the French to trade in all Spanish Ports, &c.—As also to cruze upon the English Pirats in what
place soever they could find them, because of the multitude of Hostilities which they had committed against the Subjects of his Catholick Majesty, in time of Peace betwixt the two Crowns. This Com∣mission for Trade was interpreted by the English as an express Order to exercise Piracy and War against them, notwithstanding it was onely a bare License for coming into the Spanish Ports; the cloak of which permission, were those words in∣serted, That they should cruze upon the English. And although the French did sufficiently ex∣pound the true sence of the said Commission, yet they could not clear themselves unto Captain Morgan, nor his Council. But in lieu hereof, the Ship and men were seized and sent unto Iamaica. Here they also endeavoured to obtain Justice, and the restitution of their Ship, by all the means possible. But all was in vain: for instead of Ju∣stice, they were long time detained in Prison, and threatned with hanging. Eight days after the loss of the said Ship, Cap∣tain Morgan commanded the bodies of the mise∣rable wretches who were blown up, to be sear∣ched for, as they floated upon the waters of the Sea. This he did, not out of any designe of af∣fording them Christian burial, but onely to ob∣tain the spoil of their Cloaths and other Attire. And if any had golden Rings on their fingers, these were cut off for purchase, leaving them in
that condition exposed to the voracity of the Monsters of the Sea. At last they set sail for the Isle of Savona, being the place of their assigna∣tion. They go to the Isle of Savona. They were in all fifteen Vessels, Captain Morgan commanding the biggest, which carried onely fourteen small Guns. The number of men belonging to this Fleet, were nine hundred and threescore. In few days after, they arrived at the Cape called Cabo de Lobos, on the South-side of the Isle of Hispaniola, between Cape Tibu∣ren and Cape Punta de Espada. From hence they could not pass, by reason of contrary winds that continued the space of three weeks, notwith∣standing all the endeavours Captain Morgan used to get forth, leaving no means unattempted there∣unto. At the end of this time they doubled the Cape, and presently after spied an English Ves∣sel at a distance. Having spoken with her, they found she came from England, and bought of her, for ready money, some Provisions they stood in need of. Captain Morgan proceeded in the course of his Voyage, till he came unto the Port of Ocoa. They arrive at Ocoa. Here he landed some of his men, sending them into the Woods to seek water, and what Provi∣sions they could find; the better to spare such as he had already on board his Fleet. They killed many Beasts, and among other Animals some Horses. But the Spaniards being not well satis∣fied
at their hunting, attempted to lay a Strata∣gem for the Pirats. Unto this purpose, they or∣der'd Stratagem of the Spa∣niards. three or four hundred men to come from the City of Santo Domingo, not far distant from this Port, and desired them to hunt in all the parts thereabouts adjoyning to the Sea, to the in∣tent that if any Pirats should return, they might find no subsistance. Within a few days the same Pirats returned, with designe to hunt. But finding nothing to kill, a party of them, being a∣bout fifty in number, straggled farther on into the Woods. The Spaniards, who watched all their motions, gathered a great Herd of Cows, and set two or three men to keep them. The Pirats having spied this Herd, killed a sufficient number thereof; and although the Spaniards could see them at a distance, yet they would not hinder their work for the present. But as soon as they attempted to carry them away, they set upon them with all fury imaginable, crying, Ma∣ta, mata; that is, Kill, kill. Thus the Pirats were soon compell'd to quit the prey, and re∣treat towards their Ships as well as they could. This they performed notwithstanding, in good order, retiring from time to time by degrees; and when they had any good opportunity, dis∣charging full Vollies of shot upon the Spaniards.  By this means the Pirats killed many of the Ene∣mies, though with some loss on their own side.
The rest of the Spaniards seeing what damage they had sustained, endeavoured to save them∣selves by flight, and carry off the dead bodies and wounded of their Companions. The Pirats perceiving them to flie, could not content them∣selves with what hurt they had already done, but pursued them speedily into the Woods, and kil∣led the greatest part of those that were remain∣ing. The next day Captain Morgan being ex∣treamly offended at what had passed, went him∣self with two hundred men, into the Woods, to seek for the rest of the Spaniards. But finding no body there, he revenged his wrath upon the houses of the poor and miserable Rusticks that inhabit scatteringly those Fields and Woods; of which he burnt a great number. With this he returned unto his Ships, something more satisfied in his mind, for having done some considerable damage unto the Enemy; which was always his most ardent desire. The huge impatience wherewith Captain Mor∣gan had waited now this long while for some of his Ships, which were not yet arrived, made him resolve to set sail without them, and steer his course for the Isle of Savona, the place he had They go on to Savona. always designed. Being arrived there, and not finding any of his Ships as yet come, he was more impatient and concerned than before, as fearing their loss, or that he must proceed with∣out
them. Notwithstanding, he waited for their arrival some few days longer. In the mean while, having no great plenty of Provisions, he sent a crew of one hundred and fifty men unto the Isle of Hispaniola, to pillage some Towns that were nigh unto the City of Santo Domingo. But the Spaniards having had intelligence of their coming, were now so vigilant, and in such good posture of defence, as the Pirats thought it not convenient to assault them; chusing rather to re∣turn empty-handed unto Captain Morgan's pre∣sence, than to perish in that desperate Enter∣prize. At last, Captain Morgan seeing the other Ships did not come, made a review of his People, and found onely five hundred men, more or less. The Ships that were wanting were seven, he ha∣ving onely eight in his company, of which, the greatest part were very small. Thus having hi∣therto resolved to cruze upon the coasts of Cara∣cas, and plunder all the Towns and Villages he could meet, finding himself at present with such small Forces, he changed his resolution, by the advice of a French Captain that belonged to his Advice of a French-man. Fleet. This French-man had served Lolonois in like Enterprizes, and was at the taking of Mara∣caibo; whereby he knew all the entries, passages, forces, and means how to put in execution the same again in the company of Captain Morgan.
Unto whom having made a full relation of all, he concluded to sack it again the second time, as being himself perswaded, with all his men, of the facility the French-man propounded. Hereupon they weighed Anchor, and steered their course towards Curasao. Being come within sight of that Island, they landed at another, which is nigh unto it, and is called Ruba, seated about twelve They arri at Ruba. leagues from Curasao, towards the West. This Island is defended but by a slender Garison, and is inhabited by Indians, who are subject to the Crown of Spain, and speak Spanish, by reason of the Roman Catholick Religion, which is here cultivated by some few Priests that are sent from time to time from the neighbouring Continent. The Inhabitants of this Isle exercise a certain Commerce or Trade with the Pirats that go and Commerce of this Island. come this way. These buy of the Islanders Sheep, Lambs, and Kids; which they exchange unto them for Linnen, Thread, and other things of this kind. The Country is very dry and bar∣ren, the whole substance thereof consisting in those three things abovementioned; and in a small quantity of Wheat, which is of no bad quality. This Isle produceth a great number of venomous Insects, as Vipers, Spiders, and others. These last are so pernicious here, that if any man is bitten by them, he dieth mad. And the man∣ner of recovering such persons, is to tye them
very fast both hands and feet, and in this condi∣tion▪ to leave them for the space of four and twenty hours, without eating or drinking the least thing imaginable. Captain Morgan, as was said having cast Anchor before this Island, bought of the Inhabitants many Sheep, Lambs, and also Wood, which he needed for all his Fleet. Ha∣ving been there two days, he set sail again, in the time of the night, to the intent they might not see what course he steered. The next day they arrived at the Sea of Ma∣racaibo, Arrival at t  f Mbo. having always great care of not being seen from Vigilia: for which reason they anchor'd out of sight of the Watch-tower. Night being come, they set sail again towards the Land, and the next morning by break of day found them∣selves directly over against the Bar of the Lake abovementioned. The Spaniards had built a∣nother Fort, since the action of Lolonois; from whence they did now fire continually against the Pirats, while they were putting their men into Boats for to land. The Dispute continued very They land. hot on both sides, being managed with huge courage and valour from morning till dark night. This being come, Captain Morgan, in the obscu∣rity thereof, drew nigh unto the Fort. Which having examined, he found no body in it; the Spa∣niards having deserted it not long before. They And take the tle. left behind them a Match kindled nigh unto a
train of powder, wherewith they designed to blow up the Pirats, and the whole Fortress, as soon as they were in it. This designe had ta∣ken effect, had the Pirats failed to discover it the space of one quarter of an hour. But Captain Morgan prevented the mischief, by snatching away the Match with all speed, whereby he saved both his own and his Companions lives. They found here great quantity of Powder, whereof he pro∣vided his Fleet; and afterwards demolished part of the Walls, nailing sixteen pieces of Ordnance, which carried from twelve to four and twenty pound of Bullet. Here they found also great number of Muskets, and other Military provi∣sions. The next day they commanded the Ships to enter the Bar. Among which, they divided the Powder, Muskets, and other things they found in the Fort. These things being done, they im∣barked They reim∣bark. again, to continue their course towards Maracaibo. But the Waters were very low, whereby they could not pass a certain Bank that lieth at the entry of the Lake. Hereupon they were compelled to put themselves into Canows and small Boats, with which they arrived the next day before Maracaibo, having no other defence And arrive at Maracai∣bo. but some small pieces which they could carry in the said Boats. Being landed, they ran imme∣diately to the Fort called de la Barra; which
they found in like manner as the precedent, with∣out any person in it: For all were fled before them into the Woods, leaving also the Town without any people, unless a few miserable poor folk, who had nothing to lose. As soon as they had entred the Town, the Pi∣rats searched every corner thereof, to see if they The Twn found empty. could find any people that were hidden, who might offend them at unawares. Not finding any body, every party, according as they came out of their several Ships, chose what houses they pleased to themselves, the best they could find. The Church was deputed for the common Corps de Garde, where they lived after their Military manner, committing many insolent actions. The next day after their arrival, they sent a Troop of one hundred men to seek for the Inhabitants and their Goods. These returned the next day following, bringing with them to the number of thirty persons between men, women, and chil∣dren; and fifty Mules loaden with several good Prisoners brought from the Fields. Merchandize. All these miserable prisoners were put to the Rack to make them confess where the rest of the Inhabitants were, and their Goods. Amongst other tortures then used, one was to stretch their limbs with Cords, and at the same Tortures here used. time beat them with Sticks and other Instruments. Others had burning Matches placed betwixt their fingers, which were thus burnt alive. Others
had slender Cords or Matches twisted about their heads, till their eyes bursted out of the skull. Thus all sort of inhumane Cruelties were execu∣ted upon those innocent people. Those who would not confess, or who had nothing to de∣clare, died under the hands of those tyrannical men. These Tortures and Racks continued for the space of three whole weeks. In which time they ceased not to send out, dayly, parties of men to seek for more people to torment and rob; they never returning home without Booty and new Riches. Captain Morgan having now gotten by de∣grees into his hands about one hundred of the chiefest Families, with all their Goods, at last re∣solved They intend for Gibral∣tar. to go to Gibraltar, even as Lolonois had done before. With this designe he equipped his Fleet, providing it very sufficiently with all necessary things. He put likewise on board all the prisoners; and thus weighing Anchor, set sail for the said place, with resolution to hazard the Battel. They had sent before them some prisoners unto Gibraltar, to denounce unto the Inhabitants, they should surrender: otherwise Captain Morgan would certainly put them all to the sword, without giving quarter to any per∣son he should find alive. Not long after, he ar∣rived They arrive there. with his Fleet before Gibraltar, whose In∣habitants received him with continual shooting
of great Cannon-bullets. But the Pirats, in∣stead of fainting hereat, ceased not to encourage one another, saying, We must make one meal upon bitter things, before we come to taste the sweetness of the Sugar this place affordeth. The next day, very early in the morning, they They land. landed all their men. And being guided by the French-man abovementioned, they marched to∣wards the Town, not by the common way, but crossing through the Woods; which way the Spaniards scarce thought they would have come. For at the beginning of their march, they made appearance as if they intended to come the next and open way that led unto the Town, hereby the better to deceive the Spaniards. But these remembring, as yet, full well what Hostilities Lolonois had committed upon them but two years before, thought it not safe to expect the second Brunt; and hereupon were all fled out of the The people all fled. Town as fast as they could, carrying with them all their Goods and Riches, as also all the Powder, and having nailed all the great Guns. Insomuch as the Pirats found not one person in the whole City, excepting one onely poor and innocent man who was born a fool. This man they asked whither the Inhabitants were fled, and where they had absconded their Goods. Unto all which Questions and the like, he constantly made answer, I know nothing, I know nothing. But
they presently put him to the Wrack, and tor∣tur'd him with Cords; which torments forced They rack a poor ool. him to cry out, Do not torture me any more, but come with me and I will shew you my Goods and my Riches. They were perswaded as it should seem, he was some rich person who had disguised himself under those cloaths so poor, as also that innocent tongue. Hereupon they went along with him; and he conducted them to a poor and miserable Cottage, wherein he had a few Earthen∣dishes, and other things of little or no value; and amongst these, three Pieces o Eight, which he had concealed with some other Trumpery under ground. After this, they asked him his name; and he readily made answer, My name is Don Sebastian Sanchez, and I am Brother unto the Governour of Maracaibo. This foolish Answer, it must be conceived, these men, though never so inhumane, took for a certain truth. For no sooner had they heard it, but they put him again upon the Rack, lifting him up on high with Cords, and tying huge weights unto his feet and neck. Besides which cruel and stretching tor∣ment, they burnt him alive, applying Palm-leaves burning unto his face. Under which miseries he He dieth un∣der the tor∣ments. died in half an hour. After his death they cut the Cords wherewith they had stretcht him, and drag'd him forth into the adjoyning Woods, where they left him without burial.
The same day they sent out a party of Pirats to seek for the Inhabitants, upon whom they might employ their inhumane Cruelties. These brought back with them an honest Peasant with A Peasant brought in prisoner. two Daughters of his, whom they had taken pri∣soners, and whom they intended to torture as they used to do with others, in case they shewed not the places where the Inhabitants had ab∣sconded themselves. The Peasant knew some of the said places, and hereupon seeing himself threatned with the Rack, went with the Pirats to shew them. But the Spaniards perceiving their Enemies to range every-where up and down the Woods, were already fled from thence much far∣ther off into the thickest parts of the said Woods, where they built themselves Huts, to preserve from the violence of the weather those few Goods they had carried with them. The Pirats judged themselves to be deceived by the said Peasant; and hereupon, to revenge their wrath upon him, notwithstanding all the excuses he could make, and his humble supplications for his life, they hanged him upon a Tree. Who is hanged. After this, they divided into several parties, and went to search the Plantations. For they knew the Spaniards that were absconded could not live upon what they found in the Woods, without coming now and then to seek provisions at their own Country-houses. Here they found
a certain Slave, unto whom they promised moun∣tains A Slave bri∣bed wi promise▪ of Gold, and that they would give him his liberty by transporting him unto Iamaica, in case he would shew them the places where the Inha∣bitants of Gibraltar lay hidden. This fellow conducted them unto a party of Spaniards, whom they instantly made all Prisoners, commanding the said Slave to kill some of them before the eyes of the rest; to the intent that by this per∣petrted crime, he might never be able to leave their wicked company. The Negro, according Horrid fact! to their orders, committed many murthers and insolent actions upon the Spaniards, and followed the unfortunate traces of the Pirats. Who after the space of eight days, returned unto Gibraltar with many prisoners, and some Mules laden with Riches. They examined every prisoner by him∣self (who were in all about two hundred and fifty persons) where they had absconded the rest of their Goods, and if they knew of their fellow-Townsmen. Such as would not confess, were tormented after a most cruel and inhumane man∣ner. Among the rest, there happened to be a certain Portuguese, who by the information of a Negro was reported, though falsly, to be very Cruel usage of a Portu∣guese. rich. This man was commanded to produce his Riches. But his answer was, he had no more than one hundred Pieces of Eight in the whole world, and that these had been stolen from him
two days before, by a Servant of his. Which words, although he sealed with many Oaths and Protestations, yet they would not believe him. But dragging him unto the Rack, without any regard unto his age, as being threescore years old, they stretcht him with Cords, breaking both his arms behind his shoulders. This cruelty went not alone. For he not be∣ing able or willing to make any other declara∣tion They put him to more torments. than the abovesaid, they put him to another sort of torment that was worser, and more barba∣rous than the precedent. They tyed him with small Cords by his two thumbs and great toes unto four stakes that were fixt in the ground at a convenient distance, the whole weight of his body being pendent in the air upon those Cords. Then they thrasht upon the Cords with great Sticks and all their strength, so that the body of this miserable man was ready to perish at every stroke, under the severity of those horrible pains. Not satisfied, as yet, with this cruel torture, they took a stone which weighed above two hundred pound, and laid it upon his belly, as if they in∣tended to press him to death. At which time they also kindled Palm-leaves, and applied the nd more. flame unto the face of this unfortunate Portu∣guese, burning with them the whole skin, beard, and hair At last these cruel Tyrants seeing that neither with these tortures nor others they could
get any thing out of him, they untyed the Cords, and carried him, being almost half dead, unto the Church, where was their Corps du Garde. Here they tyed him anew unto one of the pillats there∣of, leaving him in that condition, without giving him either to eat or drink, unless very sparingly, and so little as would scarce sustain life, for some days. Four or five being past, he desired that one of the prisoners might have the liberty to come unto him, by whose means he promised he would endeavour to raise some money to satisfie their demands. The prisonér whom he required, was brought unto him; and he order'd him to promise the Pirats five hundred Pieces of Eight for his ransom. But they were both deaf and obstinate at such a small sum, and instead of ac∣cepting it, did beat him cruelly with Cudgels, saying unto him, Old fellow, instead of five hun∣dred, you must say, five hundred thousand Pieces of Eight; otherwise you shall here end your life. Fi∣nally, after a thousand Protestations that he was but a miserable man, and kept a poor Tavern for his living, he agreed with them for the sum of one thousand Pieces of Eight. These he raised in few days, and having paid them unto the Pi∣rats, got his liberty; although so horribly maim∣ed in his body, that 'tis scarce to be believed he could supervive many weeks after. Several other tortures besides these, were exer∣cised
upon others, which this Portuguese endured not. Some were hang'd up by the Testicles, or Many others tortur'd very cruelly. by their privy Members, and left in that condi∣tion till they fell unto the ground, those private parts being torn from their bodies. If with this they were minded to shew themselves merciful to those wretches, thus lacerated in the most tender parts of their bodies, their mercy was to run them through and through with their Swords; and by this means rid them soon of their pains and lives. Otherwise, if this were not done, they used to lie four or five days under the agonies of death, before dying. Others were crucified by these Whereof mst die. Tyrants, and with kindled Matches were burnt between the joynts of their fingers and toes. O∣thers had their feet put into the fire, and thus were left to be roasted alive. At last, having u∣sed both these and other Cruelties with the White men, they began to practise the same over again with the Negro's their Slaves; who were treated with no less inhumanity than their Masters. Among these Slaves was found one who pro∣mised Captain Morgan to conduct him unto a Discovery made by a Slave. certain River belonging to the Lake, where he should find a Ship and four Boats richly laden with Goods that belonged unto the Inhabitants of Maraicabo. The same Slave discovered like∣wise the place where the Governour of Gibral∣tar lay hidden, together with the greatest part of
the women of the Town. But all this he revea∣led, through great menaces wherewith they threatned to hang him, in case he told not what he knew. Captain Morgan sent away presently two hundred men in two Saëties, or great Boats, towards the River abovementioned, to seek for what the Slave had discovered. But he himself, with two hundred and fifty more, undertook to go and take the Governour. This Gentleman They go to take the Go∣vernour. was retired unto a small Island seated in the mid∣dle of the River, where he had built a little Fort, after the best manner he could, for his defence. But hearing that Captain Morgan came in person But he reti∣reth. with great Forces to seek him, he retired farther off unto the top of a Mountain not much distant from that place; unto which there was no as∣cent, but by a very narrow passage. Yea, this was so streight, that whosoever did pretend to gain the ascent, must of necessity cause his men to pass one by one. Captain Morgan spent two days be∣fore he could arrive at the little Island abovemen∣tioned. From thence he designed to proceed unto the Mountain where the Governour was posted, had he not been told of the impossibility he should find in the ascent; not onely for the narrowness of the path that led to the top, but also because the Governour was very well provi∣ded with all sorts of Ammunition above. Be∣sides that, there was fallen an huge Rain, where∣by
all the Baggage belonging to the Pirats, and their Powder, was wet. By this Rain also they had lost many of their men at the passage over a River that was overflown. Here perished likewise some women and children, and many Mules laden with Plate and other Goods; all which they had taken in the Fields from the fu∣gitive Inhabitants. So that all things were in a very bad condition with Captain Morgan, and the bodies of his men as much harrassed, as ought to be inferr'd from this relation. Whereby, if the Spaniards in that juncture of time had had but a Troop of fifty men well arm'd with Pikes or Spears, they might have entirely destroyed the Pirats, without any possible resistance on their They give o∣ver the En∣terprize through bad weather. sides. But the fears which the Spaniards had conceived from the beginning, were so great, that onely hearing the leaves on the Trees to stir, they often fancied them to be Pirats. Finally, Cap∣tain Morgan and his People having upon this march sometimes waded up to their middles in water for the space of half or whole miles toge∣ther, they at last escaped for the greatest part. But of the women and children that they brought home prisoners, the major part died. Thus 12 days after they set forth to seek theGo∣vernour, Th return  Gibral∣tar. they returned unto Gibraltar with a great number of prisoners. Two days after, arrived also the two Saëties that went unto the River, bringing
with them four Boats and some prisoners. But as to the greatest part of the Merchandize that were in the said Boats, they found them not, the Spaniards having unladed and secured them, as having intelligence before-hand of the coming of the Pirats. Whereupon they designed also, when the Merchandize were all taken out, to burn the Boats. Yet the Spaniards made not so much haste as was requisite to unlade the said Vessels, but that they left both in the Ship and A Ship and four Boats taken. Boats great parcels of Goods, which, they being fled from thence, the Pirats seized, and brought thereof a considerable Booty unto Gibraltar. Thus after they had been in possession of the place five entire weeks, and committed there in∣finite number of Murthers, Robberies, Rapes, and such-like Insolencies, they concluded upon their departure. But before this could be per∣formed, for the last proof of their tyranny they gave orders unto some prisoners to go forth into the Woods and Fields, and collect a Ransom for Ransom for fire demand∣ed. the Town; otherwise they would certainly burn every house down to the ground. Those poor afflicted men went forth as they were sent. And after they had searched every corner of the ad∣joyning Fields and Woods, they returned unto Captain Morgan, telling him, they had scarce been able to find any body. But that unto such as they had found, they had proposed his de∣mands;
to which they had made answer, that the Governour had prohibited them to give any Ransom for not burning the Town. But not∣withstanding any prohibition to the contrary, they beseeched him to have a little patience, and among themselves they would collect to the sum of five thousand Pieces of Eight. And for the 5000 Pieces of Eight granted. rest, they would give him some of their own Townsmen as Hostages, whom he might carry with him to Maracaibo, till such time as he had received full satisfaction. Captain Morgan having now been long time They return to Maracai∣bo absent from Maracaibo, and knowing the Spani∣ards had had sufficient time wherein to fortifie themselves, and hinder his departure out of the Lake, granted them their Proposition abovemen∣tioned; and withal, made as much haste as he could to set things in order for his departure. He gave liberty to all the prisoners, having be∣fore-hand put them every one to the ransom; yet he detained all the Slaves with him. They delivered unto him four persons that were agreed upon for Hostages of what sums of money more he was to receive from them: and they desired to have the Slave of whom we made mention a∣bove, intending to punish him according to his deserts. But Captain Morgan would not deliver him, being perswaded they would burn him a∣live. At last they weighed Anchor, and set sail
with all the haste they could, directing their course towards Maracaibo. Here they arrived in four days, and found all things in the same po∣sture they had left them when they departed. Yet here they received news, from the informa∣tion of a poor distressed old man, who was sick, and whom alone they found in the Town, That three Spanish Men of War were arrived at the News of three Spanish Men of War. entry of the Lake, and there waited for the re∣turn of the Pirats out of those parts. Moreover, that the Castle at the entry thereof, was again put into a good posture of defence, being well provided with great Guns and men, and all sorts of Ammunition. This relation of the old man could not chuse They send to view them. but cause some disturbance in the mind of Cap∣tain Morgan, who now was careful how to get a∣way through those narrow passages of the entry of the Lake. Hereupon he sent one of his Boats, the swiftest he had, to view the entry, and see if things were as they had been related. The next day the Boat came back, confirming what was said, and assuring, they had viewed the Ships so nigh, that they had been in great danger of the shot they had made at them. Hereunto they added, that the biggest Ship was mounted with forty Guns, the second with thirty, and the smal∣lest with four and twenty. These Forces were much beyond those of Captain Morgan; and
hence they caused a general consternation in all the Pirats, whose biggest Vessel had not above fourteen small Guns. Every one judged Cap∣tain Morgan to despond in his mind, and be de∣stitute of all manner of hopes, considering the difficulty either of passing safely with his little Fleet amidst those great Ships and the Fort, or Capt. Morg. much concer∣ned. that he must perish. How to escape any other way by Sea or by Land, they saw no opportuni∣ty nor convenience. Onely they could have wished that those three Ships had rather come o∣ver the Lake to seek them at Maracaibo, than to remain at the mouth of the Streight where they were. For at that passage they must of necessi∣ty fear the ruine of their Fleet, which consisted onely for the greatest part of Boats. Hereupon, being necessitated to act as well as he could, Captain Morgan resumed new courage, A Message to the Spa∣nish Admiral and resolved to shew himself, as yet, undaunted with these terrours. To this intent he boldly sent a Spaniard unto the Admiral of those three Ships, demanding of him a considerable Tribute or Ransom for not putting the City of Mara∣caibo to the flame. This man (who doubtless was received by the Spaniards with great admira∣tion of the confidence and boldness of those Pi∣rats) returned two days after, bringing unto Captain Morgan a Letter from the said Admiral, whose Contents were as followeth.
Letter of Don Alonso del Campo and Espinosa, Ad∣miral of the Spanish Fleet, unto Captain Mor∣gan Commander of the Pirats. HAving understood by all our Friends and His Answer. Neighbours, the unexpected news, that you have dared to attempt and commit Hostilities in the Countries, Cities, Towns, and Villages belonging un∣to the Dominions of his Catholick Majesty, my sove∣raign Lord and Master; I let you understand by these lines, that I am come unto this place, according to my obligation, nigh unto that Castle which you took out of the hands of a parcel of Cowards; where I have put things into a very good posture of de∣fence, and mounted again the Artillery which you had nailed and dismounted. My intent is to dis∣pute with you your passage out of the Lake, and fol∣low and pursue you every-where, to the end you may see the performance of my duty. Notwithstanding, if you be contented to surrender with humility all that you have taken, together with the Slaves and all other prisoners, I will let you freely pass, with∣out trouble or molestation; upon condition that you retire home presently unto your own Country. But in case that you make any resistance or opposition un∣these things that I proffer unto you, I do assure you I will command Boats to come from Caracas, where∣in I will put my Troops, and coming to Maracaibo,
will cause you utterly to perish, by putting you every man to the sword. This is my last and absolute re∣solution. Be prudent therefore, and do not abuse my bounty with ingratitude. I have with me very good Souldiers, who desire nothing more ardently, than to revenge on you and your People, all the cru∣elties and base infamous actions you have committed upon the Spanish Nation in America. Dated on board the Royal Ship named the Magdalen, lying at Anchor at the entry of the Lake of Maracaibo, this 24th day of April, 1669. Don Alonso del Campo y Espinosa. As soon as Captain Morgan had received this Letter, he called all his men together in the Market-place of Maracaibo; and after reading the They read it in publick. Contents thereof, both in French and English, he asked their advice and resolutions upon the whole matter, and whether they had rather sur∣render all they had purchased, to obtain their li∣berty, than fight for it? They answered all unanimously, They had rather fight, and spill the very last drop of bloud they had in their veins, than surrender so easily the Booty they had gotten with so much danger of their lives. Among the rest, one was found Advice given by one of the Pirats. who said unto Captain Morgan, Take you care for
the rest, and I will undertake to destroy the biggest of those Ships with onely twelve men. The manner shall be, by making a Brulot or Fire-ship of that Vessel we took in the River of Gibraltar. Which, to the intent she may not be known for a Fire-ship, we will fill her Decks with logs of wood, standing with Hats and Montera-caps, to deceive their sight with the representation of men. The same we will do at the Port-holes that serve for the Guns, which shall be filled with counterfeit Cannon. At the Stern we will hang out the English Colours, and perswade the Enemy she is one of our best Men of War that goeth to fight them. This Proposition being heard by the Iunta, was admitted and ap∣proved Which is ap∣proved by all of by every one; howbeit their fears were not quite dispersed. For notwithstanding what had been conclu∣ded there, they endeavoured the next day to see if they could come to an accommodation with Don Alonso. Unto this effect Captain Morgan Propositions of accommo∣dation. sent him two persons, with these following Pro∣positions. First, That he would quit Maracaibo, without doing any damage to the Town, nor exacting any Ransom for the firing thereof. Secondly, That he would set at liberty the one half of the Slaves, and likewise all other Prisoners, without Ransom. Thirdly, That he would send home freely the four chief Inhabitants of Gibraltar, which he had in his custody as Hostages for the Contributions those people
had promised to pay. These Propositions from the Pirats being understood by Don Alonso, were instantly rejected every one, as being dishonou∣rable for him to grant. Neither would he hear But all reje∣cted. any word more of any other accommodation; but sent back this Message: That in case they surrendred not themselves voluntarily into his hands, within the space of two days, under the Conditions which he had offered them by his Letter, he would immediately come and force them to do it. No sooner had Captain Morgan received this Message from Don Alonso, than he put all things They resolve  fight. in order to fight, resolving to get out of the Lake by main force, and without surrendring any thing. In the first place, he commanded all the Slaves and Prisoners to be tyed and guarded very well. After this, they gathered all the Pitch, Tar, and Brimstone they could find in the whole Town, therewith to prepare the Fire-ship above∣mentioned. Stratagem against the Spanish Fleet. Likewise they made several inven∣tions of Powder and Brimstone, with great quan∣tity of Palm-leaves, very well ointed with Tar. They covered very well their counterfeit Can∣non, laying under every piece thereof, many pounds of Powder. Besides which, they cut down many out-works belonging to the Ship, to the end the Powder might exert its strength the better. Thus they broke open also new Port∣holes; where, instead of Guns they placed little
Drums, of which the Negro's make use. Final∣ly, the Decks were handsomly beset with many pieces of wood dressed up in the shape of men with Hats, or Montera's, and likewise armed with Swords, Muskets, and Bandeleers. The Brulot or Fire-ship being thus sitted to their purpose, they prepared themselves to go to They go to the Port. the entry of the Port. All the prisoners were put into one great Boat, and in another of the biggest they placed all the Women, Plate, Jew∣els, and other rich things which they had. Into others they put all the bales of Goods and Mer∣chandize, and other things of greatest bulk. Each of these Boats had twelve men on board, very well armed. The Brulot had orders to go before the rest of the Vessels, and presently to fall foul with the great Ship. All things being in a readiness, Captain Morgan exacted an Oath All are sworn to fight. of all his Comrades, whereby they protested to defend themselves against the Spaniards, even to the last drop of bloud, without demanding quar∣ter at any rate: promising them withal, that whosoever thus behaved himself, should be very well rewarded. With this disposition of mind, and couragious resolution, they set sail to seek the Spaniards, on the 30th day of April 1669. They found the Spanish Fleet riding at Anchor in the middle of the entry of the Lake. Captain Morgan, it being
now late, and almost dark, commanded all his Vessels to come to an Anchor; with designe to They arrive about night at the Spa∣nish Fleet. fight from thence even all night, if they should provoke him thereunto. He gave orders that a careful and vigilant Watch should be kept on board every Vessel till the morning, they being almost within shot, as well as within sight of the Enemy. The dawning of the day being come, they weighed Anchors, and set sail again, stee∣ring their course directly towards the Spaniards; who observing them to move, did instantly the same. The Fire-ship sailing before the rest, fell presently upon the great Ship, and grappled to They destroy the Spanish Vssels. her sides in a short while. Which by the Spa∣niards being perceived to be a Fire-ship, they at∣tempted to escape the danger by putting her off; but in vain, and too late. For the flame sud∣denly seized her Timber and Tackling, and in a short space consumed all the Stern, the forepart sinking into the Sea, whereby she perished. The second Spanish Ship perceiving the Admiral to burn, not by accident, but by industry of the E∣nemy, escaped towards the Castle, where the Spaniards themselves caused her to sink; chu∣sing this way of losing their Ship, rather than to fall into the hands of those Pirats, which they held for inevitable. The third, as having no oppor∣tunity nor time to escape, was taken by the Pi∣rats. The Sea-men that sank the second Ship
The Spanish Armada destroyed by Captaine Morgan Part. 2. Page. 13
nigh unto the Castle, perceiving the Pirats to come towards them to take what remains they could find of their Shipwrack, (for some part of the Bulk was extant above water) set fire in like manner unto this Vessel, to the end the Pi∣rats might enjoy nothing of that spoil. The first Ship being set on fire, some of the persons that were in her swam towards the shore. These the Pirats would have taken up in their Boats; but they would neither ask nor admit of any quarter, chusing rather to lose their lives, than receive them from the hands of their Persecu∣tors, for such reasons as I shall relate hereaf∣ter. The Pirats were extreamly gladded at this signal Victory obtained in so short a time, and with so great inequality of Forces; whereby they conceived greater pride in their minds than they had before. Hereupon they all presently They attempt to take the Castle. ran ashore, intending to take the Castle. This they found very well provided both with men, great Cannon and Ammunition; they having no other Arms than Muskets, and a few Fire-balls in their hands. Their own Artillery they thought incapable, for its smalness, of making any consi∣derable breach in the Walls. Thus they spent the rest of that day, firing at the Garison with their Muskets, till the dusk of the evening; at But in vain. which time they attempted to advance nigher
unto the Walls, with intent to throw in the Fire-balls. But the Spaniards resolving to sell their lives as dear as they could, continued firing so furiously at them, as they thought it not con∣venient to approach any nearer, nor persist any longer in that dispute. Thus having experi∣mented the obstinacy of the Enemy, and seeing thirty of their own men already dead, and as many more wounded, they retired unto their Ships. The Spaniards believing the Pirats would re∣turn The Spani∣ards prepare against a new assault. the next day to renew the attack, as also make use of their own Cannon against the Ca∣stle, laboured very hard all night, to put all things in order for their coming. But more par∣ticularly they employed themselves that night in digging down and making plain some little hills and eminent places, from whence possibly the Castle might be offended. But Captain Morgan intended not to come a∣shore again, busying himself the next day in ta∣king prisoners some of the men who still swam Many Spa∣niards taken up swim∣ming. alive upon the Waters, and hoping to get part of the Riches that were lost in the two Ships that perished. Among the rest he took a certain Pilot, who was a stranger, and who belonged unto the lesser Ship of the two, with whom he held much discourse, enquiring of him several things. Such questions were, What number of people those
three Ships had had in them? Whether they ex∣pected any more Ships to come? From what Port they set forth the last time, when they came to seek them out? His answer unto all these que∣stions, was as followeth; which he delivered in the Spanish Tongue: Noble Sir, be pleased to pardon and spare me, that no evil be done unto Speech of a Pilot to Cap. Morg. me, as being a stranger unto this Nation I have served, and I shall sincerely inform you of all that passed till our arrival at this Lake. We were sent by orders from the Supreme Council of State in Spain, being six Men of War well equipped, into these Seas, with instructions to cruze upon the English Pirats, and root them out from these parts by destroying as many of them as we could.These Orders were given, by reason of the news brought unto the Court of Spain of the loss and ruine of Puerto Velo, and other places. Of all which Damages and Hostilities commit∣ted here by the English, very dismal lamenta∣tions have often-times penetrated the ears both of the Catholick King and Council, unto whom belongeth the care and preservation of this new World. And although the Spanish Court hath many times by their Embassadours sent Com∣plaints hereof unto the King of England; yet it hath been the constant answer of his Majesty of Great Britain, That he never gave any Let∣ters-patents
nor Commissions for the acting any Hostility whatsoever, against the Subjects of the King of Spain. Hereupon the Catholick King, being resolved to revenge his Subjects, and pu∣nish these proceedings, commanded six Men of War to be equipped; which he sent into these parts under the command of Don Augustin de Bustos, who was constituted Admiral of the said Fleet. He commanded the biggest Ship there∣of, named Na Sa de la Soledad, mounted with eight and forty great Guns, and eight small ones: The Vice-Admiral was Don Alonso del Campo y Espinosa, who commanded the second Ship cal∣led la Concepcion, which carried forty four great Guns, and eight small ones. Besides which Vessels, there were also four more; whereof the first was named the Magdalen, and was mounted with thirty six great Guns, and twelve small ones, having on board two hun∣dred and fifty men. The second was called St. Lewis, with twenty six great Guns, twelve small ones, and two hundred men. The third was called la Marquesa, which carried sixteen great Guns, eight small ones, and one hundred and fifty men. The fourth and last, Na Sa del Carmen, with eighteen great Guns, eight small ones, and likewise one hundred and fifty men.We were now arrived at Cartagena, when the
two greatest Ships received orders to return in∣to Spain, as being judged too big for cruzing upon these Coasts. With the four Ships re∣maining, Don Alonso del Campo y Espinosa de∣parted from thence towards Campeche, to seek out the English. We arrived at the Port of the said City, where being surprized by a huge Storm that blew from the North, we lost one of our four Ships; being that which I named in the last place among the rest. From hence we set fail for the Isle of Hispaniola; in sight of which we came within few days, and directed our course unto the Port of Santo Domingo. Here we received intelligence there had passed that way a Fleet from Iamaica, and that some men thereof having landed at a place called Al∣ta Gracia, the Inhabitants had taken one of them prisoner, who confessed their whole de∣signe was to go and pillage the City of Caracas. With these news Don Alonso instantly weighed Anchor, and set sail from thence, crossing over unto the Continent, till we came in sight of Ca∣racas. Here we found not the English; but happened to meet with a Boat which certified us they were in the Lake of Maracaibo, and that the Fleet consisted of seven small Ships and one Boat.Upon this intelligence we arrived here; and coming nigh unto the entry of the Lake, we
shot off a Gun to demand a Pilot from the shore. Those on land perceiving that we were Spaniards, came willingly unto us with a Pilot, and told us that the English had taken the City of Maracai∣bo, and that they were at present at the pillage of Gibraltar. Don Alonso having understood this news, made a handsom Speech unto all his Soul∣diers and Mariners, encouraging them to per∣form their duty, and withal promising to divide among them all they should take from the En∣glish. After this, he gave order that the Guns which we had taken out of the Ship that was lost, should be put into the Castle, and there mounted for its defence, with two pieces more out of his own Ship, of eighteen pounds port each. The Pilots conducted us into the Port, and Don Alonso commanded the people that were on shore to come unto his presence, unto whom he gave orders to repossess the Castle, and re-enforce it with one hundred men more than it had before its being taken by the English. Not long after, we received news that you were returned from Gibraltar unto Maracaibo; unto which place Don Alonso wrote you a Letter, giving you account of his arrival and designe, and withal exhorting you to restore all that you had taken. This you refused to do; whereupon he renewed his promises and intentions unto his Souldiers and Sea-men. And
having given a very good Supper unto all his People, he perswaded them neither to take nor give any quarter unto the English that should fall into their hands. This was the occasion of so many being drowned, who dared not to crave any quarter for their lives, as knowing their own intentions of giving none. Two days before you came against us, a certain Negro came on board Don Alonso's Ship, telling him, Sir, be pleased to have great care of your self; for the English have prepared a Fire-ship with designe to burn your Fleet. But Don Alonso would not be∣lieve this intelligence, his answer being, How can that be? Have they, peradventure, wit e∣nough to build a Fire-ship? or what Instruments have they to do it withal? The Pilot abovementioned having related so distinctly all the aforesaid things unto Captain The Pilot is received into service. Morgan, was very well used by him, and after some kind proffers made unto him, remained in his service. He discovered moreover unto Capt. Morgan, that in the Ship which was sunk, there was a great quantity of Plate, even to the value of forty thousand Pieces of Eight. And that this was certainly the occasion they had oftentimes seen He maketh a discovery. the Spaniards in Boats about the said Ship. Here∣upon Capt. Morgan ordered that one of his Ships should remain there to watch all occasions of get∣ting out of the said Vessel what Plate they could.
In the mean while he himself, with all his Fleet, returned unto Maracaibo, where he refitted the great Ship he had taken of the three aforemen∣tioned. They return to Maracai∣bo. And now being well accommodated, he chose it for himself; giving his own bottom to one of his Captains. After this he sent again a Messenger unto the Rasom for fire demand∣d anw. Admiral, who was escaped on shore and got into the Castle, demanding of him a Tribute or Ran∣som of fire for the Town of Maracaibo; which being denied, he threatned he would entirely consume and destroy it. The Spaniards consi∣dering how unfortunate they had been all along with those Pirats, and not knowing after what manner to get rid of them, concluded among themselves to pay the said Ransom, although Don Alonso would not consent unto it. Hereupon they sent unto Captain Morgan to ask what sum he demanded. He answered them, he would have thirty thousand Pieces of Eight, and five hundred Beeves, to the intent his Fleet might be well victualled with flesh. This Ran∣som being paid, he promised in such case he would give no farther trouble unto the prisoners, nor cause any ruine or damage unto the Town. Finally, they agreed with him upon the sum of twenty thousand Pieces of Eight, besides the five  i∣ces of Eight granted and 500 Beeves. hundred Beeves. The Cattel the Spaniards brought in the next day, together with one part
of the money. And while the Pirats were busi∣ed in salting the Flesh, they returned with the rest of the whole sum of twenty thousand Pieces of Eight, for which they had agreed. But Captain Morgan would not deliver, for that present, the prisoners, as he had promised to do, by reason he feared the shot of the Artille∣ry of the Castle at his going forth of the Lake. Hereupon he told them he intended not to deli∣ver them, till such time as he was out of that dan∣ger; hoping by this means to obtain a free pas∣sage. Thus he set sail with all his Fleet in quest of that Ship which he had lest behind, to seek for the Plate of the Vessel that was burnt. He found her upon the place, with the sum of fifteen thou∣sand 15000 Pie∣ces of Eight out of the wrack. Pieces of Eight, which they had purchased out of the wrack; besides many other pieces of Plate, as hilts of Swords, and other things of this kind. Also great quantity of Pieces of Eight that were melted and run together by the force of the fire of the said Ship. Captain Morgan scarce thought himself secure, neither could he contrive how to evite the dama∣ges the said Castle might cause unto his Fleet. Hereupon he told the prisoners it was necessary they should agree with the Governour to open the passage with security for his Fleet. Unto which point if he should not consent, he would certainly hang them all up in his Ships. After
this warning, the prisoners met together to con∣fer upon the persons they should depute unto the said Governour Don Alonso; and they assign'd some few among them for that Embassie. These went A Mssage to the Castle. unto him, beseeching and supplicating the Admi∣ral he would have compassion and pity on those afflicted prisoners who were as yet, together with their Wives and Children, in the hands of Cap∣tain Morgan. And that unto this effect he would be pleased to give his word to let the whole Fleet of Pirats freely pass, without any molestation. Forasmuch as this would be the onely remedy of faving both the lives of them that came with this Petition, as also of those who remained behind in captivity; all being equally menaced with the Sword and gallows, in case he granted not this humble Request. But Don Alonso gave them for answer a sharp reprehension of their cowardize, telling them, If you had been as loyal unto your King in hindring the entry of these Pirats, as I shall Free passage denied. do their going out, you had never caused these trou∣bles neither unto your selves, nor unto our whole Na∣tion; which hath suffered so much through your pusillanimity. In a word, I shall never grant your Request; but shall endeavour to maintain that re∣spect which is due unto my King, according to my duty. Thus the Spaniards returned unto their fel∣low-prisoners, with much consternation of mind,
and no hopes of obtaining their Request; tel∣ling unto Captain Morgan what answer they had received. His reply was. If Don Alonso will not let me pass, I will find means how to do it with∣out Reply of Capt. Morg. him. Hereupon he began presently to make a Dividend of all the Booty they had taken in that Voyage, fearing left he might not have an opportunity of doing it in another place; if a∣ny Tempest should arise and separate the Ships. As also being jealous that any of the Comman∣ders might run away with the best part of the Spoil; which then did lie much more in one Vessel than another. Thus they all brought in, according to their Laws, and declared what they had; having before-hand made an Oath not to conceal the least thing from the publick. The accounts being cast up, they found to the value The Spoil a∣mounteth to above 250000 Pieces of Eight. of two hundred and fifty thousand Pieces of Eight in Money and Jewels, besides the huge quantity of Merchandize and Slaves. All which Purchase was divided unto every Ship or Boat, ac∣cording to their share. The Dividend being made, the Question still remained on foot, how they should pass the Ca∣stle, and get out of the Lake. Unto this effect they made use of a Stratagem, of no ill invention, which was as followeth. On the day that pre∣ceded the night wherein they determined to get Curious Stratagem to get away. forth, they embarked many of their men in Ca∣nows,
and rowed towards the shore, as if they designed to land them. Here they concealed themselves under the branches of Trees that hang over the coast, for a while, till they had laid themselves down along in the Boats. Then the Canows returned unto the Ships, with the onely appearance of two or three men rowing them back, all the rest being concealed at the bottom of the Canows. Thus much onely could be perceived from the Castle; and this action of false-landing of men, for so we may call it, was repeated that day several times. Hereby the Spaniards were brought into perswasion the Pi∣rats intended to force the Castle by scaling it, as soon as night should come. This fear caused them to place most of their great Guns on that side which looketh towards the Land, together with the main force of their Arms, leaving the contrary side belonging to the Sea, almost desti∣tute of strength and defence. Night being come, they weighed Anchor, and by the light of the Moon, without setting sail, They weigh Anchors. committed themselves to the ebbing Tyde, which gently brought them down the River, till they were nigh unto the Castle. Being now almost over against it, they spread their Sails with all And get by the Castle. the haste they could possibly make. The Spa∣niards perceiving them to escape, transported with all speed their Guns from the other side of
the Castle, and began to fire very furiously at the Pirats. But these having a favourable wind, were almost past the danger, before those of the Castle could put things into convenient order of offence. So that the Pirats lost not many of their men, nor received any considerable damage in their Ships. Being now out of the reach of the Guns, Captain Morgan sent a Canow unto the Castle with some of the prisoners; and the Go∣vernour thereof gave them a Boat that every one The prisone sent home. might return to his own home. Notwithstand∣ing, he detained the Hostages he had from Gi∣braltar, Excepting those of Gi∣braltar. by reason, those of that Town were not as yet come to pay the rest of the Ransom for not firing the place. Just as he departed, Captain Morgan ordered seven great Guns with Bullets to be fired against the Castle, as it were to take his leave of them. But they answered not so much as with a Musket-shot. The next day after their departure, they were surprized with a great Tempest, which forced them to cast Anchor in the depth of five or six A great Storm taketh them. fathom water. But the Storm increased so much, that they were compelled to weigh again, and put out to Sea, where they were in great danger of being lost. For if on either side they should have been cast on shore, either to fall into the hands of the Spaniards, or of the Indians, they would certainly have obtained no mercy. At
last the Tempest being spent, the Wind ceased; which caused much content and joy in the whole Fleet. Mean while Captain Morgan made his fortune by pillaging the Towns abovementioned, the rest of his Companions, who separated from his Fleet Their Com∣panions who were left at Cape de Lo∣os. at the Cape de Los for to take the Ship of which was spoken before, endured much misery, and were very unfortunate in all their attempts. For being arrived at the Isle of Savona, they found not Captain Morgan there, nor any one of their Companions. Neither had they the good for∣tune to finde a Letter which Captain Morgan at his departure left behind him in a certain place, where in all probability they would meet with it. Thus, not knowing what course to steer, they at last concluded to pillage some Town or other, whereby to seek their fortune. They were in all four hundred men, more or less; who were divided into four Ships and one Boat. Being ready to set forth, they constituted an Admiral among themselves, by whom they might be di∣rected in the whole affair. Unto this effect they chose a certain person who had behaved himself very couragiously at the taking of Puerto Velo, and whose name was Captain Hansel. This Com∣mander resolved to attempt the taking of the Town of Commana, seated upon the Continent of Caracas, nigh threescore leagues from the West∣side
of the Isle de la Trinidad. Being arrived there, they landed their men, and killed some few Indians that were near unto the coast. But approaching unto the Town, the Spaniards, ha∣ving in their company many Indians, disputed Beaten by the Spaniards. them the entry so briskly, that with great loss, and in great confusion, they were forced to retire to∣wards their Ships. At last they arrived at Ia∣maica, where the rest of their Companions who came with Captain Morgan, ceased not to mock and ear them for their ill success at Ca, often telling them, Let us see what money you brought from Commana, and if it be as good Sil∣ver as that which we bring from Maracaibo.
BOOKS Printed for William Crooke this Year 1684. 1. A New Survey of the present State of Europe, containing Remarks upon several Sovereign and Republican States, with Mes Historical, Chronological, Topographical, Hy∣drographical, Political, &c. By G. Pontier, Chief Prothe∣noter of Rome. Englished by John Beaumount, Author of the Weekly, Memorials. In 8 price bound 2 s. 6 d. 2. The Reports of Edward Littleton, Lord Keeper of Eng∣land. In Folio, price bound 12 s. 3. The Graecian Story, being an Historical Poem, in Five Books in imitation of the Fairy Queen and Gondibert. To which is annexed the Grove. By J. H. Esq 4o price bound 4 s. 4. A Discourse about Conscience, relating to the present Differences among us, in opposition to both Extreams, of Po∣pery and Fanaticism. 4o. price 6d.
BUCANIERS OF AMERICA. PART III. CHAP. I. Captain Morgan goeth to the Isle of Hi∣spaniola, to equipp a new Fleet, with intent to pillage again upon the Coasts of the West-Indies. CAptain Morgan perceived now that For∣tune did favour his Arms, by giving good Success unto all his Enterprizes, which occasion'd him, as it is usual in humane Affairs, to aspire unto greater things, trusting she would al∣ways be constant unto him. Such was the burn∣ing of Panama; wherein Fortune failed not to as∣sist him, in like manner as she had done before, crowning the Event of his Actions with Victory, howbeit she had led him thereunto through thou∣sands of Difficulties. The History hereof I shall
now begin to relate, as being so much remarka∣ble in all its Circumstances, as peradventure no∣thing more deserving Memory, may occur to be read by future Ages. Not long after Captain Morgan arrived at Iamai∣ca, he found many of his chief Officers and Soul∣diers reduced to their former state of Indigency, through their immoderate Vices and Debauchery. Hence they ceased not to importune him for new Invasions and Exploits, thereby to get something Captain Morgan de∣signeth  Expions. to expend anew in Wine and Strumpets, as they had already wasted what was purchased so little before. Captain Morgan being willing to follow Fortune while she call'd him, hereupon stopp'd the mouths of many of the Inhabitants of Iamaica, who were Creditors unto his Men for large summs of Money, with the hopes and promises he gave them, of greater Atchievments than ever, by a new Expedition he was going about. This being done, he needed not give himself much trouble, to levy Men for this or any other Enter∣prize, his Name being now so famous through all those Islands, as that alone would readily bring him in more Men than he could well imploy. He undertook therefore to equipp a new Fleet of Ships; for which purpose he assigned the South∣side of the Isle of Tortùga, as a Place of Rendez∣vous. With this resolution, he writ divers Let∣ters He writth to several Persons. unto all the ancient and expert Pirats there in∣habiting,
as also to the Governour of the said Isle, and to the Planters and Hunters of Hispaniola, gi∣ving them to understand his Intentions, and desi∣ring their Appearance at the said Place, in case they intended to go with him. All these people had no sooner understood his Designs, but they flocked unto the Place assigned in huge numbers, Multitudes flock unto him. with Ships, Canows, and Boats, being desirous to obey his Commands. Many who had not the convenience of coming unto him by Sea, traver∣sed the Woods of Hispaniola, and with no small Difficulties arrived there by Land. Thus all were present at the place assigned, and in a readiness, against the 24th. day of October of 1670. Captain Morgan was not wanting to be there ac∣cording Captain Morgan ar∣riveth to meet them. to his punctual custom, who came in his Ship unto the same side of the Island, to a Port called by the French, Port Couillon, over against the Island de la Vaca, this being the Place which he had assigned unto others. Having now gathe∣red the greatest part of his Fleet, he called a And calleth a Councel. Councel, to deliberate about the means of finding Provisions sufficient for so many People. Here they concluded to send four Ships, and one Boat, manned with 400 Men, over to the Continent, to the intent they should rifle some Countrey-Towns and Villages, and in these get all the Corn or Maiz they could gather. They set Sail for the Continent, towards the River de la Hacha, They sd to seek Provisi∣ons. with design to assault a small Village, called la
Rancheria, where is usually to be found the great∣est quantity of Maiz, of all those Parts there∣abouts. In the mean while Captain Morgan sent another Party of his Men to hunt in the Woods, who killed there an huge number of Beasts, and salted them: The rest of his Companions re∣mained in the Ships, to clean, fit, and rigg them out to Sea, so that at the return of those who were sent abroad, all things might be in a readiness to weigh Anchors, and follow the course of their Designs. CHAP. II. What happened in the River de la Hacha. THe four Ships above-mentioned, after they had set Sail from Hispaniola, steered their They arrive at the River de la Hacha. course till they came within sight of the River de la Hacha, where they were suddenly overtaken with a tedious Calm. Being thus within sight of Land becalmed for some days, the Spaniards inha∣biting along the Coasts, who had perceived them to be Enemies, had sufficient time to prepare themselves for the Assault, at least to hide the best part of their Goods, to the end that without any care of preserving them, they might be in a readi∣ness
to retire, when they found themselves un∣able to resist the Force of the Pirats, of whose fre∣quent Attempts upon those Coasts, they had al∣ready learnt what they had to do in such Cases. There was in the River at that present a good Ship, which was come from Cartagèna to lade Maiz, and was now when the Pirats came, al∣most ready to depart. The Men belonging to this Ship, endeavoured to escape, but not being able to do it, both they and the Vessel fell into their hands. This was a fit Purchase for their And take a Ship laden with Corn. Mind, as being good part of what they came to seek for, with so much care and toil. The next morning about break of day, they came with their Ships towards the shoar, and landed their Men, They land. although the Spaniards made huge resistance, from a Battery which they had raised on that side, where of necessity they were to land: but not∣withstanding The Spani∣ards oppose them. what defence they could make, they were forced to retire towards a Village, unto which the Pirats followed them. Here the Spani∣ards rallying again, fell upon them with great fu∣ry, and maintained a strong Combat, which last∣ed till night was come: but then perceiving they had lost great number of Men, which was no But in vain. smaller on the Pirats side, they retired unto Pla∣ces more occult in the Woods. The next day when the Pirats saw they were They pursue the Spani∣ards. all fled, and the Town left totally empty of Peo∣ple, they pursued them as far as they could possi∣ble.
In this pursuit they overtook a Party of Spaniards, whom they made all Prisoners, and exercised with most cruel Torments, to discover where they had hid their Goods: some were Many taken and tortur'd. found, who by the force of intolerable Tortures, confessed; but others who would not do the same, were used more barbarously than the former. Thus in the space of 15 days that they remained there, they took many Prisoners, much Plate, and moveable Goods, with all other things they could rob, with which Booty they resolved to re∣turn unto Hispaniola. Yet not contented with what they had already got, they dispatcht some Prisoners into the Woods, to seek for the rest of the Inhabitants, and to demand of them a Ran∣som for not burning the Town: Unto this they answered, They had no Money nor Plate, but in case they would be satisfied with a certain quanti∣ty of Maiz, they would give as much as they could afford. The Pirats accepted this proffer, as being more useful to them at that occasion than ready Money, and agreed they should pay 4000 Hanegs, 4000 Ha∣negs of Maiz given for a Ran∣som. or Bushels of Maiz. These were brought in three days after, the Spaniards being desirous to rid them∣selves as soon as possible, of that inhumane sort of People. Having laded them on board their Ships, together with all the rest of their Purchase, they returned unto the Island of Hispaniola, to give ac∣count They return to Hispani∣ola. unto their Leader Captain Morgan, of all they had performed.
They had now been absent five entire Weeks, about the Commission aforementioned, which long delay occasioned Captain Morgan almost to despair of their Return, as fearing least they were fallen into the hands of the Spaniards, especially considering that the place whereunto they went, could easily be relieved from Cartagèna, and Santa Maria, if the Inhabitants were any thing careful to alarum the Countrey: on the other side he feared, lest they should have made some great Fortune in that Voyage, and with it escaped unto some other place. But at last seeing his Ships return, and in greater number than they had departed, he resu∣med new Courage, this sight causing both in him Great Ioy for their Ar∣rival. and his Companions infinite joy. This was much increased, when being arrived, they found them full laden with Maiz, whereof they stood in great need, for the maintenance of so many people, by whose help they expected great Matters, through the Conduct of their Commander. After that Captain Morgan had divided the said Maiz, as also the Flesh which the Hunters brought in, among all the Ships, according to the number of Men that were in every Vessel, he concluded upon the departure, having viewed before-hand every Ship, and observed their being well equipped and clean. Thus he set Sail, and directed his course towards Cape Tiburòn, where he determined to take his measures and resolution, They depart to Cape Ti∣buron. of what Enterprize he should take in hand. No
sooner were they arrived there, but they met with some other Ships, that came newly to joyn them, from Iamaica. So that now the whole Fleet consisted of 37 Ships, wherein were 2000 7 Sail in all. fighting-Men, besides Mariners and Boys; the Admiral hereof was mounted with 22 great Guns, and 6 small ones, of Brass; the rest carried some 20, some 16, some 18. and the smallest Vessel at least 4. besides which, they had great quantity of Ammunition and Fire-balls, with other Inventions of Powder. Captain Morgan finding himself with such a great number of Ships, divided the whole Fleet The Fleet divided into two Squa∣drons. into two Squadrons, constituting a Vice-Admiral, and other Officers and Commanders of the second Squadron, distinctly from the former. Unto every one of these he gave Letters Patents, or Commissions, to act all manner of Hostility against the Spanish Nation, and take of them what Ships they could, either abroad at Sea, or in the Har∣bours, in like manner as if they were open and declared Enemies (as he term'd it) of the King of England, his pretended Master. This being done, he called all his Captains, and other Offi∣cers together, and caused them to sign some Arti∣cles of common Agreement betwixt them, and Articles of this Voyage. in the Name of all. Herein it was stipulated, that he should have the hundredth part of all that was gotten, to himself alone: That every Cap∣tain should draw the Shares of 8 Men, for the Ex∣pences
of his Ship, besides his own: That the Surgeon, beside his ordinary Pay, should have 200 pieces of Eight, for his Chest of Medica∣ments: And every Carpenter, above his com∣mon Salary, should draw 100 pieces of Eight. As to Recompences and Rewards, they were re∣gulated in this Voyage much higher than was ex∣pressed in the first part of this Book. Thus, for the loss of both Legs, they assigned 1500 pieces of Eight, or 15 Slaves, the Choice being left to the election of the Party. For the loss of both Hands, 1800 pieces of Eight, or 18 Slaves. For one Leg, whether the right or the left, 600 pie∣ces of Eight, or 6 Slaves. For a Hand, as much as for a Leg. And for the loss of any Eye, 100 pieces of Eight, or one Slave. Lastly, Unto him that in any Battel should signalize himself, ei∣ther by entring the first any Castle, or taking down the Spanish Colours, and setting up the English, they constituted 50 pieces of Eight for a Reward. In the head of these Articles it was stipulated, that all these extraordinary Salaries, Recompences and Rewards, should be paid out of the first Spoil or Purchase they should take, according as every one should then occur to be either rewarded or paid. This Contract being signed, Captain Morgan commanded his Vice-Admirals and Captains to put all things in order, every one in their Ships, for to go and attempt one of three Places, either
Cartagena, Panama, or Vera Cruz; but the lot fell Three Places in Delibera∣tion. Panama pitcht upon. upon Panama, as being believed to be the richest of all three: notwithstanding this City being situ∣ated at such distance from the Northern Sea, as they knew not well the Avenues and Entries ne∣cessary to approach unto it, they judg'd it necessa∣ry to go before-hand to the Isle of St. Catharin, They go to take St. Ca∣tharin. there to find and provide themselves with some Persons, who might serve them for Guides in this Enterprize; for in the Garison of that Island, are commonly imployed many Banditi, and Outla∣ries, belonging to Panama, and the neighbouring Places, who are very expert in the knowledge of all that Countrey. But before they proceeded any farther, they caused an Act to be published through the whole Fleet, containing, that in case they met with any Spanish Vessel, the first Cap∣tain who with his Men should enter, and take the said Ship, should have for his Reward the 10th. part of whatsoever should be found within her.
CHAP. III. Captain Morgan leaveth the Island of Hi∣spaniola, and goeth to that of St. Ca∣tharin, which he taketh. CAptain Morgan and his Companions weighed Anchors from the Cape of Tiburon, the They depart from Cape Tiburon. 16th. day of December, in the year 1670. Four days after they arrived within sight of the Isle of St. Catharin, which was now in possession of the Spaniards again, as was said in the Second Part of this History, and unto which they commonly ba∣nish all the Malefactors of the Spanish Dominions i'th' West-Indies. In this Island are found huge quantities of Pidgeons at certain Seasons of the Year; it is watered continually by four Rivulets, or Brooks, whereof two are always dry in Sum∣mer-season. Here is no manner of Trade nor Commerce exercised by the Inhabitants, neither do they give themselves the trouble to plant more Fruits, than what are necessary for the sustentati∣on of humane Life; howbeit the Countrey would be sufficient to make very good Plantati∣ons of Tobacco, which might render considerable Profit, were it cultivated for that use.
As soon as Captain Morgan came nigh unto the And arrive at St. Ca∣tharin. Island with his Fleet, he sent before one of his best sailing Vessels, to view the entry of the Ri∣ver, and see if any other Ships were there, who might hinder him from landing; as also fearing least they should give Intelligence of his Arrival to the Inhabitants of the Island, and they by this means prevent his Designs. The next day before Sun-rising, all the Fleet came to an Anchor nigh unto the Island, in a cer∣tain They come to an Anchor. Bay called Aguada grande: upon this Bay the Spaniards had lately built a Battery, mounted with 4 pieces of Cannon. Captain Morgan landed with 1000 Men, more or less, and disposed them And land 1000 Men. into Squadrons, beginning his March through the Woods, although they had no other Guides than some few of his own Men, who had been there be∣fore, when Mansvelt took and ransackt the Island. The same day they came unto a certain Place, where the Governour at other times did keep his ordinary Residence: here they found a Battery called the Platform, but no body in it, the Spani∣ards having retired unto the lesser Island, which, as was said before, is so nigh unto the great one, that a short Bridge only may conjoyn them. This lesser Island aforesaid was so well fortified with Forts and Batteries round about it, as might The little Island well fortisied. seem impregnable. Hereupon, as soon as the Spaniards perceived the Pirats to approach, they began to fire upon them so furiously, as they could
advance nothing that day, but were contented to retreat a little, and take up their rest upon the Grassi'th' open Fields, which afforded no strange Beds to these People, as being sufficiently used to such kind of Repose: what most afflicted them was Hunger, having not eat the least thing that whole day. About Midnight it began to rain so hard, as those miserable People had much ado to Hard Wea∣ther. resist so much hardship, the greatest part of them having no other Cloaths, than a pair of Seaman's Trowzers, or Breeches, and a Shirt, without ei∣ther Shoos, or Stockings. Thus finding them∣selves in great Extremity, they began to pull down a few thatcht Houses, to make Fires with∣al: in a word, they were in such condition, that 100 Men, indifferently well armed, might easily that night have torn them all in pieces. The next morning, about break of day, the Rain ceased, at which time they began to dry their Arms, which were entirely wet, and proceed on their March. But not long after the Rain recom∣menc'd anew, rather harder than before, as if the Yet worser. Skies were melted into Waters, which caused them to cease from advancing towards the Forts, from whence the Spaniards did continually fire at the Pirats, seeing them to approach. The Pirats were now reduced unto great Affli∣ction, and danger of their Lives, through the Much Hard∣ship endured. hardness of the Weather, their own Nakedness, and the great Hunger they sustained. For a small
relief hereof, they hapned to find i'th' Fields an old Horse, which was both lean, and full of Scabs and Blotches, with gall'd Back and Sides. This horrid Animal they instantly kill'd and flay'd, They eat an old sabby Horse. and divided into small pieces among themselves, as far as it would reach, for many could not ob∣tain one morsel, which they roasted and devour∣ed without either Salt or Bread, more like unto ravenous Wolves than Men. The Rain as yet ceased not to fall, and Captain Morgan perceived their Minds to relent, hearing many of them say, they would return on board the Ships. Amongst these Fatigues both of Mind and Body, he thought it convenient to use some sudden, and almost un∣expected Remedy: unto this effect he commanded The Spani∣ards sum∣mon'd to sur∣render. a Canow to be rigg'd in all haste, and Colours of Truce to be hang'd out of it. This Canow he sent unto the Spanish Governour of the Island with this Message: That if within a few hours he delivered not himself and all his Men into his hands, he did by that Messenger swear unto him, and all those that were in his company, he would most certainly put them all to the Sword, without granting Quarter to any. After noon the Canow returned with this An∣swer: That the Governour desired two hours time, Their An∣swer. to deliberate with his Officers in a full Councel about that Affair, which being past, he would give his positive Answer to the Message. The time now being elaps'd, the said Governour sent two Canows with white Colours, and two persons, to
treat with Captain Morgan; but before they land∣ed, they demanded of the Pirats two persons, as Hostages of their Security. These were readily The Gover∣nour betray∣eth the Island granted by Captain Morgan, who delivered unto them two of his Captains, for a mutual Pledge of the Security required. With this the Spaniards propounded unto Captain Morgan, that their Go∣vernour in a full Assembly had resolved to deliver up the Island, as not being provided with suffici∣ent Forces, to defend it against such an Armada, or Fleet. But withal he desired, that Captain Mor∣gan would be pleased to use a certain Stratagem of War, for the better saving of his own Credit, and the Reputation of his Officers, both abroad and at home, which should be as followeth: That Cap∣tain Morgan would come with his Troops by night, nigh unto the Bridge that joyned the lesser Island unto the great one, and there attaque the Fort of St. Ierom: That at the same time all the Ships of his Fleet would draw nigh unto the Castle of San∣ta Teresa, and attaque it by Sea, landing i'th' mean while some more Troops, near the Battery called of St. Matthew: That these Troops which were newly landed, should by this means inter∣cept the Governour by the way, as he endeavour∣ed to pass unto St. Ierom's Fort, and then take him Prisoner, using the Formality, as if they forced him to deliver the said Castle; and that he would lead the English into it, under the fraud of being his own Troops: That on one side and t'other,
there should be continual firing at one another, but without Bullets, or at least into the Air, so that no side might receive any harm by this device: That thus having obtained two such considerable Forts, the chiefest of the Isle, he needed not take care for the rest, which of necessity must fall by course into his hands. These Propositions, every one, were granted Captain Morgan ac∣cepteth the Proposals. by Captain Morgan, upon condition they should see them faithfully observed, for otherwise they should be used with all rigour imaginable: this they promised to do, and hereupon took their leaves, and returned, to give account of their Negotiation unto the Governour. Presently af∣ter Captain Morgan commanded the whole Fleet to enter the Port, and his Men to be in a readiness, for to assault that night the Castle of St. Ierom. Thus the false Alarum or Battel began, with in∣cessant firing of great Guns from both the Castles, against the Ships, but without Bullets, as was said before. Then the Pirats landed, and assault∣ed by night the lesser Island, which they took, as also possession of both the Fortresses, forcing all the Spaniards, in appearance, to fly unto the They take possession of the Island. Church. Before this Assault, Captain Morgan had sent word unto the Governour, he should keep all his Men together in a Body, otherwise if the Pirats met any straggling Spaniards in the Streets, they should certainly shoot them.
The Island being taken by this unusual Strata∣gem, and all things put in due order, the Pirats began to make a new War against the Poultrey, Cattel, and all sort of Victuals they could find. This was their whole Employ for some days, scarce thinking of any thing else than to kill those Animals, roast, and eat, and make good chear, as much as they could possibly attain un∣to. If Wood was wanting, they presently fell upon the Houses, and pulling them down, made Fires with the Timber, as had been done before i'th' Field. The next day they numbred all the Prisoners they had taken upon the whole Island, Number of Persons found on the Island. which were found to be in all 450 persons, be∣tween Men, Women, and Children, viz. 190 Souldiers, belonging to the Garison; 40 Inhabi∣tants, who were married; 43 Children; 34 Slaves, belonging to the King, with 8 Children; 8 Banditi; 39 Negro's, belonging unto private persons, with 27 female-Blacks, and 34 Chil∣dren. The Pirats disarmed all the Spaniards, and sent them out immediately unto the Plantations, to seek for Provisions, leaving the Women in the Church, there to exercise their Devotions. Soon after they took a Review of the whole Fortresses and Arms of the whole Island. Island, and all the Fortresses belonging thereunto, which they found to be 9 in all, as followeth. The Fort of St. Ierm, nighest unto the Bridge, had 8 great Guns, of 12, 6, and 8 pound Carri∣age, together with 6 pipes of Muskets, every
pipe containing 10 Muskets. Here they found still 60 Muskets, with sufficient quantity of Powder, and all other sorts of Ammunition. The 2d. Fortress, called St. Matthew, had 3 Guns, of 8 pound Carriage each. The 3d. and chiefest a∣mong all the rest, named Santa Teresa, had 20 great Guns, of 18, 12, 8 and 6 pound Carriage, with 10 pipes of Muskets, like unto those we said before, and 90 Muskets remaining, besides all other warlike Ammunition. This Castle was built with Stone and Mortar, with very thick Walls on all sides, and a large Ditch round about it of 20 Foot depth, the which although it was dry, yet was very hard to get over. Here was no Entry but through one door, which corresponded to the middle of the Castle. Within it was a Mount or Hill, almost unaccessible, with 4 pieces of Can∣non at the top, from whence they could shoot di∣rectly into the Port. On the Sea-side this Castle was impregnable, by reason of the Rocks which surrounded it, and the Sea beating furiously upon them. In like manner on the side of the Land, it was so commodiously seated on a Mountain, as there was no access unto it, but by a Path of 3 or 4 Foot broad. The 4th. Fortress was named St. Augustin, having 3 Guns, of 8 and 6 pound Carri∣age. The 5th. named la Plattaforma de la Concep∣cion, had only 2 Guns, of 8 pound Carriage. The 6th by Name San Salvador, had likewise no more than 2 Guns. The 7th. being called Plattaforma
de los Artilleros, had also 2 Guns. The 8th. called Santa Cruz, had 3 Guns. The 9th. which was called St. Ioseph's Fort, had 6 Guns, of 12 and 8 pound Carriage, besides two pipes of Muskets, and sufficient Ammunition. In the Store-house were found above 30000 pound of Powder, with all other sorts of Ammu∣nition, which were transported by the Pirats on board the Ships. All the Guns were stopp'd and nail'd, and the Fortresses demolished, excepting that of St. Ierom, where the Pirats kept their Guard and Residence. Captain Morgan enquired, if any Banditi were there from Panama, or Puerto Velo; and hereupon three were brought before him, Three Bandi∣ti found here, or Guides for Panama. who pretended to be very expert in all the Ave∣nues of those Parts. He asked them, if they would be his Guides, and shew him the securest Ways and Passages unto Panama; which if they perform∣ed, he promised them equal shares in all they should pillage and rob in that Expedition, and that afterwards he would set them at liberty, by transporting them unto Iamaica. These Proposi∣tions pleased the Banditi very well, and they rea∣dily accepted his Proffers, promising to serve him very faithfully in all he should desire; especially one of these three, who was the greatest Rogue, Thief, and Assassin among them, and who had de∣served for his Crimes, rather to be broken alive upon the Wheel, than punished with serving in a Garison. This wicked Fellow had a great Ascen∣dant
over the other two Banditi, and could domi∣neer and command over them as he pleased, they not daring to refuse obedience to his Or∣ders. Hereupon Captain Morgan commanded four Ships and one Boat, to be equipped and provided Four Ships sent to take the Castle of Chagre. with all things necessary, for to go and take the Castle of Chagre, seated upon the River of that Name. Neither would he go himself with his whole Fleet, fearing least the Spaniards should be jealous of his farther Designs upon Panama. In these Vessels he caused to imbark 400 Men, who went to put in execution the Orders of their chief Commander Captain Morgan, mean while he him∣self remained behind in the Island of St. Catharin, with the rest of the Fleet, expecting to hear the Success of their Arms.
CHAP. IV. Captain Morgan taketh the Castle of Chagre, with 400 Men sent unto this purpose from the Isle of St. Catha∣rin. CAptain Morgan sending these four Ships and a Captain Brodely made Vice-Admiral. Boat unto the River of Chagre, chose for Vice-Admiral thereof, a certain Person named Captain Brodely. This Man had been long time in those Quarters, and committed many Robbe∣ries upon the Spaniards, when Mansvelt took the Isle of St. Catharin, as was related in the 2d. Part of this History. He being therefore well acquain∣ted with those Coasts, was thought a fit Person for this Exploit, his Actions likewise having rendred him famous among the Pirats, and their Enemies the Spaniards. Captain Brodely being chosen chief Commander of these Forces, in three days after He arriveth at Chagre. he departed from the presence of Captain Morgan, arrived within sight of the said Castle of Chagre, which by the Spaniards is called St. Lawrence. This Castle is built upon a high Mountain, at the entry Situation of the Castle. of the River, and surrounded on all sides with strong Palizada's, or wooden Walls, being very well terra-plen'd, and filled with Earth, which
rendreth them as secure, as the best Walls made of Stone or Brick. The top of this Mountain is in a manner divided into two parts, between which lyeth a Ditch, of the depth of 30 Foot. The Castle it self hath but one Entry, and that by a Draw-bridge, which passeth over the Ditch afore-mentioned. On the Land-side it hath four Basti∣ons, that of the Sea containing only two more. That part thereof which looketh towards the South, is totally unaccessible, and impossible to be climbed, through the infinite asperity of the Mountain. The North-side is surrounded by the River, which hereabouts runneth very broad. At the foot of the said Castle, or rather Moun∣tain, is seated a strong Fort, with 8 great Guns, which commandeth and impedeth the entry of the River. Not much lower are to be seen two o∣ther Batteries, whereof each hath 6 pieces of Can∣non, to defend likewise the mouth of the said Ri∣ver. At one side of the Castle are built two great Store-houses, in which are deposited all sorts of warlike Ammunition, and Merchandize, which are brought thither from the inner parts of the Countrey. Nigh unto these Houses is a high pair of Stairs, hewed out of the Rock, which ser∣veth to mount unto the top of the Castle. On the West-side of the said Fortress lyeth a small Port, which is not above 7 or 8 Fathom deep, be∣ing very fit for small Vessels, and of very good Anchorage. Besides this, there lyeth before the
Castle, at the entry of the River, a great Rock, A dangerous Rock at the entry of the River. scarce to be perceived above Water, unless at low Tides. No sooner had the Spaniards perceived the Pi∣rats to come, but they began to fire incessantly at them with the biggest of their Guns. They came to an Anchor in a small Port, at the distance of a League more or less from the Castle. The next morning very early they went on shore, and mar∣ched They land. through the Woods, to attack the Castle on that side. This March continued until two of the Clock afternoon, before they could reach the Ca∣stle, by reason of the Difficulties of the Way, and its Mire and Dirt. And although their Guides served them exactly, notwithstanding they came so nigh the Castle at first, that they lost many of their Men with the Shot from the Guns, they be∣ing in an open Place, where nothing could cover nor defend them. This much perplexed the Pi∣rats in their Minds, they not knowing what to do, nor what course to take, for on that side of neces∣sity they must make the Assault, and being unco∣vered from Head to Foot, they could not advance one step without great danger. Besides, that the Castle, both for its Situation and Strength, did Danger of this Enter∣prize. cause them much to fear the Success of that Enter∣prize. But to give it over, they dared not, least they should be reproach'd and scorn'd by their Companions.
At last, after many Doubts and Disputes a∣mong They resolve to hazard the Assault. themselves, they resolved to hazard the Assault and their Lives after a most desperate man∣ner. Thus they advanced towards the Castle, with their Swords in one hand, and Fire-balls in the other. The Spaniards defended themselves very briskly, ceasing not to fire at them with their great Guns and Muskets continually, crying withal, Come on, ye English Dogs, Enemies to God and our King, let your other Companions that are behind come on too; ye shall not go to Panama this bout. After the Pirats had made some tryal to climb up the Walls, they were forced to retreat, which they accor∣dingly And are for∣ced to retire. did, resting themselves until night. This being come, they returned to the Assault, to try, if by the help of their Fire-balls they could over∣come, and pull down the Pales before the Wall. This they attempted to do, and mean while they were about it, there hapned a very remarkable Accident, which gave them the opportunity of the Victory. One of the Pirats was wounded Strange Ac∣cident. with an Arrow in his Back, which pierced his Bo∣dy to the other side. This instantly he pulled out with great valour at the side of his Breast; then taking a little Cotton that he had about him, he wound it about the said Arrow, and putting it in∣to his Musket, he shot it back unto the Castle. But the Cotton being kindled by the Powder, oc∣casion'd two or three Houses that were within the Castle, as being thatch'd with Palm-leaves, to
take Fire, which the Spaniards perceived not so soon as was necessary. For this Fire meeting with a parcel of Powder, blew it up, and thereby cau∣sed great Ruine, and no less Consternation to the Spaniards, who were not able to occur unto this Accident, as not having seen the beginning there∣of. Thus the Pirats perceiving the good effect of the Arrow, and the beginning of the Misfortune of the Spaniards, were infinitely gladded thereat. And mean while they were bufied in extinguishing the Fire, which caused great Confusion in the whole Castle, having not sufficient Water where∣withal to do it, the Pirats made use of this oppor∣tunity, They make use of the op∣portunity. setting Fire likewise unto the Palizada's. Thus the Fire was seen at the same time, in seve∣ral parts about the Castle, which gave them huge Advantage against the Spaniards. For many Brea∣ches were made at once by the Fire among the Pales, great heaps of Earth falling down into the Ditch. Upon these the Pirats climbed up, and got over into the Castle, notwithstanding that some Spaniards, who were not busied about the Fire, cast down upon them many flaming Pots, full of combustible Matter, and odious Smells, which occasion'd the loss of many of the Eng∣lish. The Spaniards, notwithstanding the great Re∣sistance The Empale∣ments burnt. they made, could not hinder the Paliza∣da's from being entirely burnt before midnight.
Mean while the Pirats ceased not to persist in their Intention, of taking the Castle. Unto which ef∣fect, although the Fire was great, they would creep upon the Ground, as nigh unto it as they could, and shoot amidst the Flames, against the Spaniards they could perceive on the other side, and thus cause many to fall dead from the Walls. When day was come, they observed all the move∣able Earth that say betwixt the Pales, to be fallen into the Ditch in huge quantity. So that now those within the Castle, did in a manner lye equal∣ly They lye open to one another exposed to them without, as had been on the contrary before. Whereupon the Pirats continu∣ed shooting very furiously against them, and killed great number of Spaniards. For the Governour had given them Orders not to retire from those Posts, which corresponded to the Heaps of Earth fallen into the Ditch, and caused the Artillery to be transported unto the Breaches. Notwithstanding the Fire within the Castle still continued, and now the Pirats from abroad used The Pirats help to extin∣guish the Fire what means they could to hinder its progress, by shooting incessantly against it. One party of the Pirats was imployed only to this purpose, and another commanded to watch all the Motions of the Spaniards, and take all opportunities against them. About noon the English hapned to gain a Breach, which the Governour himself defended They gain a Breach. with 25 Souldiers. Here was performed a very couragious and warlike Resistance by the Spaniards,
both with Muskets, Pikes, Stones and Swords. Yet notwithstanding through all these Arms the Pirats forced and fought their way, till at last they gain∣ed the Castle. The Spaniards who remained alive, And at last the Castle. cast themselves down from the Castle into the Sea, choosing rather to die precipitated by their own selves, (few or none surviving the Fall) than to ask any Quarter for their Lives. The Governour himself retreated unto the Corps du Garde, before which were placed two pieces of Cannon. Here he intended still to defend himself, neither would he demand any Quarter. But at last he was kil∣led with a Musket-shot, which pierced his Skull The Gover∣nour kill'd. into the Brain. The Governour being dead, and the Corps du Garde surrendred, they found still remaining in it alive, to the number of 30 Men, whereof scarce 30 Men only found alive. 10 were not wounded. These informed the Pi∣rats, that 8 or 9 of their Souldiers had deserted their Colours, and were gone to Panama, to car∣ry News of their Arrival and Invasion. These 30 Men alone were remaining of 314. wherewith the Castle was garisoned, among which number, not one Officer was found alive. These were all made Prisoners, and compelled to tell whatsoever they knew of their Designs and Enterprizes. A∣mong The Gover∣nour of Pa∣nama knew their coming. other things they declared, that the Gover∣nour of Panama had notice sent him three weeks ago from Cartagena, how that the English were equipping a Fleet at Hispaniola, with design to
come and take the said City of Panama. More∣over, that this their Intention had been known by a person, who was run away from the Pirats, at the River de la Hacha, where they provided their Fleet with Corn. That, upon this News, the said Governour had sent 164 Men, to strengthen the Garison of that Castle, together with much Provision, and warlike Ammunition; the ordi∣nary Garison whereof did only consist of 150 Men. So that in all they made the number afore-mentio∣ned, of 314 Men, being all very well armed. Besides this they declared, that the Governour of Panama had placed several Ambuscades all along Ambuscades on the River side. the River of Chagre; and that he waited for their coming, in the open Fields of Panama, with 3600 Men. The taking of this Castle of Chagre cost the Pi∣rats excessively dear, in comparison to the small numbers they used to lose at other times and pla∣ces. Yea their toil and labour here, did far ex∣ceed what they sustained at the Conquest of the Isle of St. Catharin, and its adjacent. For coming to number their Men, they found they had lost above 100. besides those that were wounded, whose number exceeded 70. They commanded the Spaniards that were Prisoners, to cast all the The dead thrown down from the Ca∣stle. dead Bodies of their own Men, down from the top of the Mountain to the Sea-side, and after∣wards to bury them. Such as were wounded, were carried unto the Church, belonging to the
Castle, of which they made an Hospital, and where also they shut up the Women. Thus it was likewise turned into a place of Prostitution, the Pirats ceasing not to defile the Bodies of those afflicted Widows, with all manner of insolent Actions and Threats. Captain Morgan remained not long time behind, Captain Morgan prepareth for Chagre. at the Isle of St. Catharin, after taking the Castle of Chagre; of which he had notice presently sent him. Yet notwithstanding, before he departed from thence, he caused to be imbarked, all the Provisions could be found, together with great quantities of Maiz, or Indian Wheat, and Cazave; whereof, in like manner, is made Bread in those Parts. He commanded likewise, great store of Provisions should be transported unto the Garison of the aforesaid Castle of Chagre, from what Parts soever they could be gotten. At a certain place of the Island, they cast into the Sea all the Guns belonging thereunto, with a design to return, and leave that Island well garrison'd, unto the perpe∣tual possession of Pirats. Notwithstanding he order'd all the Houses and Forts to be set on fire, excepting only the Castle of St. Teresa, which he judged to be the strongest and securest wherein to fortifie himself, at his return from Panama. He carried with him all the Prisoners of the Island, and thus set Sayl for the River of Chagre, where he ar∣rived He arriveth there. in the space of 8 days. Here the Joy of the whole Fleet was so great, when they spyed the
English Colours upon the Castle, that they minded not their way into the River, which occasioned them to loose four of theirShips at the Entry there∣of, that wherein Captain Morgan went, being one I  four Ships at the entry of the River. of the four. Yet their Fortune was so good, as to be able to save all the Men and Goods that were in the said Vessels. Yea, the Ships likewise had been preserved, if a strong Northerly Wind had not risen in that occasion, which cast the Ships upon the Rock above-mentioned, that lyeth at the Entry of the said River. Captain Morgan was brought into the Castle with great Acclamations of Triumph and Joy, of all the Pirats, both of those who were within, And is re∣ceived with great joy. and also them that were but newly come. Ha∣ving understood the whole Transactions of the Conquest, he commanded all the Prisoners to be∣gin to work, and repair what was necessary. Especially, in setting up new Palizada's, or Pales, round about the Forts depending on the Castle. There were still in the River some Spanish Vessels, called by them Chatten, which serve for the Trans∣portation of Merchandize up and down the said River, as also for to go to Puerto Velo, and Nica∣ragua. These are commonly mounted with two great Guns of Iron, and four other small ones of Brass. All these Vessels they seized on, together  seized i'th' River. with four little Ships they found there, and all the Canows. In the Castle they left a Garison of 500 Garison left at Chagre. Men, and in the Ships within the River 150 more.
A Map of the Countrey and Citty of PANAMA. Part. 3. Page. 31
These things being done, Captain Morgan depar∣ted towards Panama, at the Head of 1200 Men. He carried very small Provisions with him, being in good hopes he should provide himself sufficient∣ly among the Spaniards, whom he knew to lye in Ambuscade at several Places by the way. CHAP. V. Captain Morgan departeth from the Ca∣stle of Chagre, at the Head of 1200 Men, with design to take the City of Panama. CAptain Morgan set forth from the Castle of Voyage to Panama. Chagre, towards Panama, the 18th. day of August, in the year 1670. He had under his Con∣duct 1200 Men, 5 Boats with Artillery, and 32 Canows, all which were filled with the said Peo∣ple. Thus he steered his course up the River to∣wards Panama. That day they sailed only 6 First day thereof. Leagues, and came to a Place called, de los Bracos. Here a party of his Men went on shore, only to sleep some few hours, and stretch their Limbs, they being almost crippl'd with lying too much crowded in the Boats. After they had rested a while, they went abroad, to see if any Victuals
could be found in the neighbouring Plantations. But they could find none, the Spaniards being fled, and carrying with them all the Provisions they had. This day, being the first of their Journey, there was amongst them such scarcity of Victuals, as the greatest part were forced to pass with only a pipe of Tobacco, without any other Refresh∣ment. The next day, very early i'th' morning, they continued their Journey, and came about evening Second day. to a Place called, Cruz de Iuan Gallego. Here they were compelled to leave their Boats and Canows, by reason the River was very dry for want of Rain, and the many obstacles of Trees that were fallen into it. The Guides told them, that about two Leagues farther on, the Countrey would be very good to continue the Journey by Land. Hereupon they left some Companies, being in all 160 Men, on board the Boats, to defend them, with intent they might serve for a place of Refuge, in case of necessity. The next morning, being the 3d. day of their Journey, they all went ashore, excepting those Third day. above-mentioned, who were to keep the Boats. Unto these Captain Morgan gave very strict Or∣ders, under great penalties, that no Man, upon any pretext whatsoever, should dare to leave the Boats, and go ashore. This he did, fearing least they should be surprized and cut off by any Am∣buscade
of Spaniards, that might chance to lye thereabouts in the neighbouring Woods, which appeared so thick, as to seem almost impenetra∣ble. Having this morning begun their March, they found the ways so dirty and irksom, that Captain Morgan thought it more convenient to transport some of the Men in Canows, (though it could not be done without great labour) to a Place farther up the River, called Cedro bueno. Thus they re-imbarked, and the Canows returned for the rest that were left behind. So that about night, they found themselves all together at the said Place. The Pirats were extreamly desirous to meet any Spaniards, or Indians, hoping to fill their Bellies with what Provisions they should take from them. For now they were reduced almost to the very extremity of Hunger. On the 4th. day, the greatest part of the Pirats Fourth day. marched by Land, being led by one of the Guides. The rest went by Water, farther up with the Ca∣nows, being conducted by another Guide, who always went before them with two of the said Ca∣nows, to discover on both sides the River, the Ambuscades of the Spaniards. These had also Spies, who were very dextrous, and could at any time give notice of all Accidents, or of the Arri∣val of the Pirats, six hours at least before they came to any Place. This day about noon they found themselves nigh unto a Post, called Torna Cavallos. Here the Guide of the Canows began
to cry aloud, he perceived an Ambuscade. His Voice caused infinite Joy unto all the Pirats, as perswading themselves they should find some Pro∣visions, wherewith to satiate their Hunger, which was very great. Being come unto the Place, they found no body in it, the Spaniards who were there not long before, being every one fled, and leav∣ing nothing behind, unless it were a small number of leather Bags, all empty, and a few crums of Bread, scatter'd upon the Ground, where they had eaten. Being angry at this Misfortune, they pull'd down a few little Huts which the Spaniards had made, and afterwards fell to eating the lea∣thern Bags, as being desirous to afford something to the ferment of their Stomachs, which now was grown so sharp, as it did gnaw their very Bowels, having nothing else to prey upon. Thus they made a huge Banquet upon those Bags of Leather, which doubtless had been more grateful unto them, if divers Quarrels had not risen, concern∣ing who should have the greatest share. By the circumference of the Place, they conjectur'd 500 Spaniards, more or less, had been there. And these, finding no Victuals, they were now infinite∣ly desirous to meet, intending to devour some of them, rather than perish. Whom they would certainly in that occasion have roasted or boyled, to satisfie their Famine, had they been able to take them. After they had feasted themselves with those
pieces of Leather, they quitted the Place, and marched farther on, till they came about night to another Post, called Torna Munni. Here they found another Ambuscade, but as barren and de∣sert as the former. They searched the neighbour∣ing Woods, but could not find the least thing to eat. The Spaniards having been so provident, as not to leave behind them any where the least crum of Sustenance, whereby the Pirats were now brought to the Extremity aforementioned. Here again he was happy, that had reserved since noon any small piece of Leather, whereof to make his Supper, drinking after it a good draught of Wa∣ter for his greatest comfort. Some persons, who never were out of their Mothers Kitchins, may ask, how these Pirats could eat, swallow and di∣gest, those pieces of Leather, so hard and dry? Unto whom I only answer, That could they once experiment, what Hunger, or rather Famine is, they would certainly find the manner, by their own necessity, as the Pirats did. For these first took the Leather, and slic'd it in pieces. Then did they beat it between two Stones, and rub it, often dipping it in the Water of the River, to ren∣der it by these means supple and tender. Lastly, they scraped off the Hair, and roasted or broyl'd it upon the Fire. And being thus cook'd, they cut it into small morsels, and eat it, helping it down with frequent Gulps of Water, which by good Fortune they had nigh at hand.
They continued their March the 5th. day, and Fifth day. about noon came unto a Place, called Barbacoa. Here likewise they found Traces of another Am∣buscade, but the Place totally as unprovided, as the two precedent were. At a small distance were to be seen several Plantations, which they searched very narrowly, but could not find any Person, Animal, or other thing, that was capable of relieving their extream and ravenous Hunger. Finally, having ranged up and down, and search∣ed long time, they found a certain Grot, which seemed to be but lately hewn out of a Rock, in the which they found two Sacks of Meal, Wheat, and like things, with two great Jars of Wine, and certain Fruits, called Platanos. Captain Morgan knowing that some of his Men were now through the extremity of Hunger, reduced almost to the extremity of their Lives, and fearing least the ma∣jor part should be brought into the same conditi∣on, caused all that was found to be distributed, amongst them who were in greatest necessity. Having refreshed themselves with these Victuals, they began to march anew with greater Courage than ever. Such as could not well go for Weak∣ness, were put into the Canows, and those com∣manded to land that were in them before. Thus they prosecuted their Journey till late at night, at which time they came unto a Plantation, where they took up their Rest. But without eating any thing at all; for the Spaniards, as before, had
swept away all manner of Provisions, leaving not behind them the least signs of Victuals. On the 6th. day they continued their March, part of them by Land through the Woods, and Sixth day. part by Water in the Canows. Howbeit they were constrained to rest themselves very frequent∣ly by the way, both for the Ruggedness thereof, and the extream Weakness they were under. Un∣to this they endeavoured to occur, by eating some Leaves of Trees, and green Herbs, or Grass, such as they could pick, for such was the miserable con∣dition they were in. This day, at noon, they arrived at a Plantation, where they found a Barn full of Maiz. Immediately they beat down the Doors, and fell to eating of it dry, as much as they could devour. Afterwards they distributed great quantity, giving unto every man a good al∣lowance thereof. Being thus provided, they prosecuted their Journey, which having continu∣ed for the space of an hour, or thereabouts, they met with an Ambuscade of Indians. This they no sooner had discover'd, but they threw away their Maiz, with the sudden hopes they conceived of finding all things in abundancy. But after all this haste, they found themselves much deceived, they meeting neither Indians, nor Victuals, nor any thing else, of what they had imagined. They saw notwithstanding on the other side the River, a Troop of 100 Indians, more or less, who all escaped away through the agility of their Feet.
Some few Pirats there were who leapt into the River, the sooner to reach the shore, to see if they could take any of the said Indians Prisoners. But all was in vain; for being much more nimble at their Feet than the Pirats, they easily baffl'd their Endeavours. Neither did they only baffle them, but killed also two or three of the Pirats with their Arrows, howting at them at a distance, and crying, Ha! perros, à la savana, à la savana. Ha! ye Dogs, go to the Plain, go to the Plain. This day they could advance no farther, by reason they were necessitated to pass the River hereabouts, to continue their March on the other side. Hereupon they took up their Repose for that night. Howbeit their Sleep was not heavy, nor profound, for great Murmurings were heard that night in the Camp, many complaining of Captain Morgan, and his Conduct in that Enter∣prize, and being desirous to return home. On the contrary, others would rather die there, than go back one step from what they had undertaken. But others who had greater Courage than any of these two parties, did laugh and joke at all their Discourses. I'th' mean while they had a Guide, who much comforted them, saying, It would not now be long before they met with People, from whom they should reap some considerable Advantage. The 7th. day i'th' morning, they all made clean their Arms, and every one discharged his Pistol, or Seventh day. Musket, without Bullet, to examine the Security
of their Fire-locks. This being done, they passed to the other side of the River in the Canows, leav∣ing the Post where they had rested the night be∣fore, called Santa Cruz. Thus they proceeded on their Journey till noon, at which time they arri∣ved at a Village called Cruz. Being at a great di∣stance as yet from the Place, they perceived much Smoak to arise out of the Chimneys. The sight hereof afforded them great Joy, and hopes of find∣ing people i'th' Town, and afterwards what they most desired, which was plenty of good Cheer. Thus they went on with as much haste as they could, making several Arguments to one another upon those external Signs, though all like Castles built i'th' Air. For, said they, there is Smoak co∣meth out of every House, therefore they are making good. Fires, for to roast and boyl what we are to eat. With other things to this purpose. At length they arrived there in great haste, all sweating and panting, but found no person i'th' Town, nor any thing that was eatable, where∣with to refresh themselves, unless it were good Fires to warm themselves, which they wanted not. For the Spaniards before their departure, had every one set Fire to his own House, except∣ing only the Store-houses and Stables belonging to the King. They had not left behind them any Beast what∣soever, either alive or dead. This occasion'd much Confusion in their Minds, they not finding
the least thing to lay hold on, unless it were some few Cats and Dogs, which they immediately kill'd, and devoured with great Appetite. At last in the King's Stables they found by good For∣tune, 15 or 16 Jarrs of Peru Wine, and a leather Sack, full of Bread. But no sooner had they be∣gan to drink of the said Wine, when they fell sick, almost every Man. This sudden Disaster made them think that the Wine was poysoned, which caused a new Consternation in the whole Camp, as judging themselves now to be irrecove∣rably lost. But the true Reason was, their huge want of Sustenance in that whole Voyage, and the manifold sorts of Trash which they had eaten, upon that occasion. Their Sickness was so great that day, as caused them to remain there till the next morning, without being able to prosecute their Journey, as they used to do, i'th' afternoon. This Village is seated in the Altitude of 9 De∣grees, and 2 Minutes, Northern Latitude, being distant from the River of Chagre, 26 Spanish Leagues, and 8 from Panama. Moreover, this is the last Place unto which Boats or Canows can come; for which reason they built here Store-hou∣ses, wherein to keep all sorts of Merchandize, which from hence to and from Panama, are trans∣ported upon the Backs of Mules. Here therefore Captain Morgan was constrained to leave his Canows, and land all his Men, though never so weak in their Bodies. But least the Ca∣nows
should be surprized, or take up too many Men for their Defence, he resolved to send them all back to the place where the Boats were, ex∣cepting one, which he caused to be hidden, to the intent it might serve to carry Intelligence, ac∣cording to the exigency of Affairs. Many of the Spaniards and Indians belonging to this Village, were fled unto the Plantations thereabouts. Here∣upon Captain Morgan gave express Orders, that none should dare to go out of the Village, except in whole Companies of 100 together. The oc∣casion hereof was his fear, least the Enemies should take an Advantage upon his Men, by any sudden Assault. Notwithstanding one party of English Souldiers, stickl'd not to contravene these Com∣mands, being thereunto tempted with the desire of finding Victuals. But these were soon glad to fly into the Town again, being assaulted with great Fury by some Spaniards and Indians, who snatch up one of the Pirats, and carried him away Prisoner. Thus the Vigilancy and Care of Cap∣tain Morgan, was not sufficient to prevent every Accident that might happen. On the 8th. day, i'th' morning, Captain Mor∣gan sent 200 Men before the Body of his Army, Eighth day. to discover the Way to Panama, and see if they had laid any Ambuscades therein. Especially consi∣dering, that the Places by which they were to pass, were very fit for that purpose, the paths being so narrow, that only 10 or 12 persons could
march in a File, and oftentimes not so many. Ha∣ving marched about the space of 10 hours, they came unto a Place called Quebrada Obscura. Here all on a sudden 3 or 4000 Arrows were shot at them, without being able to perceive from whence they came, or who shot them. The place from whence it was presumed they were shot, was a high rocky Mountain, excavated from one side to the other, wherein was a Grot that went thorow it, only capable of admitting one Horse, or other Beast, laded. This multitude of Arrows caused a huge Alarum among the Pirats, especially be∣cause they could not discover the place from whence they were discharged. At last, seeing no more Arrows to appear, they marched a little farther, and entred into a Wood. Here they per∣ceived some Indians to fly as fast as they could pos∣sible before them, to take the Advantage of ano∣ther Post, and thence observe the March of the Pirats. There remained notwithstanding one Troop of Indians upon the place, with full design to fight, and defend themselves. This Combat they performed with huge Courage, till such time as their Captain fell to the Ground wounded. Who although he was now in despair of Life, yet his Valour being greater than his Strength, would demand no Quarter, but endeavouring to raise himself, with undaunted Mind laid hold of his Azagaya, or Javelin, and struck at one of the Pi∣rats. But before he could second the Blow, he
was shot to death with a Pistol. This was also the Fate of many of his Companions, who like good and couragious Souldiers, lost their Lives with their Captain, for the defence of their Coun∣trey. The Pirats endeavour'd, as much as was possi∣ble, to lay hold on some of the Indians, and take them Prisoners. But they being infinitely swifter than the Pirats, every one escaped, leaving 8 Pi∣rats dead upon the place, and 10 wounded. Yea, had the Indians been more dextrous in military Affairs, they might have defended that Passage, and not let one sole Man to pass. Within a little while after they came to a large Campaign Field, open, and full of variegated Meadows. From hence they could perceive at a distance before them, a parcel of Indians, who stood on the top of a Mountain, very nigh unto the Way by which the Pirats were to pass. They sent a Troop of 50 Men, the nimblest they could pick out, to see if they could catch any of them, and afterwards force them to declare, whereabouts their Companions had their Mansions. But all their Industry was in vain, for they escaped through their Nimbleness, and presently after shewed themselves in another place, hallowing unto the English, and crying, A la Savana, a la Savana, Cornudos, Perros Ingleses: that is, To the Plain, to the Plain, ye Cuckoids, ye English Dogs. Mean while these things passed, the 10 Pirats that were wounded a little before, were dres∣sed, and plaistred up.
At this place there was a Wood, and on each side thereof a Mountain. The Indians had possessed themselves of the one, and the Pirats took posses∣sion of the other, that was opposite unto it. Cap∣tain Morgan was perswaded, that in the Wood the Spaniards had placed an Ambuscade, as lying so conveniently for that purpose. Hereupon he sent before 200 Men to search it. The Spaniards and Indians perceiving the Pirats to descend the Moun∣tain, did so too, as if they designed to attack them. But being got into the Wood, out of sight of the Pirats, they disappear'd, and were seen no more, leaving the passage open unto them. About night there fell a great Rain, which cau∣sed the Pirats to march the faster, and seek every where for Houses, wherein to preserve their Arms from being wet. But the Indians had set Fire to every one thereabouts, and transported all their Cattel unto remote places, to the end that the Pi∣rats finding neither Houses nor Victuals, might be constrained to return homewards. Notwithstan∣ding, after diligent Search, they found a few lit∣tle Huts belonging to Shepherds, but in them no∣thing to eat. These not being capable of holding many Men, they placed in them out of every Com∣pany a small number, who kept the Arms of all the rest of the Army. Those who remained i'th' open Field, endured much Hardship that night, the Rain not ceasing to fall until the morning.
The next morning, about break of day, being Ninth day. the 9th. of this tedious Journey, Captain Morgan continued his March, while the fresh Air of the morning lasted. For the Clouds then hanging as yet over their Heads, were much more favoura∣ble unto them, than the scorching Rays of the Sun, by reason the Way was now more difficult and laborious, than all the precedent. After two hours March, they discover'd a Troop of about 20 Spaniards, who observed the Motions of the Pi∣rats. They endeavour'd to catch some of them, but could lay hold on none, they suddenly disap∣pearing, and absconding themselves in Caves a∣mong the Rocks, totally unknown to the Pi∣rats. At last they came to a high Mountain, which when they had ascended, they discover'd from the top thereof, the South-Sea. This happy Sight, as if it were the end of their Labours, caused infinite Joy among all the Pirats. From hence they could descry also one Ship, and six Boats, which were set forth from Panama, and sailed towards the Islands of Tovago and Tovagilla. Having descended this Mountain, they came unto a Vale, in which they found great quantity of Cattel, whereof they killed good store. Here mean while some were imployed in killing and flaying of Cows, Horses, Bulls, and chiefly Asses, of which there was greatest number; others busied themselves in kindling of Fires, and getting Wood wherewith to roast them. Thus cutting the Flesh of these
Animals into convenient pieces, or goblets, they threw them into the Fire, and half carbonado'd, or roasted, they devour'd them with incredible haste and Appetite. For such was their Hunger, as they more resembled Canibals than Europeans at this Banquet, the Blood many times running down from their Beards unto the middle of their Bo∣dies. Having satisfied their Hunger with these delici∣ous Meats, Captain Morgan order'd them to conti∣nue the March. Here again he sent before the main Body, 50 Men, with intent to take some Prisoners, if possibly they could. For he seemed now to be much concerned, that in 9 days time he could not meet one person, who might inform him of the Condition and Forces of the Spaniards. About evening they discover'd a Troop of 200 Spaniards, more or less, who haloo'd unto the Pi∣rats, but these could not understand what they said. A little while after they came the first time, within sight of the highest Steeple of Panama. This Steeple they no sooner had discover'd, but they began to shew Signs of extream Joy, casting They discover the Steeple f Panama. up their Hats into the Air, leaping for Mirth, and shouting, even just as if they had already obtain∣ed the Victory, and entire accomplishment of their Designs. All their Trumpets were sound∣ed, and every Drum beaten, in tokens of this uni∣versal Acclamation, and huge Alacrity of their Minds. Thus they pitcht their Camp for that They incamp nigh the City
night, with general Content of the whole Army, waiting with Impatience for the morning, at which time they intended to attack the City. This evening there appeared 50 Horse, who came out of the City, hearing the noise of the Drums and Trumpets of the Pirats, to observe, as it was thought, their Motions. They came almost within Musket-shot of the Army, being preceded by a Trumpet, that sounded marvelously well. Those on Horseback haloo'd aloud unto the Pirats, and threatned them, saying, Perros! nos veremos: that is, Ye Dogs! we shall meet ye. Having made this Menace, they returned into the City, except∣ing only 7 or 8 Horse men, who remained hover∣ing thereabouts, to watch what Motions the Pi∣rats made. Immediately after the City began to fire, and ceased not to play with their biggest Guns, all night long against the Camp, but with little or no harm unto the Pirats, whom they could not conveniently reach. About this time also the 200 Spaniards, whom the Pirats had seen i'th' af∣ternoon, appeared again within sight, making re∣semblance as if they would block up the passages, to the intent no Pirats might escape the hands of their Forces. But the Pirats, who were now in a manner besieged, instead of conceiving any fear of their Blockado's, as soon as they had placed Centries about their Camp, began every one to open their Satchels, and without any preparation of Napkins, or Plates, fell to eating very heartily
the remaining pieces of Bulls and Horses Flesh, which they had reserved since noon. This being done, they laid themselves down to sleep upon the Grass, with great repose and huge satisfacti∣on, expecting only with Impatience for the dawnings of the next day. On the 10th. day, betimes i'th' morning, they Tenth day. They  the Spanish Forces. put all their Men into convenient Order, and with Drums and Trumpets sounding, continued their March directly towards the City. But one of the Guides desired Captain Morgan, not to take the common High-way that led thither, fearing least they should find in it much Resistance, and many Ambuscades. He presently took his Advice, and chose another way that went through the Wood, although very irksom and difficult. Thus the Spaniards perceiving the Pirats had taken another way, which they scarce had thought on, or be∣lieved, were compelled to leave their Stops and Batteries, and come out to meet them. The Go∣vernour of Panama put his Forces in Order, con∣sisting of 2 Squadrons, 4 Regiments of Foot, and a huge number of wild Bulls, which were driven by a great number of Indians, with some Negro's, and others, to help them. The Pirats, being now upon their March, came unto the top of a little Hill, from whence they had a large prospect of the City and Campaign Coey underneath. Here they discovered the es of the people of Panama, extended in Bat∣tel
Array, which when they perceived to be so nu∣merous, they were suddenly surprized with great They fear the number of the Spani∣ards. Fear, much doubting the Fortune of the day. Yea few or none there were but wished themselves at home, or at least free from the obligation of that Engagement, wherein they perceived their Lives must be so narrowly concerned. Having been some time at a stand, in a wavering condition of Mind, they at last reflected upon the Straits they had brought themselves into, and that now they ought, of necessity, either to fight resolutely, or Yet resolve to hazard the Battel. die, for no Quarter could be expected from an Enemy, against whom they had committed so many Cruelties on all occasions. Hereupon they encouraged one another, and resolved either to conquer, or spend the very last drop of Blood in their Bodies. Afterwards they divided themselves into three Battallions, or Troops, sending before them one of 200 Bucaniers, which sort of people are infinitely dextrous at shooting with Guns. Thus the Pirats left the Hill, and descended, marching directly towards the Spaniards, who were posted in a spacious Field, waiting for their They march on. coming. As soon as they drew nigh unto them, the Spaniards began to shout, and cry, Viva el Rey! God save the King! and immediately their Horse began to move against the Pirats. But the Field being full of Quaggs, and very soft under foot, they could not ply to and fro, and wheel about, as they desired. The 200 Bucaniers, who went
before, every one putting one Knee to the ground, gave them a full Volley of Shot, wherewith the They engage. Battel was instantly kindled very hot. The Spa∣niards defended themselves very couragiously, act∣ing all they could possibly perform, to disorder the Pirats. Their Foot, in like manner, endea∣voured to second the Horse, but were constrained by the Pirats to separate from them. Thus find∣ing themselves frustrated of their Designs, they attempted to drive the Bulls against them at their Backs, and by this means put them into Disorder. But the greatest part of that wild Cattel ran away, being frighted with the noise of the Battel. And some few that broke through the English Compa∣nies, did no other harm than to tear the Colours in pieces; whereas the Bucaniers shooting them dead, left not one to trouble them thereabouts. The Battel having now continued for the space The Spanish Horse ruin'd of two hours, at the end thereof the greatest part of the Spanish Horse was ruin'd, and almost all kill'd. The rest fled away. Which being per∣ceived by the Foot, and that they could not possi∣bly prevail, they discharged the Shot they had in their Muskets, and throwing them on the ground, betook themselves to Flight, every one which way The Foot put to Flight. he could run. The Pirats could not possibly fol∣low them, as being too much harass'd and wea∣ried with the long Journey they had lately made. Many of them, not being able to fly whither they desired, hid themselves for that present among the Many hide themselves.
Shrubs of the Sea-side. But very unfortunately; for most of them being found out by the Pirats, But are found, and kill'd. As also ma∣ny religious Men. were instantly kill'd, without giving Quarter to any. Some religious Men were brought priso∣ners before Captain Morgan; but he being deaf to their Cryes and Lamentations, commanded them all to be immediately pistol'd, which was accor∣dingly done. Soon after they brought a Captain to his presence, whom he examined very strictly They take a Spanish Cap∣tain. about several things; particularly, wherein con∣sisted the Forces of those of Panama? Unto which he answered, Their whole Strength did consist in Who decla∣reth the whole Forces of the Ene∣my. 400 Horse, 24 Companies of Foot, each being of 100 Men compleat, 60 Indians, and some Negro's, who were to drive 2000 wild Bulls, and cause them to run over the English Camp, and thus by breaking their Files, put them into a total Disor∣der and Confusion. He discovered more, that in the City they had made Trenches, and raised Batteries in several places, in all which they had placed many Guns. And that at the entry of the High-way which led to the City, they had built a Fort, which was mounted with 8 great Guns of Brass, and defended by 50 Men. Captain Morgan having heard this Information, gave Orders instantly they should march another way. But before setting forth, he made a Re∣view of all his Men, whereof he found both killed Many Piras kill'd i'th' Battel. and wounded a considerable number, and much greater than had been believed. Of the Spaniards
were found 600 dead upon the place, besides the 600 Spani∣ards kill'd. wonnded, and Prisoners. The Pirats were no∣thing discouraged, seeing their number so much diminished, but rather filled with greater pride than before, perceiving what huge Advantage they had obtained against their Enemies. Thus having rested themselves some while, they prepa∣red to march couragiously towards the City, They march towards the City. plighting their Oaths to one another in general, they would fight till never a Man were left alive. With this Courage they recommenc'd their March, either to conquer, or be conquered, carrying with them all the Prisoners. They found much difficulty in their Approach unto the City. For within the Town the Spani∣ards had placed many great Guns, at several Quar∣ters thereof, some of which were charged with small pieces of Iron, and others with Musket-Bul∣lets. With all these they saluted the Pirats, at their drawing nigh unto the place, and gave them full and frequent Broad-sides, firing at them in∣cessantly. From whence it came to pass, that un∣avoidably they lost at every step they advanced, They loose many Men 'th' Assault. great numbers of Men. But neither these mani∣fest Dangers of their Lives, nor the sight of so ma∣ny of their own, as dropped down continually at their Sides, could deter them from advancing far∣ther,  continue to advance. and gaining Ground every moment upon the Enemy. Thus although the Spaniards never ceased to fire; and act the best they could for
their Defence, yet notwithstanding they were forced to deliver the City after the space of three And take the City in three hours. hours Combat. And the Pirats having now pos∣sessed themselves thereof, both killed and destroy∣ed as many, as attempted to make the least Op∣position against them. The Inhabitants had cau∣sed the best of their Goods to be transported unto more remote and occult places. Howbeit they found within the City as yet several Ware-houses, very well stockt with all sorts of Merchandize, as well Silks and Cloths, as Linnen, and other things of considerable value. As soon as the first Fury of their entrance into the City was over, Captain Morgan assembled all his Men at a certain place which he assigned, and there commanded them under very great penalties, that none of them should dare to drink or taste any Wine. The Rea∣son Orders not to drink Wine. he gave for this Injunction was, because he had received private Intelligence, that it had been all poysoned by the Spaniards. Howbeit it was the opinion of many, he gave these prudent Or∣ders, to prevent the Debauchery of his people, which he foresaw would be very great at the be∣ginning, after so much Hunger sustained by the way. Fearing withal least the Spaniards seeing them in Wine, should rally their Forces, and fall upon the City, and use them as inhumanely, as they had used the Inhabitants before.
CHAP. VI. Captain Morgan sendeth several Canows and Boats unto the South-Sea. He setteth Fire to the City of Panama. Robberies and Cruelties committed there by the Pirats, till their return unto the Castle of Chagre. CAptain Morgan, as soon as he had placed Guards at several Quarters, where he thought necessary, both within and without the City of Panama, immediately commanded 25 Men to seize a great Boat, which had stuck in the Mud of A Bat seiz∣ed i'th' Port. the Port, for want of Water at a low Tide, so that she could not put out to Sea. The same day, about noon, he caused certain Men privately to set Fire unto several great Edifices of the City, no The City set on Fire. body knowing from whence the Fire proceeded, nor who were the Authors thereof, much less what Motives perswaded Captain Morgan there∣unto, which are as yet unknown to this day. The Fire increased so fast, that before night the great∣est Almost burnt in a day. part of the City was in a Flame. Captain Mor∣gan endeavour'd to make the Publick believe, the Spaniards had been the cause thereof, which Sus∣picions
The Battel Between the Spaniards and the pyrats or Buccaniers before the Citty of PANAMA. Part▪ 3 Page 54
he surmised among his own people, per∣ceiving they reflected upon him for that Action. Many of the Spaniards, as also some of the Pirats, used all the means possible, either to extinguish the Flame, or by blowing up of Houses with Gun∣powder, and pulling down others, to stop its progress. But all was in vain; for in less than half an hour it consumed a whole Street. All the Houses of this City were built with Cedar, being Houses of Cedar. of very curious and magnificent Structure, and richly adorned within. Especially with Hangings and Paintings, whereof part were already trans∣ported out of the Pirats way, and another great part were consumed by the Voracity of the Fire. There belonged unto this City (which is also the Head of a Bishoprick) eight Monasteries, whereof seven were for Men, and one for Women; two stately Churches, and one Hospital. The Churches and Monasteries were all richly adorned with Altar-pieces and Paintings, huge quantity of Gold and Silver, with other precious things; all which the Ecclesiasticks had hidden and concealed. Besides which Ornaments, here were to be seen 2000 Houses, of magnificent and prodigious Building, as being all or the greatest part, inhabi∣ted 7000 Hou∣ses i'th' Ci∣ty. by Merchants of that Countrey, who are vast∣ly rich. For the rest of the Inhabitants, of lesser quality, and Tradesmen, this City contained 5000 Houses more. Here were also great num∣ber
of Stables, which served for the Horses and Mules, that carry all the Plate, belonging as well unto the King of Spain, as private Men, towards the Coast of the North-Sea. The neighbouring Fields belonging to this City, are all cultivated with fertil Plantations and pleasant Gardens, which afford delicious Prospects unto the Inhabitants the whole year long. The Genoeses had in this City of Panama a stately House of the Genoeses. and magnificent House, belonging to their Trade and Commerce of Negro's. This Building like∣wise was commanded by Captain Morgan to be set on Fire; whereby it was burnt to the very Ground. Besides which pile of Building, there were consumed to the number of 200 Ware-hou∣ses, and great number of Slaves, who had hid Great destru∣ction of the fire. themselves therein, together with an infinite mul∣titude of Sacks of Meal. The Fire of all which Houses and Buildings, was seen to continue four weeks after the day it began. The Pirats i'th' mean while, at least the greatest part of them, incamped some time without the City, fearing and expecting that the Spaniards would come and fight them anew. For it was known, they had an incomparable number of Men more than the Pirats were. This occasion'd them to keep the Field, thereby to preserve their Forces united, which now were very much diminished, by the losses of the precedent Battels. As also because they had a great many wounded, all which they
had put into one of the Churches which alone re∣mained standing, the rest being consumed by the Fire. Moreover, beside these Decreases of their Men, Captain Morgan had sent a Convoy of 150 A Convoy sent to Cha∣gre. Men unto the Castle of Chagre, to carry the News of his Victory obtained against Panama. They saw many times whole Troops of Spani∣ards, cruize to and fro in the Campaign Fields, which gave them occasion to suspect their rallying anew. Yet they never had the courage to attempt any thing against the Pirats. I'th' afternoon of this fatal day, Captain Morgan re-entred again the City with his Troops, to the intent every one might take up their Lodgings, which now they could hardly find, very few Houses having esca∣ped the Desolation of the Fire. Soon after they fell to seeking very carefully among the Ruines and Ashes, for Utensils of Plate, or Gold, which peradventure were not quite wasted by the Flames. And of such things they found no small number in several places. Especially in Wells and Cisterns, Much Riches found ith' Ruines. where the Spaniards had hid them from the cove∣tous Search of the Pirats. The next day Captain Morgan dispatcht away two Troops of Pirats, of 150 Men each, being all very stout Souldiers, and well armed, with Orders to seek for the Inhabitants of Panama, who They sd to seek the In∣habitants. were escaped from the hands of their Enemies. These Men, having made several Excursions up and down the Campaign Fields, Woods and Moun∣tains,
adjoyning to Panama, returned after two days time, bringing with them above 200 Priso∣ners, And find 200. between Men, Women, and Slaves. The same day returned also the Boat above-mentioned, which Captain Morgan had sent into the South-Sea, bringing with her three other Boats, which they had taken in a little while. But all these Prizes they could willingly have given, yea although they had imployed greater labour into the bargain, for one certain Galeon, which miraculously esca∣ped their Industry, being very richly laden with A  Ga∣leon a∣peth. all the King's Plate, and great quantity of Riches of Gold, Pearl, Jewels, and other most precious Goods, of all the best and richest Merchants of Panama. On board of this Galeon were also the re∣ligious Women, belonging to the Nunnery of the said City, who had imbarked with them, all the Ornaments of their Church, consisting in great quantity of Gold, Plate, and other things of great value. The Strength of this Galeon was nothing consi∣derable, as having only 7 Guns, and 10 or 12 Small Strength of the id Ship Muskets, for its whole Defence. Being on the other side very ill provided of Victuals, and other Necessaries, with great want of fresh Water, and having no more Sayls than the uppermost Sayls of the main Mast. This description of the said Ship the Pirats received from certain persons, who had spoken with 7 Mariners belonging to the Galeon, at such time as they came ashore in the Cockboat,
to take in fresh Water. Hence they concluded for certain they might easily have taken the said Vessel, had they given her Chace, and pursued her, as they ought to do, especially considering the said Galeon could not long subsist abroad at Sea. But they were impeded from following this vastly rich Prize, by the lascivious Exercises wherein Their own Debauchery the cause of this loss. they were totally at that present involved with Women, which unto this effect they had carried with them, and forced on board their Boat. Un∣to this Vice was also joyned that of Gluttony and Drunkenness, having plentifully debauched them∣selves with several sorts of rich Wines, they found there ready to their hands. So that they chose rather to satiate their Lust and Appetite, with the things above-mentioned, than to lay hold on the occasion of such an huge Advantage. Although this only Prize would certainly have been of far greater Value and Consequence unto them, than all they purchased at Panama, and other Places thereabouts. The next day, repenting of their Negligence, and being totally wearied of the Vi∣ces and Debaucheries aforesaid, they sent forth to Sea another Boat well armed, to pursue with all They send after her. speed imaginable the said Galeon. But their pre∣sent Care and Diligence was in vain, the Spaniards who were on board the said Ship, having received Intelligence of the Danger they were in one or two days before, while the Pirats were cruizing so nigh unto them, whereupon they fled unto Pla∣ces
more remote and unknown to their Ene∣mies. Notwithstanding the Pirats found in the Ports of the Islands of Tavoga and Tavogilla, several Boats Other Bts takn. that were laden with many sorts of very good Mer∣chandize. All which they took and brought unto Panama. Where being arrived, they made an exact Relation of all that had passed while they were abroad, unto Captain Morgan. The Priso∣ners confirmed what the Pirats had said, adding thereunto, they undoubtely knew whereabouts the said Galeon might be at that present, but that it was very probable they had been relieved before now from other Places. These Relations stirred up Captain Morgan anew, to send forth all the Boats that were in the Port of Panama, with design Four Boats more sent af∣ter the Ga∣leon. to seek and pursue the said Galeon, till they could find her. The Boats aforesaid, being in all four, set Sayl from Panama, and having spent 8 days in cruizing to and fro, and searching several Ports and Creeks, they lost all their hopes of finding But in vain. what they so earnestly sought for. Hereupon they resolved to return unto the Isles of Tavoga and Tavogilla. Here they found a reasonable good Ship, that was newly come from Payta, being la∣den A Ship and a Boat taken. with Cloth, Soap, Sugar and Bisket, with 20000 pieces of Eight in ready Money. This Vessel they instantly seized, not finding the least Resistance from any person within her. Nigh un∣to the said Ship was also a Boat, whereof in like
manner they possessed themselves. Upon the Boat they laded great part of the Merchandizes they had found in the Ship, together with some Slaves they had taken in the said Islands. With this Purchase they returned unto Panama, some∣thing better satisfied of their Voyage, yet withal much discontented they could not meet with the Galeon. The Convoy which Captain Morgan had sent unto the Castle of Chagre, returned much about The Convoy returneth from Chagre the same time, bringing with them very good News. For mean while Captain Morgan was up∣on his Journey to Panama, those he had left in the Castle of Chagre, had sent forth to Sea two Boats to exercise Piracy. These hapned to meet with a Spanish Ship, which they began to chace within A Spanish Ship taken at Chagre. sight of the Castle. This being perceived by the Pirats that were in the Castle, they put forth Spa∣nish Colours, thereby to allure and deceive the Ship that fled before the Boats. Thus the poor Spaniards, thinking to refuge themselves under the Castle, and the Guns thereof, by flying into the Port, were caught in a Snare, and made Prison∣ers, where they thought to find Defence. The Cargo which was found on board the said Vessel, consisted in Victuals and Provisions, that were all eatable things. Nothing could be more oppor∣tune than this Prize for the Castle, where they had begun already to experiment great scarcity of things of this kind.
This good Fortune of the Garison of Chagre, gave occasion unto Captain Morgan, to remain longer time than he had determined at Panama. And hereupon he ordered several new Excursions  Excur∣s of the . to be made into the whole Countrey, round about the City. So that mean while the Pirats at Panama were imployed in these Expeditions, those at Chagre were busied in exercising Piracy upon the North-Sea. Captain Morgan used to send forth daily parties of 200 Men, to make In∣roads into all the Fields and Countrey thereabouts, and when one party came back, another consisting Many Riches and Prisoners brought . of 200 more was ready to go forth. By this means they gathered in a short time huge quantity of Riches, and no lesser number of prisoners. These being brought into the City, were present∣ly put unto the most exquisite Tortures imagina∣ble, to make them confess both other peoples Goods and their own. Here it happened, that one poor and miserable Wretch, was found in the Crlties used at Pa∣nama. House of a Gentleman of great Quality, who had put on, amidst that confusion of things, a pair of Taffety Breeches, belonging to his Master, with a little silver Key hanging at the Strings thereof. This being perceived by the Pirats, they immedi∣ately asked him, Where was the Cabinet of the said Key? His Answer was, He knew not what was become of it, but only that finding those Breeches in his Master's House, he had made bold to we them. Not being able to extort any other
Confession out of him, they first put him upon the Rack, wherewith they inhumanely dis-joynted his Arms. After this, they twisted a Cord about his Forehead, which they wrung so hard, that his Eyes appeared as big as Eggs, and were ready to fall out of his Skull. But neither with these Torments, could they obtain any positive Answer to their Demands. Whereupon they soon after hung him up by the Testicles, giving him infinite Blows and Stripes, mean while he was under that intolerable pain and posture of Body. After∣wards they cut off his Nose and Ears, and singed his Face with burning Straw, till he could speak nor lament his Misery no longer. Then loosing all Hopes of hearing any Confession from his Mouth, they commanded a Negro to run him through with a Lance, which put an end to his Life, and a period to their cruel and inhumane Tortures. After this execrable manner, did ma∣ny others of those miserable Prisoners finish their days, the common Sport and Recreation of these Pirats, being these, and other Tragedies not in∣feriour to these. They spared, in these their Cruelties, no Sex, nor Condition whatsoever. For as to religious No Conditi∣on spared. Persons and Priests, they granted them less Quar∣ter than unto others, unless they could produce a considerable Sum of Money, capable of being a sufficient Ransom. Women themselves were no Unlss Wo∣m,  sr∣ved th  better used, except they would condescend unto
the libidinous Demands and Concupiscency of the Pirats. For such as would not consent unto their Lust, were treated with all the Rigor and Cruel∣ty imaginable. Captain Morgan, their Leader and Commander, gave them no good Example in this point. For as soon as any beautiful Wo∣man was brought as a Prisoner to his presence, he used all the means he could possible, both of Rigor and Mildness, to bend them to his lascivi∣ous will and pleasure. For a confirmation of which Assertion, I shall here give my Reader a short History of a Lady, whose Vertue and Con∣stancy ought to be transmitted unto Posterity, as a memorable Example of her Sex. Among the Prisoners that were brought by the Pirats, from the Islands of Tavoga and Tavogilla, there was found a Gentlewoman of good Quality, History of a Spanish La∣dy. as also no less Vertue and Chastity, who was Wife unto one of the richest Merchants of all those Countreys. Her Years were but few, and her Beauty so great, as peradventure I may doubt, whether in all Europe any could be found, to surpass her Perfections either of Comeliness or Honesty. Her Husband, at that present, was absent from home, being gone as far as the King∣dom of Peru, about great Concerns of Commerce and Trade, wherein his Employments did lye. This vertuous Lady likewise hearing, that Pirats were coming to assault the City of Panama, had absented her self from thence in the company of
other Friends and Relations, thereby to preserve her Life, amidst the Dangers, which the Cruel∣ties and Tyrannies of those hard-hearted Enemies did seem to menace unto every Citizen. But no sooner had she appeared in the presence of Cap∣tain Morgan, when instantly she was designed for his voluptuous Pleasures and Concupiscence. Hereupon he commanded, they should lodge her in a certain Apartment by her self, giving her a Negra, or black Woman, to wait upon her, and that she should be treated with all the Respect and Regale due unto her Quality. The poor afflicted Lady did beg with multitude of Sobs and Tears, she might be suffered to lodge among the other Prisoners, her Relations, fearing least that unex∣pected Kindness of the Commander, might prove to be a Design upon her Chastity. But Captain Morgan would by no means hearken to her Petiti∣on, and all he commanded, in answer thereunto, was, she should be treated with more particular care then before, and have her Victuals carried from his own Table. This Lady had ormerly heard very strange Reports concerning the Pirats, before their arri∣val at Panama, intimating unto her, as if they were not Men, but, as they said, Hereticks, who did neither invoke the Blessed Trinity, nor believe in Jesus Christ. But now she began to have bet∣ter Thoughts of them then ever before, having experimented the manifold Civilities of Captain
Morgan. Especially hearing him many times to swear by the Name of God, and of Jesus Christ, in whom, she was perswaded, they did not be∣lieve. Neither did she now think them to be so bad, or to have the Shapes of Beasts, as from the Relations of several people she had oftentimes heard. For as to the Name of Robbers or Thieves, which was commonly given them by others, she wondred not much at it, seeing, as she said, that among all Nations of the Universe, there were to be found some wicked Men, who naturally cove∣ted to possess the Goods of others. Conformable to the perswasion of this Lady, was the Opinion of another Woman, of weak Understanding, at Panama, who used to say, before the Pirats came thither, she desired very much, and had a great curiosity, to see one of those Men called Pirats. For as much as her Husband had often told her, The Pirats srce thght to be M. that they were not Men, like unto others, but ra∣ther irrational Beasts. This silly Woman at last happening to see the first of them, cryed out a∣loud, saying, Iesus bless me! these Thieves are like unto us Spaniards. This false Civility of Captain Morgan, where∣with he used this Lady, as a thing very common unto such persons as pretend and cannot obtain, was soon after changed into barbarous Cruelty. For three or four days being past, he came to see her, and entertain'd her with dishonest and lasci∣vious Huge Con∣stancy of the said Lady. Discourses, opening unto her his ardent De∣sires,
of enjoying the accomplishment of his Lust. The vertuous Lady constantly repuls'd him, with all the Civility imaginable, and many humble and modest Expressions of her Mind. But Captain Morgan still persisted in his disorderly Request, pre∣senting her withal with much Pearl, Gold, and all that he had got, that was precious and valua∣ble in that Voyage. But the Lady being in no manner willing to consent thereunto, nor accept his Presents, and shewing her self, in all Respects, like unto Susannah for Constancy, he presently changed Note, and began to speak unto her in another Tone, threatning her with a thousand Cruelties and hard Usages at his hands. Unto all these things she gave this resolute and positive An∣swer, then which no other could be extorted from her: Sir, My Life is in your hands; but as to my Bo∣dy, in relation to that which you would perswade me unto, my Soul shall sooner be separated from it, through the Vi∣olence of your Arms, then I shall condescend to your Re∣quest. No sooner had Captain Morgan understood this heroick Resolution of her Mind, but he com∣manded her to be stript of the best of her Apparel, and imprisoned in a darksom and stinking Cellar. Here she had allowed her an extream small quanti∣ty of Meat and Drink, wherewith she had much ado to sustain her Life for a few days. Under this Hardship, the constant and vertuous Lady ceased not to pray daily unto God Almighty, She is tryed with great Hardship. for constancy and patience against the Cruelties of
Captain Morgan. But he being now thorowly convinc'd of her chast Resolutions, as also desirous to conceal the cause of her Confinement, and hard Usage, since many of the Pirats, his Compa∣nions, did compassionate her condition, laid ma∣ny false Accusations to her charge, giving to un∣derstand, she held Intelligence with the Spaniards, and corresponded with them by Letters, abusing thereby his former Leniy and Kindness. I my self was an Eye-witness unto these things here re∣lated, and could never have judged such constancy of Mind, and vertuous Chastity, to be found in the World, if my own Eyes and Ears had not in∣formed me thereof. But of this incomparable Lady, I shall say something more hereafter in its proper place; whereupon I shall leave her at pre∣sent, to continue my Hstory. Captain Morgan having now been at Panama the full space of three weeks, commanded all things Cin Mgan pre∣p   d∣part. to be put in order for his Departure. Unto this effect, he gave Orders to every Company of his Men, to seek out for so many Beasts of Carriage, as might suffice to convey the whole Spoyl of the City, unto the River where his Canows lay. A∣bout this time a great Rumour was spread in the City, of a considerable number of Pirats, who A  . intended to leave Captain Morgan. And that by taking a Ship which was in the Port, they deter∣mined to go and rob upon the South-Sea, till they had got as much as they thought fit, and then re∣turn
homewards by the way of the East-Indies, in∣to Europe. For which purpose, they had already gathered great quantity of Provisions, which they had hidden in private places, with sufficient store of Powder, Bullets, and all other sorts of Ammu∣nition. Likewise some great Guns, belonging to the Town, Muskets, and other things, where∣with they designed not only to equip the said Ves∣sel, but also to fortifie themselves, and raise Bat∣teries in some Island or other, which might serve them for a place of Refuge. This Design had certainly taken effect as they intended, had not Captain Morgan had timely Ad∣vice thereof given him by one of their Comrades. Hereupon he instantly commanded, the main-Mast of the said Ship should be cut down and burnt, together with all the other Boats that were in the Port. Hereby the Intentions of all or most of his Companions, were totally frustrated. Af∣ter this, Captain Morgan sent forth many of the Spaniards, into the adjoyning Fields and Coun∣trey, to seek for Money, wherewith to ransom Ransoms de∣manded. not only themselves, but also all the rest of the Prisoners, as likewise the Ecclesiasticks, both Se∣cular and Regular. Moreover he commanded all the Artillery of the Town to be spoyled, that The Artil spoyled. is to say, nail'd and stopt up. At the same time he sent out a strong company of Men, to seek for the Governour of Panama, of whom Intelligence was brought, that he had laid several Ambuscades
in the way, by which he ought to pass at his Re∣turn. But those who were sent upon this De∣sign, returned soon after, saying, they had not found any Sign or Appearance of any such Ambus∣cades. For a confirmation whereof, they brought with them some Prisoners they had taken, who declared, how that the said Governour had had an Intention of making some Opposition by the way, but that the Men whom he had designed to effect it, were unwilling to undertake any such En∣terprize; so that for want of Means, he could not put his Design in execution. On the 24th. of February, of the year 1671. Captain Morgan departed from the City of Panama, ey leave Panama. or rather from the place where the said City of Pa∣nama did stand. Of the Spoyls whereof he carri∣ed with him, 175 Beasts of Carriage, laden with 175 Beasts laden with Riches. Silver, Gold, and other precious things, besides 600 prisoners, more or less, between Men, Wo∣men, Children, and Slaves. That day they came unto a River, that passeth through a delicious Campagn Field, at the distance of a League from Panama. Here Captain Morgan put all his Fores into good Order of martial Array, in such manner, as that the prisoners were in the middle of the Camp, surrounded on all sides with Pirats. At which present Conjuncture, nothing else was to  o the . be heard but Lamentations, Cryes, Shrieks, and doleful Sighs, of so many Women and Children, who were perswaded Captain Morgan designed to
transport them all, and carry them into his own Countrey for Slaves. Besides that, among all those miserable prisoners, there was extream Hun∣ger and Thirst endured at that time. Which Hardship and Misery Captain Morgan designedly caused them to sustain, with intent to excite them more earnestly to seek for Moneys, wherewith to ransom themselves, according to the Tax he had set upon every one. Many of the Women begg'd of Captain Morgan upon their Knees, with infinite Sighs and Tears, he would permit them to return unto Panama, there to live in company of their dear Husbands and Children, in little Huts of Straw, which they would erect, seeing they had no Houses, until the rebuilding of the City. But his Answer was, He came not thither to hear La∣mentations and Cryes, but rather to seek Moneys. Therefore they ought to seek out for that in the first place, where-ever it were to be had, and bring They are all put to Ran∣som. it to him, otherwise he would assuredly transport them all unto such places, whither they cared not to go. The next day, when the March began, those lamentable Cryes and Shrieks were renewed, in so much as it would have caused compassion in the Their Cryes renew'd. hardest Heart to hear them. But Captain Morgan, as a Man little given to Mercy, was not moved therewith in the least. They marched in the same order as was said before; one party of the Pirats preceding in the Van, the prisoners i'th' middle,
and the rest of the Pirats in the Arrear-Guard, by whom the miserable Spaniards were, at every Step, puncht and thrust in their Backs and Sides, with the blunt end of their Arms, to make them march the faster. That beautiful and vertuous Lady, of whom we made mention heretofore, for her un∣parallel'd Constancy and Chastity, was led priso∣ner by her self, between two Pirats who guarded her. Her Lamentations now did pierce the Skies, seeing her self carried away into foreign Captivi∣ty, often crying unto the Pirats, and telling them: That she had given order unto two religious persons, in whom she had relyed, to go unto a certain place, and fetch so much Money as her Ransom did amount unto. That they had promised faithfully to do it. But having obtained the said Money, instead of bringing it unto her, they had imployed it another way, to ransom some of their own, and particular Friends. This ill Action of theirs was discovered by a Slave, who brought a Letter unto the said Lady. Her Complaints, and the cause thereof, being brought unto the Ears of Captain Morgan, he thought fit to enquire there∣into. Having found the thing to be true, espe∣cially hearing it confirmed by the Confession of the said religious Men, though under some frivolous Excuses, of having diverted the Money but for a day or two, within which time they expected more Sums to repay it, he gave Liberty unto the The Lady st at Liberty. said Lady, whom otherwise he designed to trans∣port unto Iamaica. But i'th' mean while he de∣tained
the said religious Men, as prisoners in her place, using them according to the Deserts of their incompassionate Intrigues. As soon as Captain Morgan arrived, upon his March, at the Town called Cruz, seated on the Banks of the River Chagre, as was mentioned be∣fore, he commanded an Order to be published among the prisoners, that within the space of three days, every one of them should bring in Every one to be ransom'd, or transported their Ransom, under the penalty afore-mentioned, of being transported unto Iamaica. In the mean while he gave Orders, for so much Rice and Maiz to be collected thereabouts, as was necessary for the victualling all his Ships. At this place some of the prisoners were ransom'd, but many others could not bring in their Moneys in so short time. Hereupon he continued his Voyage, leaving the Village on the 5th. day of March next following, and carrying with him all the Spoyl that ever he could transport. From this Village he likewise led away some new prisoners, who were Inhabi∣tants of the said place. So that these prisoners were added unto those of Panama, who had not as yet paid their Ransoms, and all transported. But the two religious Men, who had diverted the Mo∣ney belonging to the Lady, were ransomed three days after their Imprisonment, by other persons, who had more compassion for their condition, then they had shewed for hers. About the middle of the way unto the Castle of Chagre, Captain Morgan
commanded them to be placed in due order, ac∣cording to their custom, and caused every one to be sworn, that they had reserved nor concealed nothing privately to themselves, even not so much as the value of Six-pence. This being done, Captain Morgan having had some Experience, that those lewd Fellows would not much stickle to swear falsly in points of Interest, he commanded them every one to be searched very strictly, both in their Cloaths and Satchels, and every where it might be presumed they had reserved any thing. Yea to the intent this Order might not be ill taken by his Companions, he permitted himself to be A strict Search for concealed Riches. searcht, even to the very soals of his Shoos. Unto this effect, by common consent, there was as∣signed one out of every Company, to be the Searchers of all the rest. The French Pirats, that went on this Expedition with Captain Morgan, were not well satisfied with this new custom of Searching. Yet their Number being less then that of the English, they were forced to submit un∣to it, as well as the others had done before them. The Search being over, they re-imbarked in their Canows and Boats, which attended them on the River, and arrived at the Castle of Chagre, on the They arrive at Chagre. 9th. day of the said Month of March. Here they found all things in good order, excepting the wounded Men, whom they had left there at the time of their departure. For of these the greatest number were dead, through the Wounds they had received.
From Chagre, Captain Morgan sent presently af∣ter A Boat sent to Puerto Velo. his Arrival, a great Boat unto Puerto Velo, wherein were all the Prisoners he had taken at the Isle of St. Catharin, demanding by them a conside∣rable Ransom for the Castle of Chagre, where he then was, threatning otherwise to ruine and de∣molish it even to the Ground. Unto this Mes∣sage, those of Puerto Velo made Answer, They would not give one Farthing towards the Ransom of the said Castle, and that the English might do with it as they pleased. This Answer being come, the Dividend was made of all the Spoyl they had The Divi∣dend made. purchased in that Voyage. Thus every Compa∣ny, and every particular person therein included, received their portion of what was gotten. Or rather, what part thereof Captain Morgan was pleased to give them. For so it was, that the rest of his Companions, even of his own Nation, com∣plained But with much Disgust on all sides. of his Proceedings in this particular, and feared not to tell him openly to his Face, that he had reserved the best Jewels to himself. For they judged it impossible, that no greater share should belong unto them then 200 pieces of Eight per ca∣pita, of so many valuable Purchases and Robbe∣ries as they had obtained. Which small Sum they thought too little Reward for so much Labour, and such huge and manifest Dangers, as they had so often exposed their Lives unto. But Captain Morgan was deaf unto all these, and many other Complaints of this kind, as having designed in his
mind to cheat them of as much as he could. At last Captain Morgan finding himself obnoxi∣ous Captain Morgan feareth their Displeasure. to many Obloquies, and Detractions among his people, began to fear the consequence thereof. And hereupon thinking it unsafe to remain any longer time at Chagre, he commanded the Ord∣nance of the said Castle to be carried on board his Ship. Afterwards he caused the greatest part of the Walls to be demolished, and the Edifices to be burnt, and as many other things spoyl'd and ruin'd, as could conveniently be done in a short while. These Orders being performed, he went And stealeth away very privately. secretly on board his own Ship, without giving any notice of his Departure unto his Companions, nor calling any Councel, as he used to do. Thus he set Sayl, and put out to Sea, not bidding any body adieu, being only followed by three or four Vessels of the whole Fleet. These were such (as the French Pirats believed) as went Shares with Captain Morgan, towards the best and greatest part of the Spoyl, which had been concealed from them in the Dividend. The French-men could very wil∣lingly The French dsirous of Revenge. have revenged this Affront upon Captain Morgan, and those that followed him, had they found themselves with sufficient Means to encoun∣ter him at Sea. But they were destitute of most things necessary thereunto. Yea, they had much ado to find sufficient Victuals and Provisions for their Voyage to Iamaica, he having left them to∣ta'ly unprovided of all things.
CHAP. VII. Of a Voyage made by the Author, a∣long the Coasts of Costa Rica, at his return towards Jamaica. What hap∣pened most remarkable in the said Voy∣age. Some Observations made by him at that time. CAptain Morgan left us all in such a miserable condition, as might serve for a lively Re∣presentation, of what Reward attendeth Wicked∣ness at the latter end of Life. From whence we ought to have learned, how to regulate and amend our Actions for the future. However it was, our Affairs being reduced to such a posture, every Company that was left behind, whether English, or French, were compelled to seek what means they could to help themselves. Thus most of them separated from each other, and several Companies took several courses, at their return homewards. As for that Party unto which I did belong, we steer'd our Voyage along the Coast of Costa Rica, where we intended to purchase some Provisions, and careen our Vessel in some secure place or other. For the Boat wherein we were,
was now grown so foul, as to be rendred totally unfit for Sayling. In few days we arrived at a great Port, called Boca del Toro, where are always The     dl Toro. to be found an huge quantity of good and eatable Tortoises. The Circumference hereof is ten Leagues, more or less, being surrounded with little Islands, under which Vessels may ride very secure from the violence of the Winds. The said Islands are inhabited by Indians, who never could be subjugated by the Spaniards, and Isl of wild Indi∣ans. hence they give them the Name of Indios bravos, or wild Indians. They are divided, according to the variety of Idioms of their Language, into se∣veral Customs and Fashions of People, from whence ariseth, that they have perpetual Wars against one another. Towards the East-side of this Port are found some of them, who formerly did much trade with the Pirats, selling unto them the Flesh of divers Animals, which they hunt in their Countreys, as also all sorts of Fruits that the Land produceth. The Exchange of which Com∣modities was Iron-Instruments, that the Pirats brought them, Beads, and other Toys, whereof they made great account for wearing, more then of precious Jewels, which they knew not, nor esteemed in the least. This Commerce after∣ward failed, because the Pirats committed many barbarous Inhumanities against them, killing ma∣ny of their Men on a certain occasion, and taking away their Women, to serve their disordinate
Lust. These Abuses gave sufficient cause for a perpetual cessation of all Friendship and Com∣merce, between them and the Pirats. We went ashore, with design to seek Provisi∣ons, They seek for Provisions. our necessity being now almost extream. But our Fortune was so bad, that we could find no∣thing But find none else then a few Eggs of Crocodiles, where∣with we were forced to content our selves for that present. Hereupon we left those Quarters, and steered our course Eastwards. Being upon this Tack, we met with three Boats more of our own Companions, who had been left behind by Cap∣tain Three Boats of their own Comrades. Morgan. These told us, they had been able to find no Relief for the extream Hunger they sustained. Moreover, that Captain Morgan him∣self, and all his People, were already reduced to such Misery, as he could afford them no more Al∣lowance then once a day, and that very short too. We therefore hearing from these Boats, that lit∣tle or no good was like to be done, by sailing far∣ther They depart Westwards. Eastwards, changed our course, and steered towards the West. Here we found an excessive quantity of Tortoises, more then we needed for the victualling our Boats, should we be never so long without any other Flesh or Fish. Having provided our selves with this sort of Victuals, the next thing we wanted was fresh Water. There was enough to be had in the neighbouring Islands, but we scarce dared to land on them, by reason of
the Enmity above mentioned, between us Pirats and those Indians Notwithstanding, Necessity having no Law, we were forced to do as we could, rather then as we desired to do. And here∣upon we resolved to go all of us together, unto one of the said Islands. Being landed, one Party of our Men went to range in the Woods, mean while another filled the Barrels with Water, Scarce one whole hour was past, after our People were got ashore, when suddenly the Indians came upon us, and we heard one of our Men cry, Arm, Arm. A assault∣ed by the In∣dians. We presently took up our Arms, and began to fire at them as hot as we could. This caused them to advance no farther, and in a short while put them to Flight, sheltring themselves in the Woods. We pursued them some part of the way, but not far, by reason we then esteemed rather to get in our Water, then any other Advantages upon the Enemy. Coming back, we found two Indians Two Indians kill'd. dead upon the shore, whereof the Habiliments of one gave us to understand, he was a Person of Quality amongst them. For he had about his Body a Girdle, or Shash, very richly woven; and on his Face he wore a Beard of massive Gold. I mean, a small Planch of Gold hung down at his  d a golden Beard Lips by two Strings, (which penetrated two lit∣tle Holes, made there on purpose) that covered his Beard, or served instead thereof. His Arms were made of Sticks of Palmite-trees, being very curiously wrought, at one end whereof, was a
kind of Hook, which seemed to be hardned with Fire. We could willingly have had opportunity to speak with some of these Indians, to see if we could reconcile their Minds unto us, and by this They desire to speak with the Indians, but in vain. means renew the former Trade with them, and obtain Provisions. But this was a thing impossi∣ble, through the Wildness of their Persons, and Savageness of their Minds. Notwithstanding, this Rencounter hindred us not from filling our Barrels with Water, and carrying them a∣board. The night following we heard from the Shore, Great Cryes heard from shore. huge Cryes and Shrieks among the Indians. These Lamentations caused us to believe, because they were heard so far, they had called in much more People to aid them against us; as also, that they lamented the Death of those two Men, who were kill'd the day before. These Indians never use to These Indi∣ans never use the Sea. come upon the Waters of the Sea, neither have they ever given themselves to build Canows, or any other sort of Vessels, for Navigation. Not so much as Fisher-boats, of which Art of Fishery, they are totally ignorant. At last, having no∣thing else to hope for in these Parts, we resolved to depart from thence for Iamaica, whither we de∣signed to go. Being set forth, we met with con∣trary Winds, which caused us to make use of our Oars, and row as far as the River of Chagre. When They return to Chagre. we came nigh unto it, we perceived a Ship that made towards us, and began to give us Chace.
Our Apprehensions were, that it was a Ship from Are chased by a Ship. Cartagena, which might be sent to rebuild and re∣take possession of the Castle of Chagre, now all the Pirats were departed from thence. Hereupon we set all our Sayl, and ran before the Wind, to see if we could escape, or refuge our selves in any place. But the Vessel being much more swifter and cleaner then ours, easily got the Wind of us, and stopt our Course. Then approaching nigh unto us, we discover'd what they were, and knew them to be our former Comrades, in the But of their wn Party. same Expedition of Panama, who were but lately set out from Chagre. Their Design was to go unto Nombre de Dios, and from thence to Cartagena, to seek some Purchase or other, in or about that frequented Port. But the Wind at that present being contrary to their Intention, they concluded to go in our Company, towards the same Place where we were before, called Boca del Toro. This Accident and Encounter retarded our Journey, in the space of two days, more then we could regain in a whole Fortnight. This was the occasion that obliged us to return unto our former Station, where we remained for a few days. From thence we directed our Course for a Place, called Boca del Dragon, there to make Provisions of Flesh. Especially of a certain Animal, which the Spani∣ards call Manentines, and the Dutch, Sea-Cows, be∣cause Sea-Cows. the Head, Nose, and Teeth, of this Beast, are very like unto those of a Cow. They are
found commonly in such places, as under the depth of the Waters, are very full of Grass, on which, it is thought, they do pasture. These Animals have no Ears, and only in place of them are to be seen two little Holes, scarce capable of receiving the little Finger of a Man. Nigh unto the Neck, they have two Wings, under which are seated two Udders, or Breasts, much like unto the Breasts of a Woman. The Skin is very close, and united together, resembling the Skin of a Barbary, or Guiney-Dog. This Skin upon the Back is of the thickness of two Fingers, which being dryed, is as hard as any Whale-bone, and may serve to make Walking-staffs withal. The Belly is in all things like unto that of a Cow, as far as the Kid∣neys, or Reins. Their manner of Engendring likewise, is the same with the usual manner of a Land-Cow, the Male of this kind being in simili∣tude, almost one and the same thing with a Bull. Yet notwithstanding they conceive and breed but once. But the space of time that they go with Calf, I could not as yet learn. These Fishes have the sense of Hearing extreamly acute, in so much as in taking them, the Fishermen ought not to make the least noise, nor row, unless it be very slightly. For this reason they make use of certain Instruments for Rowing, which the Indians call Pagayos, and the Spaniards name Caneletas, with which although they row, yet is it performed without any noise that can fright the Fish. Mean
while they are busied in this Fishery, they use not How they take them. to speak to one another, but all is transacted by Signs. He that darteth them with the Javelin, useth it after the same manner as when they kill Tortoises. Howbeit, the point of the said Jave∣lin is somewhat different, as having two Hooks at the Extremity, and these longer then that of the other Fishery. Of these Fishes, some are found to be of the length of 20, unto 24 Foot. Their Flesh is very good to eat, being very like in Co∣lour unto that of a Land-Cow, but in Taste, un∣to that of Pork. It containeth much Fat, or Grease, the which the Pirats use to melt, and keep in earthen Pots, to make use thereof instead of Oyl. On a certain day, wherein we were not able to do any good at this sort of Fishery, some of our Men went into the Woods to hunt, and others to catch other Fish. Soon after we espied a Canow, wherein were two Indians. These no sooner had discovered our Vessels, but they rowed back with all the speed they could towards the Land, being unwilling to trade, or have any thing to do with us Pirats. We followed them to the shore, but through their natural Nimbleness, being much greater then ours, they retired into the Woods before we could overtake them. Yea, what was more admirable, they drew on shore, and carri∣ed Huge Strength of those Indi∣ans. with them their Canow into the Wood, as ea∣sily as if it were made of Straw, although it weigh∣ed
above 2000 l. This we knew by the Canow it self, which we found afterwards, and had much ado to get into the Water again, although we were in all 11 persons to pull at it. We had at that time in our Company, a certain Pilot, who had been divers times in those Quar∣ters. An Account thereof given by a Pilot. This Man, seeing this Action of the Indi∣ans, told us, that some few years before, a Squa∣dron of Pirats happened to arrive at that place. Being there, they went in Canows, to catch a certain sort of little Birds, which inhabiteth the Sea-coast, under the shade of very beautiful Trees, which here are to be seen. Mean while they were busied at that Work, certain Indians, who were climbed up into the Trees, to view their Actions, seeing now the Canows underneath, leaped down into the Sea, and with huge celerity seized some of the Canows and Pirats that kept the, both which they transported so nimbly in∣to the remotest parts of the Woods, as that the Prisoners could not be relieved by their Compani∣ons. Hereupon the Admiral of the said Squadron landed presently after with 500 Men, to seek and rescue the Men he had lost. But they saw such an excessive number of Indians flock together to oppose them, as obliged them to retreat with all possible diligence unto their Ships. Conclu∣ding among themselves, that if such Forces as those could not perform any thing, towards the recovery of their Companions, they ought to stay
no longer time there. Having heard this History, we came away from thence, fearing some Mis∣chief might befal us, and bringing with us the Ca∣now afore-mentioned. In this we found nothing else but a Fishing-net, though not very large, and four Arrows, made of Palm-tree, of the length of 7 Foot each, and of the figure, or shape, as followeth. These Arrows, we believed, to be their Arms. Arm of the  Indi∣ans. The Canow we brought away was made of Ce∣dar, but very roughly hewen, and polisht, which caused us to think, that those People have no In∣struments of Iron. We left that Place, and arrived in 24 hours unto another, called Rio de Zuera, where we They  the River of Zacra. found some few Houses belonging to the City of Cartagena. These Houses are inhabited by Spani∣ards, whom we resolved to visit, not being able to find any Tortoises, nor yet any of their Eggs. The Inhabitants were all fled from the said Hou∣ses, Th Spani∣ards fly a∣way. having left no Victuals, nor Provisions, be∣hind them, in so much as we were forced to con∣tent our selves with a certain Fruit, which there is called Platano. Of these Platanos we filled our Boats, and continued our Voyage, coasting along
the shore. Our Design was to find out some Creek, or Bay, wherein to careen our Vessel, which now was very leaky on all sides. Yea, in such a dangerous condition, that both night and They are in great danger. day we were constrained to imploy several Men at the Pump, unto which purpose we made use of all our Slaves. This Voyage lasted a whole Fortnight, all which time we lay under the con∣tinual Frights of perishing every moment. At last we arrived at a certain Port, called The Bay of Bleevelt, being so named from a Pirat who used to resort thither, with the same Design that we did. Here one party of our Men went into the Woods to hunt, i'th' mean while that another undertook to refitt and careen our Vessel. Our Companions who went abroad to hunt, found hereabouts Porcupines, of a huge and mon∣strous Huge Por∣upines. bigness. But their chief Exercise was kil∣ling of Monkeys, and certain Birds, called by the Monkeys and Pheasants. Spaniards, Faisanes, or Pheasants. The Toyl and Labour we had in this Employ of Shooting, did seem, at least, unto me, to be sufficiently com∣pensated with the pleasure of killing the said Mon∣keys. For at these we usually made 15 or 16 Shot, before we could kill three or four of them. So nimbly would they escape our Hands and Aim, even after being desperately wounded. On the other side, it was delightful to see the Female-Monkeys Actions of the Monkeys. carry their little ones upon their Backs, even just as the Negra's do their Children. When
any person passeth under the Trees where these Monkeys are sitting, they will commonly open their Bellies, and squirt their Excrements upon their Heads and Cloaths. Likewise, if shooting at a parcel of them, any Monkey happeneth to be wounded, the rest of the Company will flock about him, and lay their Hands upon the Wound, to hinder the Blood from issuing forth. Others will gather Moss that groweth upon the Trees, and thrust it into the Wound, and hereby stop the Blood. At other times they will gather such or such Herbs, and chewing them in their Mouth, apply them after the manner of a Poultis, or Ca∣taplasm. All which things did cause in me great Admiration, seeing such strange Actions in those irrational Creatures, which testified the Fidelity and Love they had for one another. On the 9th. day, after our Arrival at that Place, our Women-Slaves being busied in their ordinary Employments, of washing Dishes, sewing, draw∣ing Water out of Wells, which we had made on the shore, and the like things, we heard great Cryes of one of them, which said, she had seen a Troop of Indians appear towards the Woods, whereby she began immediately to cry out, Indi∣ans, Indians. We, hearing this Rumour, ran presently to our Arms, and their Relief. But, coming unto the Wood, we found no person there, excepting two of our Women-Slaves killed upon Two Women-Sls kill'd   Indi∣ans. the Place, with the shot of Arrows. In their Bo∣dies
we saw so many Arrows sticking, as might seem they had been fixed there with particular care and leisure. For otherwise we knew, that one of them alone was sufficient to bereave any humane Body of Life. These Arrows were all of a rare fashion and shape, their length being of 8 Feet, and their thickness, of a man's Thumb. At one of the Extremities hereof, was to be seen a Hook made of Wood, and tyed to the body of the Arrow with a String. At the other end was a certain Case, or Box, like the Case of a pair of Twizars, in the which we found certain little Pib∣bles, or Stones. The Colour thereof was red, and very shining, as if they had been locked up some considerable time. All which, we believed, Arms of the Indians. were Arms belonging to their Captains and Lead∣ers. A. A Marcasite, which was tyed unto the Extremity of the Arrow. B. A Hook, tyed to the same Extremity. C. The Arrow. D. The Case, at the other end.
These Arrows were all made without Instru∣ments How they make th Arrows. of Iron. For whatsoever the Indians make, they harden it first very artificially with Fire, and afterwards polish it with Flints. As to the Nature of these Indians, they are ex∣treamly robust of Constitution, strong, and nim∣ble Their Consti∣tution. at their Feet. We sought them carefully up and down the Woods, but could not find the least trace of them, neither any of their Canows, nor Floats, whereof they make use to go out to fish. Hereupon we retired unto our Vessels, where, ha∣ving imbarked all our Goods, we put off from the shore, fearing, least finding us there, they should return in any considerable number, and, over∣powering our Forces, tear us all in pieces.
CHAP. VIII. The Author departeth towards the Cape of Gracias à Dios. Of the Com∣merce which here the Pirats exercise with the Indians. His arrival at the Island de los Pinos. And finally, his Return unto Jamaica. THe Fear we had, more then usual, of those Indians above-mentioned, by reason of the Death of our two Women-Slaves, of which we told you in the former Chapter, occasion'd us to depart, as fast as we could, from that Place. We They depart for Cape Gracias à Dios. directed our Course from thence, towards the Cape of Gracias à Dios, where we had fixed our last Hopes of finding Provisions. For thither do usually resort many Pirats, who entertain a friend∣ly Correspondence and Trade with the Indians of those Parts. Being arrived at the said Cape, we hugely rejoyced, and gave thanks unto God Al∣mighty, for having delivered us out of so many Dangers, and brought us unto this Place of Re∣fuge, where we found People, who shewed us Where they find great Relief. most cordial Friendship, and provided us with all Necessaries whatsoever.
The Custom of this Island is such, That when any Pirats arrive there, every one hath the liberty to buy unto himself an Indian Woman, at the price of a Knife, or any old Ax, Wood-Bill, or Hatchet. They buy re Women for any Tri∣e. By this Contract, the Woman is obliged to remain in the Custody of the Pirat all the time he stayeth there. She serveth him in the mean while, and bringeth him Victuals of all sorts, that the Coun∣trey affordeth. The Pirat moreover hath liberty to go when he pleaseth, either to hunt, or fish, or about any other Divertisements of his Pleasure. But withal is not to commit any Hostility, or De∣predation upon the Inhabitants, seeing the Indians bring him in all that he standeth in need of, or that he desireth. Through the frequent Converse and Familiari∣ty Policy and Customs of the Island. these Indians have with the Pirats, they some∣times use to go to Sea with them, and remain among them for whole years, without returning home. From whence it cometh, that many of them can speak English, and French, and some of the Pirats their Indian Language. They are very dextrous at darting with the Javelin, whereby they are very useful to the Pirats, towards the vi∣ctualling their Ships, by the Fishery of Tortoises, and Manita's, a sort of Fish so called by the Spani∣ards. For one of these Indians, is alone sufficient to victual a Vessel of an 100 persons. We had among our Crew, two Pirats, who could speak very well the Indian Language. By the Help of
these Men, I was so curious as to enquire into their Customs, Lives, and Policy, whereof I shall give you here a brief Account. This Island containeth about 30 Leagues in Circumference, more or less. It is governed af∣ter the form of a little Commonwealth, they ha∣ving no King, nor Soveraign Prince, among them. Neither do they entertain any Friendship, or Cor∣respondence, with other neighbouring Islands, much less with the Spaniards. They are in all but a small Nation, whose number exceedeth not 1600 or 1700 persons. They have among them some few Negro's, who serve them in quality of How Ne∣gro's came thither. Slaves. These happened to arrive there, swim∣ming after Shipwrack made upon that Coast. For being bound for Tierra firme, in a Ship that carried them to be sold in those Parts, they killed the Captain and Mariners, with design to return unto their Countrey. But through their Ignorance in Marinery, they stranded their Vessel hereabouts. Although, as I said before, they make but a small Nation, yet they live divided, as it were, into two several Provinces. Of these, the one sort imploy themselves in cultivating the Ground, and making several Plantations. But the others are Laziness of the Indians. so lazy, as they have not Courage to build them∣selves Huts, much less Houses, to dwell in. They frequent chiefly the Sea-coast, wandring disorder∣ly up and down, without knowing, or caring so much as to cover their Bodies from the Rains,
which are very frequent in those Parts, unless it be with a few Palm-leaves. These they put up∣on their Heads, and keep their Backs always turn∣ed to the Wind that bloweth. They use no other Cloaths then an Apron, which being tyed to their Middle, cometh down so far, as to hide the shameful parts of their Bodies. Such Aprons are made of the rinds of Trees, which they strongly beat upon Stones, till they are softned. Of these same they make use for Bed-cloaths, to cover themselves when they sleep. Some make to themselves Bed-cloaths of Cotton, but these are but few in number. Their usual Arms are nothing Their Arms. but Azagayas, or Spears, which they make fit for their use with points of Iron, or Teeth of Coco∣driles. They know, after some manner, that there is a God, yet they live without any Religion, or di∣vine Worship. Yea, as far as I can learn, they Rligion. believe not in, nor serve the Devil, as many other Nations of America do both believe, invoke, and worship him. Hereby they are not so much tor∣mented by him, as other Nations are. Their or∣dinary Food, for the greatest part, consisteth in se∣veral . Fruits; such as are called Bananas, Racoves, Ananas, Potato's, Cazave; as also Crabs, and some few Fish of other sorts, which they kill in the Sea with Darts. As to their Drink, they are Their Drink. something expert in making certain pleasant and delicate Liquors. The commonest among them
is called Achioc. This is made of a certain Seed of Palm-tree, which they bruise, and afterwards steep, or infuse, in hot Water, till it be settled at the bottom. This Liquor being strained off, hath a very pleasant Taste, and is very nourishing. Many other sorts of Liquors they prepare, which I shall omit for brevity. Only I shall say some∣thing, in short, of that which is made of Platanos. These they knead betwixt their Hands with hot Water, and afterwards put into great Calabashes, which they fill up with cold Water, and leave in repose for the space of eight days, during which time, it fermenteth as well as the best sort of Wine. This Liquor they drink for Pleasure, and as a great Regale, in so much that when these In∣dians invite their Friends, or Relations, they can∣not treat them better, then to give them some of this pleasant Drink. They are very unskilful in dressing of Victuals; and hence it is, that they very seldom treat one Their Invita∣tions. another with Banquets. For this purpose, when they go, or send, to any House, to invite others, they desire them to come and drink of their Li∣quors. Before the invited persons come to their House, those that expect them, comb their Hair very well, and anoint their Faces with Oyl of Palm, mingled with a certain black Tincture, which rendreth them very hideous. The Women, in like manner, dawb their Faces with another sort of Stuff, which causeth them to look as red as
Crimson. And such are the greatest Civilities they use in their Ornaments and Attire. After∣wards, h that inviteth the other, taketh his Arms, which are three or four Azagayas, and goeth out of his Cottage the space of 3 or 400 Steps, to wait for, and receive the persons that are to come to visit him. As soon as they draw nigh unto him, he falleth down upon the Ground, lying flat on his Face, in which posture he remaineth, without any Motion, as if he were dead. Being thus pro∣strate before them, the invited Friends take him up, and set him on his Feet, and thus they go all together unto the Hut. Here the persons who are invited, use the same Ceremony, falling down on the Ground, as the Inviter did before. But he lifteth them up one by one, and giving them his Hand, conducteth them into his Cottage, where he causeth them to sit. The Women, on these Occasions, perform few or no Ceremonies. Being thus brought into the House, they are presented every one with a Calabash full of the Liquor above-mentioned, made of Platanos, which is very thick, almost like unto Water-gruel, or Childrens Pap, wherein is contained four Quarts, more or less, of the said Liquor. These they are to drink off as well as they can, and get down at any rare. The Calabashes being emptied into their Stomachs, the Master of the House, with many Ceremonies, goeth about the Room, and gathereth his Calabashes. And this Drinking hi∣therto
is reckoned but for one Welcom, whereas every Invitation ought to contain several Wel∣coms. Afterwards, they begin to drink of the clear Liquor above-mentioned, for which they were called to this Treat. Hereunto follow ma∣ny Songs, Dances, and a 1000 Caresses, to the Women that are present. In so much that often∣times, for a Testimony of their great Love unto them, they take their Darts, and with the points thereof, pierce and wound their genital Parts. This Relation, I confess, I could not believe, They pierce their Geni∣tals. though oftentimes it had been certified unto me, until such time as my own Eyes were Witnesses unto these, and the like Actions. Neither only on this Occasion do they perform this Ceremony, of piercing their Genitals, but also when they make Love unto any Woman, intending thereby to let them understand the greatness of their Affe∣ction and Constancy. They use not to marry any young Maid, with∣out Marriages. the Consent of her Parents. Hereupon, if any one desireth to take a Wife, he is first examin∣ed by the Damsels Father, concerning several Points relating to good Husbandry. These are most commonly; whether he can make Azagayas, Darts for Fishing; or spin a certain Thread, which they use about their Arrows? Having answered to Satisfaction, the Examiner calleth to his Daugh∣ter, for a little Calabash full of the Liquor above-mentioned. Of this he drinketh first; then giveth
the Cup unto the young Man; and he finally un∣to the Bride, who drinketh it up; and with this only Ceremony the Marriage is made. When any one drinketh to the Health of another, the second person ought to drink up the Liquor, which the other person hath left in the Calabash. But in case of Marriage, as was said before, it is consu∣med alone among them three, the Bride obtain∣ing the greatest part to her share. When the Woman lyeth in, neither she nor her Husband observe the time, as is customary among How the Wo∣mn lye in. the Caribes. But as soon as the Woman is delive∣red, shegoeth instantly unto the next River, Brook, or Fountain, and washeth the new-born Crea∣ture, swathling it up afterwards in certain Row∣lers, or Swathing-bands, which there are called Cabalas. This being done, she goeth about her ordinary Labour, as before. At their Entertain∣ments it is usual, that when the Man dieth, his Wife burieth him with all his Azagaya's, Aprons, Their Buri∣. and Jewels, that he used to wear at his Ears. Her next Obligation is, to come every day to her Hus∣band's Grave, bringing him Meat and Drink for a whole year together. Their Years they reckon by the Moons, allowing 15 to every year, which make their entire Circle, as our 12 months do ours. Some Historians, writing of the Caribe Islands, do affirm, that this Ceremony, of carrying Victu∣als to the Dead, is generally observed among
them. Moreover, that the Devil cometh unto the Sepulchres, and carrieth away all the Meat and Drink which is placed there. But I my self am not of this Opinion, seeing I have oftentimes with my own Hands, taken away these Offerings, and eaten them, instead of other Victuals. Un∣to this I was moved, because I knew that the Fruits used on these Occasions, were the choicest and ripest of all others, as also the Liquors, of the best sort, they made use of, for their greatest Regale and Pleasure. When the Widow hath Strange Cu∣stom of Wid∣dows here. thus compleated her year, she openeth the Grave, and taketh out all her Husband's Bones. These she scrapeth and washeth very well, and after∣wards dryeth against the Beams of the Sun. When they are sufficiently dryed, she tyeth them all to∣gether, and putteth them into a Cabala, being a certain Pouch, or Satchel, and is obliged for ano∣ther year to carry them upon her Back i'th' day∣time, and to sleep upon them i'th' night, until the year be compleatly expired. This Ceremony be∣ing finished, she hangeth up the Bag and Bones, against the Post of her own Door, in case she be Mistress of any House. But having no House of her own, she hangeth them at the Door of her next Neighbour, or Relation. The Widows cannot marry the second time, according to the Laws or Customs of this Nation, until the whole space of the two years above-men∣tioned, be compleated. The Men are bound to
perform no such Ceremonies towards their Wives. But if any Pirat marrieth an Indian Woman, she is bound to do with him, in all things, as if he were an Indian Man born. The Negro's that are upon this Island, live here, in all Respects, ac∣cording to the Customs of their own Countrey. All these things I have thought fit to take notice of in this place, though briefly, as judging them worthy the Curiosity of some judicious and inqui∣sitive persons. Now I shall continue the Account of our Voyage. After that we had refreshed and provided our selves, as well as we could, at the Island afore∣said, we departed from thence, and steered our Course towards the Island de los Pinos. Here we They depart for the Island de los Pinos arrived in 15 days, and were constrained to resit again our Vessel, which now, the second time, was very leaky, and not fit for sayling any far∣ther. Hereupon we divided our selves, as be∣fore, and some went about that Work of careen∣ing the Ship, mean while others betook themselves to Fishing. In this last we were so successful, as to take in 6 or 7 hours, as much Fish, as would Great plenty f Fish. abundantly suffice to feed a 1000 persons. We had in our Company some Indians, from the Cape of Gracias à Dios, who were very dextrous both in Hunting and Fishing. With the Help of these Men we killed likewise, in a short while, and salted, an huge number of wild Cows, sufficient And Cws. both to satiate our hungry Appetites, and to vi∣ctual
our Vessel for the Sea. These Cows were formerly brought into this Island by the Spaniards, with design they should here multiply, and stock the Countrey with Cattel of this kind. We salt∣ed, in like manner, a vast number of Tortoises, whereof in this Island huge quantities are to be found. With these things, our former Cares and Troubles began to dissipate, and our Minds to be so far recreated, as to forget the Miseries we had lately endured. Hereupon, we began to call one another again by the Name of Brothers, which was customary amongst us, but had been disused in our Miseries, and scarce remembred without Regret. All the time we continued here, we feasted our selves very plentifully, without the least Fear of Enemies. For as to the Spaniards that were upon the Island, they were here in mutual League and Friendship with us. Thus we were only con∣strained to keep Watch and Ward every night, for fear of the Crocodiles, which are here in great Many Croco∣diles here. plenty all over the Island. For these, when they are hungry, will assault any Man whatsoever, and devour him; as it happened in this Conjuncture, unto one of our Companions. This Man being gone into the Wood, in Company with a Negro, they fell into a Place where a Crocodile lay con∣cealed. The furious Animal, with incredible A Pirat as∣saulted by one. Agility, assaulted the Pirat, and fastning upon his Leg, cast him upon the Ground, the Negro be∣ing
fled, who should assist him. Yet he notwith∣standing, being a robust and couragious Man, drew forth a Knife he had then about him, and with the same, after a dangerous Combat, over∣came and killed the Crocodile. Which having done, he himself, both tired with the Battel, and weakned with the loss of Blood, that ran from his Wounds, lay for dead upon the Place, or at least beside his Senses. Being found in this posture some while after by the Negro, who returned to see what was become of his Master, he took him upon his Back, and brought him to the Sea-side, distant from thence the space of a whole League. Here we received him into a Canow, and convey∣ed him on board our Ship. After this Misfortune, none of our Men dared be so bold, as to enter the Woods without good Company. Yea, we our selves, desirous to re∣venge the Disaster of our Companion, went in Troops the next day unto the Woods, with design to find out Crocodiles to kill. These Animals They go to seek Croco∣diles. would usually come every night to the Sides of our Ship, and make resemblance of climbing up into the Vessel. One of these, on a certain night, we seized with an iron Hook, but he instead of fly∣ing to the bottom, began to mount the Ladder of the Ship, till we kill'd him with other Instruments. Thus after we had remained there some considera∣ble time, and refitted our selves with all things necessary, we set Sayl from thence for Iamaica. They arrive at aica.
Here we arrived within few days, after a prospe∣rous Voyage, and found Captain Morgan, who was got home before us, but had seen as yet none of his Companions whom he left behind, we be∣ing the first that arrived there after him. The said Captain at that present was very busie, Captain Morgan in∣tendeth to keep St. Ca∣tharin. endeavouring to perswade and levy People, to transport unto the Isle of St. Catharin, which he designed to fortifie, and hold as his own, think∣ing to make it a common Refuge unto all sorts of Pirats, or at least of his own Nation, as was said before. But he was soon hindred in the prosecu∣tion But is pre∣vented by a new Gover∣nour. of this Design, by the arrival of a Man of War from England. For this Vessel brought Orders from his Majesty of Great Britain, to recal the Go∣vernour of Iamaica from his Charge over that Island, unto the Court of England, there to give an Account of his Proceedings and Behaviour, in relation to the Pirats whom he had maintained in those Parts, to the huge detriment of the Subjects of the King of Spain. Unto this purpose, the said Man of War brought over also a new Gover∣nour of Iamaica, to supply the place of the prece∣dent. This Gentleman, being possessed of the Government of the Island, presently after gave notice unto all the Ports thereof, by several Boats which he sent forth to at intent▪ of the good and entire Correspondece, which his Master the King of England designd henceforwards to main∣tain, in those Western Parts of the World, to∣wards
his Catholick Majesty, and all his Subjects, and Dominions. And that unto this effect, for the time to come, he had received from his Sacred Majesty, and Privy Councel, strict and severe Orders, not to permit any Pirat whatsoever, to set forth from Iamaica, to commit any Hostility, or Depredation, upon the Spanish Nation, or Do∣minions, or any other People of those neighbour∣ing Islands. No sooner these Orders were sufficiently divul∣ged, but the Pirats, who as yet were abroad at All the Pi∣rats fear him Sea, began to fear them, in so much as they da∣red not return home unto the said Island. Here∣upon they kept the Seas as long as they could, and continued to act as many Hostilities as came in their way. Not long after, the same Pirats took and ransackt a considerable Town, seated in the Isle of Cuba, called la Villa de los Cayos, of which we made mention in the Description of the said Island. Here they committed again all sorts of Hostility, and inhumane and barbarous Cruelties. But the new Governour of Iamaica behaved himself so constant to his Duty, and the Orders he had brought from England, as that he apprehended several of the chief Actors herein, and condemned them to Se of them hanged. be hanged, which was accordingly done. From this Severity, many others still remaining abroad, took warning, and retired unto the Isle of Tortuga, least they should fall into his Hands. Here they joyned in Society with the French Pirats, Inhabi∣tants
of the said Island, in whose Company they continue unto this day. CHAP. IX. The Relation of the Shipwrack, which Monsieur Bertram Ogeron, Gover∣nour of the Isle of Tortuga, suffered nigh the Isles of Guadanillas. How both he and his Companions fell into the Hands of the Spaniards. By what Arts he escaped their Hands, and preserved his Life. The Enter∣prize which he undertook against Pu∣erto Rico, to deliver his People. The unfortunate Success of that Design. AFter the Expedition of Panama above-menti∣oned, the Inhabitants of the French Islands in America, in the year 1673▪ (mean while the War was so fierce in Europe between France and Holland) gathered a considerable Fleet, for to go and possess themselves of the Islands, belonging to the States-General of the United Provinces in the West-Indies. Unto this effect, their Admiral called
together, and levied all the Pirats and Voluntiers, that would, by any Inductions whatsoever, sit down under his Colours. With the same Design the Governour of Tortuga caused to be built in that Island, a good strong Man of War, unto which Vessel he gave the Name of Ogeron. This Ship he provided very well with all sort of Ammuniti∣on, and manned with 500 Bucaniers, all resolute and couragious Men, as being the Vessel he de∣signed for his own Safety. Their first Intention was to go and take the Isle of Curasao, belonging to the said States of Holland. But this Design met with very ill Success, by reason of a Shipwrack, which impeded the Course of their Voyage. Monsieur Ogeron set Sayl from the Port of Tortu∣ga, as soon as all things were in a readiness, with intent to joyn the rest of the said Fleet, and pur∣sue the Enterprize afore-mentioned. Being arri∣ved on the West-side of the Island of St. Iohn de Pu∣erto Rico, he was suddenly surprized with a violent Storm. This increased to that degree, as caused his new Frigat to strike against the Rocks, that Monsieur O∣geron is cast away. neighbour upon the Islands, called Guadanillas, where the Vessel broke into a 1000 pieces. Yet being nigh unto the Land of Puerto Rico, all his Men escaped, by saving their Lives in Boats, which they had at hand. The next day, all being now got on shore, they were discover'd by the Spaniards, who inha∣bit They get a∣shore in Boats the Island. These instantly took them to be
French Pirats, whose intent was to take the said Island anew, as they had done several times be∣fore. Hereupon they alarum'd the whole Coun∣trey, and gathering their Forces together, march∣ed out to their Encounter. But they found them unprovided of all manner of Arms, and conse∣quently not able to make any Defence, craving And are ta∣ken by the Spaniards. for Mercy at their Hands, and begging Quarter for their Lives, as the Custom is. Yet notwith∣standing, the Spaniards, remembring the horrible and cruel Actions, those Pirats had many times committed against them, would have no Com∣passion on their Condition. But answering them, Ha! ye thievish Dogs, here's no Quarter for you; they assaulted them with all Fury imaginable, and killed the greatest part of the Company. At last, perceiving they made no Resistance, nor had any Arms to defend themselves, they began to relent in their Cruelty, and stay their Blows, taking Pri∣soners, as many as remained alive. Yet still they would not be perswaded, but that those un∣fortunate People were come thither, with Design to take again and ruinate the Island. Hereupon they bound them with Cords, by two and two, or three and three together, and drove them through the Woods, into the Cham∣pagne, or open Fields. Being come thus far with them, they asked them, What was become of their Captain and Leader? Unto these Questions they constantly made Answer, He was drowned
in the Spwrack at Sea; although they knew full well it was false. For Monsieur Ogeron, being unknown unto the Spaniards, behaved himself among them, as if he were a Fool, and had no . common use of Reason. Notwithstanding, the Spaniards, rce believing what the Prisoners had answered, used all the means they could possibly to find him, but could not compass their Desires. For Monsieur Ogeron kept himself very close, to all the Features and mimical Actions, that might become any innocent Fool. Upon this account, he was not tyed as the rest of his Companions, but let loose, to serve the Divertisement and Laugh∣ter of the common Souldiers. These now and then would give him Scraps of Bread, and other Victuals, whereas the rest of the Prisoners had never sufficient wherewith to satisfie their hungry Stomachs. For as to the Allowance they had from the Spaniards, their Enemies, it was scarce enough to preserve them alive. It happened there was found among the French Pirats, a certain Surgeon, who had done some re∣markable A Surgeon . Services unto the Spaniards. In Conside∣ration of these Merits, he was unbound, and set at Liberty, to go freely up and down, even as Monsieur Ogeron did. Unto this Surgeon, Mon∣sieur  pth th Mon∣sur Oge∣ron to gt a∣way. Ogeron, having a fit opportunity thereunto, declared his Resolution of hazarding his Life, to attempt an Escape, from the Cruelty and hard Usage of those Enemies. After mature Delibe∣ration,
they both performed it, by flying unto the Woods, with Design there to make something or other that might be navigable, whereby to transport themselves else-where. Although un∣to this effect, they had nor could obtain no other thing i'th' World, that could be serviceable in building of Vessels, but one only Hatchet. Thus they joyned Company, and began their March to∣wards the Woods that say nearest the Sea-coast. They fly into the Woods. Having travelled all day long, they came about Evening unto the Sea-side almost unexpectedly. Here they found themselves without any thing to eat, nor any secure Place wherein to rest their wearied Limbs. At last they perceived nigh the Shore an huge quantity of Fishes, called by the Spaniards, Corlabados. These frequently approach the Sands of the Shore, in pursuit of other little Fishes that serve them for their Food. Of these they took as many as they thought necessary, and by rubbing two Sticks tediously together, they kindled Fire, wherewith they made Coals to roast them. The next day they began to cut down and prepare Timber, wherewith to make a kind of small Boat, in which they might pass over unto the Isle of Santa Cruz, which belongeth to the French. Mean while they were busied about their Work, they discovered, at a great distance, a certain Ca∣now, They eize a Canow, by killing two Men. which steered directly towards the Place where they were. This occasioned in their Minds
some Fears, least they should be found, and ta∣ken again by the Spaniards; and hereupon they re∣tired into the Woods, till such time as they could see from thence, and distinguish what People were in the Canow. But at last, as their good Fortune would have it, they perceived them to be no more then two Men, who in their Disposition and Apparel seemed to be Fishermen. Having made this Discovery, they concluded unanimous∣ly betwixt themselves, to hazard their Lives, and overcome them, and afterwards seize the Canow. Soon after they perceived one of them, who was a Mulato, to go with several Calabashes hanging at his Back towards a Spring, not far distant from the Shore, to take in fresh Water. The other, who was a Spaniard, remained behind, waiting for his Return. Seeing them divided, they as∣saulted the Mulato first, and discharging a great Blow on his Head with the Hatchet, they soon bereav'd him of Life. The Spaniard, hearing the Noise, made instantly towards the Canow, think∣ing to escape. But this he could not perform so soon, without being overtaken by the two, and there massacred by their Hands. Having now compassed their Design, they went to seek for the Corps of the Mulato, which they carried on board the Canow. Their intent was to convey them into the middle of the Sea, and there cast them over board, to be consumed by the Fish, and by this means conceal this Fact from being known un∣to
the Spaniards, either at a short or long distance of time. These things being done, they took in present∣ly as much fresh Water as they could, and set Sayl from thence to seek some Place of Refuge. That day they steered along the Coasts of Puerto Rico, and came unto the Cape, called by the Spa∣niards, Cabo Roxo. From hence they traversed di∣rectly to the Isle of Hispaniola, where so many of their own Comrades and Companions were to be found. Both the Currents of the Waters and Winds were very favourable unto this Voyage, in so much as in a few days they arrived at a Place, led Samana, belonging to the said Island, where They arrive at Samana: ey found a Party of their own People. Monsieur Ogeron, being landed at Samana, gave Orders unto the Surgeon, to levy all the People, Monsieur O∣geron ga∣thereth a Fleet. he could possible, in those Parts, mean while he departed to re-visit his Government of Tortuga. Being arrived at the said Port, he used all his En∣deavours, to gather what Vessels and Men he could, to his Assistance. So that within a few days he compassed a good number of both, very well equipped and disposed to follow and execute his Designs. These were to go unto the Island of St. Iohn de Puerto Rico, and deliver his fellow-Pri∣soners, whom he had left in the miserable condi∣tion To rescue  Companions. was said before. After having imbarked all the People, which the Surgeon had levied at Sa∣mana, he made them a Speech, exhorting them
to have good Courage, and telling them, You may all expect great Spoyl and Riches from this Enterprize, and therefore let all Fear and Cowardize be set on side. On the contrary, fill your Hearts with Courage and Va∣lour, for thus you will find your selves soon satisfied, of what, at present, bare Hopes do promise. Every one relyed much on these Promises of Monsieur Oge∣ron, and, from his words, conceived no small Joy in their Minds. Thus they set Sayl from Tortuga, They t Sayl steering their Course directly for the Coasts of Pu∣erto Rico. Being come within sight of Land, they made use only of their lower Sayls, to the intent they might not be discovered at so great a distance by the Spaniards, till they came something near unto the Place where they intended to land. The Spaniards, notwithstanding this Caution, The Spani∣ard knw of th Design. had Intelligence before-hand of their coming, and were prepared for a Defence, having posted ma∣ny Troops of Horse all along the Coast, to watch the Descent of the French Pirats. Monsieur Oge∣ron, perceiving their Vigilancy, gave Order to the Vessels to draw nigh unto the Shore, and shoot off many great Guns, whereby he forced the Cavalry to retire unto Places more secure within the Woods. Here lay concealed many Companies of Foot, who had prostrated themselves upon the Ground. Mean while the Pirats made their Descent at lei∣sure, and began to enter among the Trees, sarce  . suspecting any Harm to be there, where the Horse∣men could do no Service. But no sooner were
they fallen into this Ambuscade, when the Spa∣niards arose with great Fury, and assaulted the French so couragiously, that in a short while they destroyed great part of them. And thus leaving And are o∣vercome. great Numbers of Dead on the Place, the rest with great difficulty escaped, by retreating in all haste unto their Ships. Monsieur Ogeron, although he escaped this Monsieur O∣geron esca∣peth. Danger, yet could willingly have perished in the Fight, rather then suffer the Shame and Confusion, the unfortunate Success of this Enterprize was like to bring upon his Reputation. Especially consi∣dering, that those whom he had attempted to set at Liberty, were now cast into greater Miseries, through this Misfortune. Hereupon they hastned to set Sayl, and go back unto Tortuga, the same way they came, with great Confusion in their Minds, much diminished in their Number, and nothing laden with those Spoyls, the Hopes where∣of had possessed their Hearts, and caused them readily to follow the Promises of unfortunate Monsieur Ogeron. The Spaniards were very vigi∣lant, and kept their Posts nigh unto the Sea-side, till such time as the Fleet of Pirats was totally out of sight. I'th' mean while they made an end of killing such of their Enemies, as being desperately wounded, could not escape away by Flight. In like manner, they cut off several Limbs from the They cut off Limbs to shew the Pri∣soners. dead Bodies, with design to shew them unto the former Prisoners, for whose Redemption these o∣thers had cross'd the Seas.
The Fleet being departed, the Spaniards kind  ld Bones all over the Island, and made great Demonstrations of Joy, for the Victory they had obtained. But the French Prisoners, who were there before, had more Hardship shewed them from that day then ever. Of their Misery and Mis-usage, was a good Eye-witness, Iacob Binkes, Governour at that time in America, for the States-General of the United Provinces. For he happened to arrive in that Conjuncture, at the Island of Pu∣erto Rico, with some Men of War, to buy Provi∣sions, and other Necessaries, for his Fleet. His Compassion on their Misery was such, as caused him to bring away by Stealth, five or six of the said Prisoners, which served only to exasperate . the Minds of the Spaniards. For soon after they sent the rest of the Prisoners, unto the chief City of the Island, there to work and toil about the For∣tifications  which then were making, forcing them to bring and carry Stones, and all sorts of Materi∣als belonging thereunto. These being finished, the Governour transported them unto Havana, where they imployed them in like manner, in for∣tifying that City. Here they caused them to work 'th' day-time, and by night they shut them up as ose Prisoners, fearing least they should enter∣prie uon the City. For of such Attempts the Spaniards had had divers Proofs, on other Occasi∣ons, which afforded them sufficient Cause to use them after that manner.
Afterwards at several times, wherein Ships ar∣rived They a transported by degrees  to Spain. there from New Spain, they transported them by degrees into Europe, and landed them at the City of Cadiz. But notwithstanding this Care of the Spaniards to disperse them, they soon after met almost all together in France, and resolved among M of  met  France. themselves to return again unto Tortuga, with the first Opportunity should proffer. Unto this ef∣fect, they assisted one another very lovingly, with what Necessaries they could spare, according to every ones Condition. So that in a short while the greatest part of those Pirats had nested them∣selves again at Tortuga, their common Place of And return unto Tortu∣ga. Rendezvous. Here, some time after, they equip∣ped again a new Fleet, to revenge their former Misfortunes on the Spaniards, under the Conduct of one le Sieur Maintenon, a French-man by Nation. With this Fleet he arrived at the Island de la Trini∣dad, They tak the Island de la Trinidad. situated between the Isle of Tabago, and the neighbouring Coasts of Paria. This Island they sackt, and afterwards put to the Ransom of 10000 And put t to a Ransom of 10000 pieces of Eight. pieces of Eight. From hence they departed, with Design to take and pillage the City of Caracas, seated over against the Island of Curasao, belong∣ing to the Hollanders.
CHAP. X. A Relation of what Encounters lately happened at the Islands of Cayana and Tabago, between the Count de Estres, Admiral of France, in Ame∣rica, and the Heer Jacob Binkes, Vice-Admiral of the United Provin∣ces, in the same Parts. IT is a thing already known unto the greatest part of Europe, that the Prince of Curland began The Prince of Curland first Possessor of Tabago. to establish a Colony in the Island of Tabago. As also, that some while after, his People, for want of timely Recruits from their own Countrey, a∣bandoned the said Island, leaving it to the first that should come and possess it. Thus it fell in∣to the Hands of the Heers Adrian, and Cornelius The id Island posses∣sed by the Dutch. Lampsius, Natives of the City of Fissing▪ in the Province of Zeeland▪ For being arrived at the said Island of Tabago, in the year 1654. they un∣dertook to fortifie it, by Commands of their So∣vereigns, the States-General. Hereupon they built a goodly Castle, in a convenient Situation, capa∣ble of hindring the Assaults of any Enemies, that might enterprize upon the Island.
The Strength of this Castle was afterwards suf∣ficiently tryed by Monsieur de Estres, as I shall pre∣sently relate, after I have first told you, what happened before at Cayana, in the year 1676. This year the States-General of the United Provinces, sent their Vice-Admiral, Iacob Binkes, unto the Island of Cayana, then in possession of the French, for to retake the said Island, and hereby restore it unto The Isle of Cayana re∣taken by the Hollanders. the Dominions of the United Provinces afore-men∣tioned. With these Orders he set forth from Hol∣land, on the 16th. day of March, in the said year, his Fleet consisting of seven Men of War, one Fire∣ship, and five other small Vessels of less account. This Fleet arrived at Cayana the 4th. day of the Month of May next following. Immediately af∣ter their Arrival, the Heer Binkes landed 900 Men, who approaching the Castle, summoned the Go∣vernour to surrender, at their Discretion. His Answer was, He thought of nothing less then Sur∣rendring, but that he and his People were resolved to defend themselves, even to the utmost of their Endeavours. The Heer Binkes having received this Answer, presently commanded his Troops to attack the Castle on both sides at once. The Assault was very furious. But at length, the French being few in number, and overwhelmed with the multitude of their Enemies, surrendred both their Arms and the Castle. In it were found 37 pieces of Cannon. The Governour, who was named Monsieur Lesi, together with two Priest,
were sent into Holland. The Heer Binkes lost in the Combat 14 Men only, and had 72 wound∣ed. The King of France no sooner understood this Success, but he sent in the Month of October fol∣lowing, the Count de Estres, for to retake the said The Count de Estres sent to re∣take it again from the Dutch. Island again from the Hollanders. He arrived there in the Month of December, with a Squadron of Men of War, all very well equipped and provi∣ded. Being come on his Voyage as far as the Ri∣ver called Aperovaco, he met there with a small Vessel of Nantes, which had set forth from the said Island of Cayana but a fortnight before. This Ship gave him Intelligence of the present state and condition, wherein he might be certain to find the Hollanders at Cayana. They told him, there were 300 Men in the Castle; that all about it they had fixed strong Palizadas, or Empalements; and that within the Castle were mounted 26 pieces of Can∣non. Monsieur de Estres, being enabled with this In∣telligence to take his own Measures, proceeded  . on his Voyage, and arrived at a Port of the said Island, three Leagues distant from the Castle. Here he landed 800 Men, whom he divided into two several Parties. The one he placed under the Conduct of the Count de Blinac; and the other he gave unto Monsieur de St. Faucher. On board . the Fleet he left Monsieur Gabaret, with divers other principal Troops, which he thought not fit
or necessary to be landed. As soon as the Men were set on shore, the Fleet weighed Anchor, and sailed very slowly towards the Castle, mean while the Souldiers marched by Land. These could not travel otherwise then by night, by reason of the excessive Heat of the Sun, and intolerable Ex∣halations of the Earth, which here is very sulphu∣reous, and consequently no better then a smoaky and stinking Oven. On the 19th. day of the said Month, the Count de Estres sent Monsieur de Lesi, (who had been Go∣vernour He summon∣eth them to surrender. of the Island, as was said before) de∣manding of them, to deliver the Castle unto the Obedience of the King his Master, and unto him in his Sovereigns Name. But those who were within, resolved not to deliver themselves up, Which they deny to do. but at the expence of their Lives and Blood, which Answer they sent unto Monsieur de Estres. Hereup∣on the French, the following night, assaulted and storm'd the Castle on seven several sides thereof all He stormeth the Castle. at once. The Defendants, having performed their Obligation very stoutly, and fought with as much Valour as was possible, were at last forced to surrender. Within the Castle were found 38 And taketh it. Persons dead, besides many others that were wounded. All the Prisoners were transported in∣to France, where they were used with great Hard∣ship. Monsieur de Estres, having put all things in good Order at the Isle of Cayana, departed from thence  dep t Marti▪
for that of Martinica. Being arrived at the said Island, he was told, that the Heer Binkes was at that present at the Island of Tabago, and his Fleet lay at Anchor in the Bay. Having received this Intelligence, Monsieur de Estres made no long Stay there, but set Sayl again, steering his Course di∣rectly for Tabago. No sooner was he come nigh And thence to Tabago. unto the Island, but Vice-Admiral Binkes sent his Land-Forces, together with a good number of Ma∣riners, on shore, for to manage and defend the Artillery that was there. These Forces were com∣manded by the Captains van der Graef, van Don∣gen, and Ciavone, who laboured very hard all that night in raising certain Batteries, and filling up the Palizadas, or Empalements, of the Fortress called Sterreschans. Two days after the French Fleet came to an An∣chor, in the Bay of Palmit, and immediately, with the Help of 18 Boats, they landed all their Men. H and   Men at Tabago. The Heer Binkes, perceiving the French to appear upon the Hills, gave Orders to burn all the Hou∣ses that were nigh unto the Castle, to the intent the French might have no Place to shelter them∣selves thereabouts. On the 23d. day of February, Monsieur de Estres sent a Drum over to the Hollan∣ders, to demand the Surrendry of the Fort, which was absolutely denied. In this posture of Affairs things continued until the 3d. of March. On this And enga∣ the Dch Fleet at the same . day the French Fleet came with full Sayl, and en∣gaged the Dutch Fleet. The Heer Binkes present∣ly
encountred them, and the Dispute was very hot on both sides. I'th' mean while the Land-Forces belonging to the French, being sheltred by the thickness of the Woods, advanced towards the Castle, and began to storm it very briskly, with more than ordinary Force. But were repul∣sed by the Dutch with such Vigor, as caused them after three distinct Attacks to retire, with the loss But is beaten by Land. of above 150 Men, and 200 wounded. These they carried off, or rather dragg'd away, with no small Difficulty, by reason of their disorderly Re∣treat. All this while the two Fleets continued the Com∣bat, and fought very desperately, until that on both sides some Ships were consumed between Vulcan and Neptune. Of this number was Monsieur de Estres his own Ship, mounted with 27 Guns of He looseth his own Ship and others. prodigious bigness, besides other Peeces of lesser Port. The Battel continued from break of day, until the Evening. A little before which time, Monsieur de Estres quitted the Bay, with the rest And leaveth the Victory to the Dutch. of his Ships, unto the Hollanders, excepting only two, which were stranded under Sayl, as having gone too high within the Port. Finally, the Victory remained on the side of the Hollanders, howbeit with the loss of several of their Ships that were burnt. Monsieur de Estres finding himself under the Shame of the loss of this Victory, and that he could
expect no Advantage for that present, over the Island of Tabago, set Sayl from those Quarters the Monieur de Estres re∣ unto France. 13th. day of March, and arrived the 21st. day of Iune next following, at the Port of Brest in France. Having given an Account of these Transactions unto his most Christian Majesty, he was pleased to command him, to undertake again the Enterprize And is nt again unto Tabago. of Tabago. Unto this effect, he gave Orders for 8 great Men of War to be equipped with all speed, together with 8 others of smaller account. With all which Vessels he sent again Monsieur de Estres into America the same year. He set Sayl from the said Port of Brest, on the 3d. day of October follow∣ing, and arrived the 1st. of December, at the Island of Barbadas. Afterwards having received some Recruits from the Isle of Martinica, he sent before∣hand to review the Island of Tabago, and consider the Condition thereof. This being done, he  arriveth . weighed Anchors, and set Sayl directly for the said Island, where he arrived the 7th. day of the said Month of December with all his Fleet. Immediately after his Arrival he landed 500 Men, under the Conduct of Monsieur de Blinac, Governour of the French Islands in America. These were followed soon after by one 1000 more. The 9th. day of the said Month, they approached with∣in 600 Paces of a certain Post called le Cort, where they landed all the Artillery designed for this En∣terprize.  th n. On the 10th. day Monsieur de Estres went
in Person, to take a View of the Castle, and de∣manded of the Heer Binkes, by a Messenger, the Surrendry thereof, which was generously denied. The next day the French began to advance to∣wards And attack∣eth the Ca∣stle. the Castle, and on the 12th. of the said Month, the Dutch from within began to fire at them with great Perseverance. The French made a beginning to their Attack, by casting Fire-balls into the Castle with main Violence. The very third Ball that was cast in, happened to fall in the The Castle blown up by an Accident. Path-way that led unto the Store-house, where the Powder and Ammunition was kept, belong∣ing to the Castle. In this Path was much Pow∣der scatter'd up and down, through the Negli∣gence of those that carried it to and fro, for the necessary Supplies of the Defendants. By this means the Powder took Fire i'th' Path, and from thence ran in a moment as far as the Store-house above-mentioned. So that suddenly both the Store-house was blown up, and with it, Vice-Admiral Binkes himself, then Governour of the Island, and all his Officers. Only Captain van Dongen remained alive. This Mischance being perceived by the French, they instantly ran with And hence is taken by the French. 500 Men, and possessed themselves of the Castle. Here they found 300 Men alive, whom they took Prisoners, and transported into France. Monsieur de Estres after this commanded the Castle to be demolished, together with other Posts that might
serve for any Defence, as also all the Houses standing upon the Island. This being done, he departed from thence the twenty seventh day of the said Month of December, and arrived again in France, after a prosperous Voyage.
The Table. A. ALcatrazes, what sort of People they are. Part i. pag. 28 Aprcott-tree. Pt. i. p. 36 Acoma-tree. ib. 39 Abelcose-tree. Pt. i. p. 40 Author of this Book, his Voyage along the Coasts of Costa Rica, at his return, from Panama, to Jamaica. Pt. 3. p. 77. They arrive at Boca del Too. 78. Seek Provisions, but find none: they depart West∣wards: provide themselves with Tortoises; are assaulted by the In∣dians, kill two of them, whereof one had a golden Beard; desire to speak with them, but in vain. 79, 80. They return to Chagre: and are chased by a ship, of their own party. 81, 82. They go to the River of Zuera, where the Spaniards flie from them. 86. Are in great danger of sinking a whole fortnight. 87. They arrive at the Bay of Blecvelt: careen their Vessel: are assaulted by the Indians, who kill two Women Slaves: this causeth them suddenly to depart. 90. They arrive at Cape Gracias à Dios. 91. And, find, there, great re∣lief. ibid. They came to the Island de los Pinos, where they ca∣reen their Vessel again: here they victual themselves well: depart for Jamaica, and arrive there. 100. & sq. Adrian, and Cornelius, Lampsins, take possession of Tabago for the Dutch. Pt. 3. p. 116 St. Augustin (a City of Florida) ransackt by John Davis, Pirat of Jamaica. Pt. i. p. 114, 115 B. BAptism used by the French at Sea. Part i. pag. 3, 6 —by the Dutch. ib. p. 4 Brasil-wood. ib. 39 Bucanis, their distinctions, manner of living, Vices, &c. Pt. i. p. 59 Banana-wine, not inferiour to Spanish. Pt. i. p. 66 Bartholomew Portuguez, a famous Pirat. Pt. 1. p 95. He taketh a great Spanish ship. Is retaken, and loseth his liberty. 96. Is brought unto Campeche. 97. Condemned to the Gallows. 98. Killeth his Centry, and escapeth. ibid. Goeth to the Golfo triste. 99. Gettth a Boat, there: and retaketh the Ship by which he was taken. 100, 101▪ He loseth his Ship in a storm, and escapeth in a Canow. 101, 102
Bitumen, or Pitch, in great quantities. Pt. ii. p. 42 Ba dl Toro, a Port, where great store of Tortoises are found. Its circumference. Pt. iii. p. 78 Boca del Dragon, another Port, on Costa Rica, where be Indians of prodigious strength. Pt. 3. p. 84 Bay of Bleevelt, so called from a Pirat of that name. Pt. 3. p. 87. Here are Porcupines of prodigious bigness. ibid. Binkes (Jacob) sent from Holland, to retake Cayana from the French, an. 1676. Pt. iii. p. 117. is engaged at Tabago, by the Count de Estres. 120 Brodely (Cap.) is made Viceadmiral by Morgan: taketh the Castle of Chagre. Pt. iii. p. 21. & seq. C. CRabs, both of Land, and Sea. Part i. pag. 13 —Their effects, when eaten. ibid. City of Santo Domingo. Pt. i. p. 25 —of San Tiago. ib. 26. its Commerce: is pillaged by Pirats. Pt. ii. p. 78 —of Na Sa de Alta Gracia. ibid. Crab-Lemons. Pt. i. p. 31 Caramite-tree. Pt. i. p. 36 Cedar-tree. Pt. i. p. 37. Pt. ii. p. 16. Panama was all built with Cedar. Pt. iii. p. 55 Canows, how they are made. ibid. 38 Cochinillas, or Glow-worms. Pt. i. p. 42 Cricketts, or Grillones. ib. 43 Cazadors de Moscas, or Fly-catchers. Pt. i. p. 44 Cocodriles, or Caymanes, their nature, and qualities. Pt. i. p. 47. they persecute the Flyes, and wherefore. ib. 48. their manner of procreating. ib. Many at the Island de los Pinos. Pt. iii. p. 101 Carpinter-birds. Pt. i. p. 57. they build Nests for the Parrots. ib. Cabreros, or Goat-keepers, a Bird having seven galls. Pt. i. p. 58 Crows, or Ravens, in great multitudes, at Hispaniola. ib. Cazave, or Mandioca. Pt. i. p. 65. How prepared, for to make bread, and drink. ibid. Campeche was sackt by Lewis Scot. Pt. i. 110 St. Catharin taken by Mansvelt, and Morgan: surrendred again to the Spaniards, by le Sieur Simon: its convenient situation: 62. & seq. A Relation of its retaking, written by a Spanish Ingeneer. 66. Mor∣gan endeavoureth to keep it, but in vain. 75. taken again by treachery of the Governour. Pt. iii. p. 15 Cuba, its description. Pt. ii. p. 76 Cayos Islands, the refuge of the Pirats. Pt. ii. p. 77
Castle of Chagre, its situation: is taken, after great resistance, by help of a strange accident. Pt. iii. p. 27 Cows of the Sea. vid. Sea-Cows. Cayos, a considerable Town of Cuba, sackt by the Pirats: all manner of Cruelties committed there. Pt. iii. p. 104 Curasao, an Island of the Dutch, designed upon by the French of Tor∣tuga in Ann. 1673. Pt. iii. p. 105 Caracas (City) designed upon by the Pirats of Tortuga. Pt. iii. p. 115 Cayana (Island) retaken from the French by Binkes. Pt. iii. p. 117. is taken again by the French. 119 D. DAte-trees, their description, and several sorts. Part 1. page 31 Davis a Pirat. vid. John. E. COunt de Estres his actions at Cayana, and Tabago, Ann. 1676. Part iii. pag. 118. & seq. F. FLyes, how troublesom in Hispaniola. Part i. page 41. their seve∣ral sorts. ibid. They persecute continually, and are persecuted by the Caymanes, or Crocodiles. Pt. i. p. 48 Fly-catchers. vid. Cazadores de Moscas. French-ship, seized by Capt. Morgan. Pt. ii. p. 105 G. GEnipa-tree. Part i. pag. 37 Genipa-ink. ibid. Grillones, or Cricketts. Pt. i. p. 43 Guines agudos, whereof they make drink. Pt. i. p. 63 Gibraltar, its Situation: Inundations: Trade. Pt. ii. p. 15 Governor of Gibraltar killed. Pt. ii. p. Governor of Puerto del Principe killed. Pt. ii. p. 82 Governor of Puerto Velo killed. Pt. ii. p. 98 Governor of Chagre killed. Pt. iii. p. 27 Governor of Panama cometh against Morgan: is forced to retire: send∣eth a strange message to Morgan: his answer. Pt. ii. p. 100. & sq. Governor of St. Katharin betrayeth the Island into the hands of  English, by a very cunning stratagem. Pt. iii. p. 15 Governor of Jamaica recalled for maintaining the Pirats, there: ano∣ther sent: all the Pirats fear him: he hangeth some of them: Pt. iii. p. 103. & .
Guadanillas certain little Islands, nigh St. John de Puerto Rico. Pt. iii p. 106 Garcias à Dios (Cape) description of the particular Customs of the Indians there. Pt. iii. p. 91 H. HIspaniola, its description. Part i. pag. 24 Sir Henry Morgan, his origen. Pt. 2. p. 60. He goeth to Barba∣das, and, thence, to Jamaica: he serveth the Pirats. 61. is made a Captain: and chosen Viceadmeral by Mansvelt: they take St. Catha∣rin. 62. He desireth to keep it, though in vain. 75. Equippeth an∣other Fleet. 76. Goeth to Puerto del Principe. 81. and taketh it. 83. Havana the strongest place in the West-Indies: its Iurisdiction; Com∣merce; Castles, Inhabitants, convenient Situation: is designed against. Pt. ii. p. 78. & seq. Sir Henry Morgan equippeth a new Fleet. Pt. ii. p. 89. designeth upon Puerto Velo. 90. and sacketh it, with 400 men. 98. His message to the Governor of Panama. 102. He returneth to Cuba, and findeth 250000 Pieces of Eight spoil, taken at Puerto Velo, besides Goods, and Iewels. 103. He undertaketh a new Expedition against Maracaibo. 104. Arriveth there, and taketh it: Cruelties against the Prisoners there: he goeth to Gibraltar, and taketh it likewise: other inhumane Cruelties, there, used. 114. & seq. He goeth to take the Governor of Gibraltar: hardship of their Iourny: bringeth home many Prisoners. 125. & seq. A Ship, and four Boats, taken. 127. He returneth to Maracaibo: is blockt up there by a Spanish Fleet: his bold message to the Admiral of the said Fleet: Letter of the Admiral commanding him to surrender: a Treaty, on foot, betwixt them: he destroyeth the said Fleet by a stratagem. 129. & seq. Sir Henry Morgan equippeth another Fleet: writeth several Letters to all the ancient Pirats for their assistance: multitudes flock unto him: he calleth a Councel: and sendeth to seek provisions. Pt. iii. p. 1. & seq. Four ships, which he sent, for this purpose, arrive at the River de la Hacha: they take a great Vessel laden with Corn: they land, defeat the Spaniards, pursue them, torture them, take great spoil, put them to the ransom; and return. ib. 4, 5, 6. His Fleet maketh 37 Sail in all, with 2000 fighting men: he divideth it into two Squadrons: Ar∣ticles of this Voyage. 8. They resolve to go to Panama: but, first, to St. Catharin, to procure Guides, for this enterprize. 10. They ar∣rive, and take St. Catharin, being betrayed by the Governor: great hardship they endured, after landing: they eat; for hunger, an old seabby horse: Bravado of Capt. Morgan, which occasion'd the Spa∣niards
to surrender: 12. & seq. Number of persons found on the Island: Fortresses, and Arms, they found there: they also find three Guides: Four Ships sent to Chagre: 17. & seq. Brodely made Vice-Admiral: he arriveth at Chagre: situation of the Castle: they land: danger of this Enterprize: they resolve to give the Attack: are, at first, forced to retire: yet, overcome, at last, by help of a very strange Accident. 21. & seq. He arriveth at Chagre, and is received with great Acclamation: loseth his own Ship, and three more, at the entry of the River: leaveth in the Ca∣stle a Garrison of 500 men, and, in the Ships, 150 more. 29, 30. He set∣teth forth for Panama, at the head of 1200 men, with very small Provi∣sions, thinking to find by the way. 31. He leaveth his Boats bhind the 3d. day, with 160 men, to keep them: a pipe of Tobacco their best Victu∣als, the 1st. day of this Iourney: they feed, the 4th. day, upon Bags of Leather, which they found: some small Provision is found the 5th. day, which is distributed among the weakest: they eat Leaves of Trees, green Herbs, or Grass, on the 6th. At noon, they find quantity of Maiz: great Murmurings against Captain Morgan, and his Conduct, that night. On the 7th. day, they eat some few Cats, and Dogs, they found at Santa Cruz; drink some Wine of Peru, and fall sick, almost every man, think∣ing themselves poysoned: Captain Morgan sendeth back the Canows: 8 Pirats killed, and 10 wounded, by the Indians, on the 8th. day: no Provisions found, and great Hardship endured, that night, by Rain: they discover the South-Sea, with great joy, on the 9th. and find great num∣ber of Cattel, especially Asses, which they kill, and devour: after noon, they come within sight of Panama, and encamp nigh the City, at the sound of Drums, and Trumpets, to express their joy: they march to at∣tack the Spanish Forces on the 10th. in the morning: they fear the num∣ber of the Enemy, yet resolve to hazard the Battel: they engage, and de∣feat the Spaniards: many Pirats kill'd in the Battel, with 600 Spani∣ards: they march towards the City: lose many in the Assault: yet, con∣tinue, to advance: and take it in three hours: Orders, not to drink Wine. p. 31. & seq. to 53. Sir Henry Morgan sendeth Boats to search the South Sea: he fireth the Ci∣ty of Panama, and burneth it almost in a day: great destruction of the Fire: he sendeth a Convoy to Chagre: much Riches found in the Ru∣ines: 200 of the Inhabitants brought in: a rich Galeon escapeth, their own Debauchery being the cause: they send, to seek her: several Boats, and a Ship, taken: the Convoy returneth from Chagre, with News of a Spanish Ship taken there: Cruelties used at Panama: no Condition spared: History of a Spanish Lady: Captain Morgan prepareth to de∣part: A Plot discovered: Ransoms demanded: the Artillery spoiled: they leave Panama: 175 Beasts laden with Riches: Misery of the Pri∣soners: all are put to Ransom: the Spanish Lady set at liberty: they ar∣rive
at Chagre: A Dividend made: but with much Disgust on all sides: Captain Morgan feareth their displeasure, and stealeth away very private∣ly: the Frnch dsirous of Revenge. p. 54. & seq. to 76. He is still de∣sirous to keep. St. Catharin, but is prevented by a new Governour sent un∣to Jamaica. Pt. 3. p. 103. I. ISland of Punta Rica. Part i. Page 7 —Tortuga. ib. p. 8 John Esquling is sold at Tortuga: Pt. i. p. 21. is sold again: ibid.  gtteth his liberty: ib. p. 22. turneth Pirat. ibid. Isle of Savona. Pt. i. p. 27 Indians, what Women they love bst. Pt. i. p. 28 John Davis, a famous Pirat: be landeth in Nicaragua: Pt. i. p. 111. killeth the Centry, and entreth the City: ib. 12. spareth not the Churches: gettth away with many iches: is pursued by the Spaniards: but all in vain: 113. He brough away 50000 pieces of Eight: is made Admiral of the Pirats: and ransth the City of St. Augustin. 114, 115 Indians of Jacatan, their Cuoms, and Religion. Pt. ii. p. 43 Islands de l Pertas. Pt. ii. p. 51. Their Inhabitants, and the Customs thereof. 5. All the Indians disappear suddenly, and strangely. 54. The Pirats were there 6 months. 55. How they got away, who remained be∣bind. 57. Miseries they endure. 58, 59 Indians of Darin, not civilized. Pt. ii. p. 56. They kill Lolonois. ib. Island of St. Cathain. v. lit. C. Island of Cuba. v. lit. C. Islands de los Cayos. v. lit. C. Islands of wild Indians. Pt. iii. p. 78. They use not the Sea, not so much as r Fing. 81 Indians t Bodel Dragon (on Costa Rica) of prodigious strength of bo∣dy: two examples therf: their Arms. Pt. iii. p. 86 Indians of the Bay of Bllt, their Arrows 8 feet long, of a rare fashion, and shape: the figure thereof: they are extream robust, and strong. Pt. iii. p. 89, 90 Indians of Cape Gracias à Dios, much civilized: Women are bought there for  trifle: Policy, and Customs, of the Island: how Negro's came thi: laziness of those Indians: they build  Houses, nor Huts, to  in: their Arms Religion, Food, and Dk: their Invitations: they worship nither God, nor the Dvil: thy pierce their Genals in complement to the Women: thir Marriages: how the Women lye in: their :   of the Ws, there. Pt. iii. p. 91. & seq. Island d los Ps. P. 3. p. 100.   ty of Wild Cows. ibid.   : a Pirt  . 101 Island  S.   to Ri   by the Pirats. Pt. 3. p. 107
Island de la Trinidad. vide Trinidad. K. KIdnappers. Part i. Page 74 Kidnappt People, how they fare in the Indies. ibid. The Miseries they endure there. ibid. L. LAtanier-palme. Part i. Page 33 Lewis Scot, the first Pirat that made Land-Invasions. Pt. i. p. 110. He sackt Campche. ibid. Lolonois, his Origen. Pt. ii. p. 1. Is advanced to be a Captain: loseth his Ship: escapeth by a Stratagem: retireth into the Woods: the Spaniards believe him dead: goeth to Sea again: his Enterprize at los Cayos: his cruelty. Pt. ii. p. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. He taketh a Ship of Maracaibo. 7. He equippeth a Fleet, with dsign to land. ibid. 8. cometh to Bayala. 9. Taketh a Spanish Ship: lading thereof. 10. He arriveth at Maracaibo, and taketh it. 17. & seq. He cutteth a Spaniard in pieces. 21 March∣eth to Gibraltar, and taketh it. 21. & sq. The Prisoners die for Hun∣ger 27. They got 260000 pieces of Eight in ready money, bsides Iew∣els, and Goods. 31. They set sayl for Tortuga, and soon waste all they had gotten. 32. Lolonois maketh new Preparations against the Spani∣ards. 33. He taketh a great Spanish Ship. 36. His cruelty. 36. He marcheth to San Pedro: meeteth several Ambuscades, defeateth them, and taketh the Town. 37. & seq. He goeth to Guatimala, and thence, to other Islands. 41. Taketh another great Ship. 48. Many of his Com∣panions leave him. 49. He remaineth behind: wanteth Provisions: lo∣seth his Ship: and intendeth to build a Boat. 51. His Misfortunes, which preceded his death: he is torn in pieces alive. 56. As also many of his Companions. 57 Lampsins, vide Adrian. Lesi Monsieur) surrendreth Cayana to the Dutch. Pt. 3. p. 117 Lady, vide Spanish Lady. M. MUlatos, what People they are. Part i. Page 28 Mestizos, what Men they are. ibid. Mapou-tree. Pt. i. p. 38 Manzailla, or Dwarf Apple-tree, its venomous quality. ib. 39 Mosquitos, or Marangumes. Pt. i. p. 41 Moscas de fuego, or Fire-flyes. Pt. i. p. 43 Mandioca, or Cazave. Pt. i. p. 65 Mansvelt, a famous Pirat, set foot in Granada, and penetrated to the South-Sea: he took St. Catharin, &c. Pt. i. p. 110 Michel de Basco, a Pirat, joyneth with Lolonois. Pt. ii. p. 8
Maracalbo, its situation, and description, commerce, &c. Pt. ii. p. 11, 12, 13 Merida, its situation and commerce. Pt. ii. p. 16 Mines of Gold in Costa Rica. Pt. ii. p. 50 Morgan. vide Sir Henry. Mansvelt chuseth Morgan his Viceadmiral: setteth forth with 15 Sail, and 500 Men: taketh St. Catharin: is desirous to keep it: returneth to Jamaica for Recruits: which are denied. Pt. ii. p. 62, 64. he go∣eth to Tortuga, for the same purpose, and dieth. 65 Manentines. vide Sea-Cows. Monkeys, how hard it is to shoot them: how they cure one another when wounded: their apish tricks. Pt. iii. p. 87 Sieur Maintenon taketh the Island de la Trinidad. Pt. iii. p. 115 N. NEgro's, what women they love best. Part i. pag. 28 Nata, a Town on the South-Sea, designed upon. Pt. ii. p. 50, 63 Negro's, how they came among the Indians of Cape Gracias à Dios. Pt. iii. p. 93 Nicaragua (City) ransackt by John Davis. Pt. i. p. 111. & seq. O. MOnsieur Ogeron, Governor of Tortuga, buildeth a great ship, with intent, to take Curasao from the Dutch. Part iii. pag. 106. is cast away, at the Islands, called Guadanillas: they get ashore in Boats, and are taken Prisoners by the Spaniards. Ogeron behaveth himself, as a fool; is given out for dead, by his men; and escapeth, by the help of a Chirurgion, into the woods: they seize a Canow, by killing two men: he arriveth at Tortuga, and gathereth a Fleet, to rescue his companions. The Spaniards know of these designs: the French land at St. John de Puerto Rico: are beaten. Monsieur Ogeron escapeth: the Spaniards cut off limbs of men, to shw the French Prisoners: they make Bonfires for joy: The Heer Binkes bring∣eth away six of the Prisoners: the rest sent to work at the Havana: by degrees, are transported into Spain: most of them meet in France: and return unto Tortuga: they take the Island de la Trinidad, and put it to a ransom. 106. & seq. to 115.
P. PUnta Rica Island. Part i. pag. 7 Palmito-trees. Pt. i. p. 11 Wine. ibid. Pueblo de Aso. Pt. i. p. 27 Palm-trees, their description, and several sorts. Pt. i. p. 31 Palm-wine. ibid. p. 34 Prickle-palm. ib. p. 33 Pintadas, or Wood-pullets. Pt. 1. p. 57 Parrots in Hispaniola. ibid. How they build their Nests. ibid. Potato-wine. Pt. i. p. 64 Planters of Hispaniola subject to the Governors of Tortuga. Pt. i. p. 68. they rebel. ib. p. 70. resolve to kill the Governor of Tortuga. 71. are forced to surrender to him again. ib. 73 Planters, their cruelty towards their servants. Pt. i. p. 75. they are worser in the Caribby Islands. Pt. i. p. 77. The English sell one another for debts. ib. Pierre le Grand his origen. Pt. i. p. 80. bold attempt of his. ibid. Pirats their origen at Tortuga. Pt. i. p. 83. they take many boats. ibid. and increse in number. ib. 84. how they arm their boats. 85. their ordinary food, and allowance to every one. 85, 86. Articles they agree upon among themselves. 86. they are very faithful to each other. 88. where they recruit themselves at Sea. 89. Places, where they cruise. 92. they will spend 2000 pieces of Eight in a night. 106 Pierre Francois, a famous Pirat. Pt. i. p. 92. He taketh the Viceadmi∣ral of the Pearl Fleet. 92. is retaken. 95 Pirats begin to make land-ivasions. Pt. i. p. 110 Piraguas, what sort of shipping. Pt. ii. p. 16 Priests-tobacco so caled. ibid. Pitch, or Bitumen, in huge quantities. Pt. ii. p. 42. the Author's opi∣nion thereof. ibid. Puerto del Principe, a rich Town, taken, and ransackt, by Morgan. Pt. ii. p. 83. resistance they made. 82. the Town put to ransom. 84. 50000 pieces of Eight robbed there. 88 Puerto Velo, its desription, strength, situation, unhealthiness, and other qualities. Pt. ii. p. 91. Expedition thereof performed by Morgan. 90. & seq. brave, and obstinate, defence of the Governor. ibid. Debauche∣ry, and Cruelty, of the Pirats, there. 99. Religious men, and women, forced to fix the ladders against the walls of the Castle: many of them slain. 96 Panama, its situation, description, &c. is taken, and burnt by Captain
Morgan: it contained 7000 houses, all of Cedar: house of the Ge∣noises there: its Monasteries, Warehouses, &c. Pt. iii. p. 54. & seq. Porcupines of prodigious, and monstrous, bigness. Pt. iii. p. 87 Pheasants, called by the Spaniards Faysanes. ib. Pirats of Jamaica retire unto Tortuga, and join with the French Pt. iii. p. 104. some of them hanged by the new Governor of Jamaica. ib. R. ROjados, or Calarodes. Part i. pag. 42 Roche Brasiliano, a famous Pirat, his origen. Pt. i. p. 102. is chosen Captain, and taketh a great ship. ib. 103. he loseth his ship, and escapeth in a Canow. 104. is pursued by the Spaniards; yet, putteth them to flight. 104, 105. he taketh a Fleet of Canows, and a Boat of War. Also, a Ship from New Spain. 106. he goeth to Sea again. 108. is made Prisoner with all his men. ibid. is set at li∣berty, and sent into Spain. 109 Rubia (Island) its situation, and commerce. Pt. ii. p. 113. Spiders of this place very pernicious. ib. strange cure of their venom. ib. River of Zuera, nigh Cartagena. Pt. iii. p. 86 S. SPaniards, what Women they love best in America. Part i. p. 28 Snakes, or Serpents, of Hispaniola. Pt. i. p. 43. how useful in houses there. ibid. Spiders y hideos in Hispaniola. Pt. i. p. 44. pernicious at the Isle of Rubia. Pt. ii. p. 113 Scorpions, not venomous, there. ib. 45 Scolopendria's, or Millepedes, there. ib. Le Sieur Simon made Governor of St. Catharin, by Mansvelt. Pt. ii. p. 63. He putteth the said Island in good posture. 64. is impatient, to ear from Mansvelt. 65. surrendreth the Island unto the Spaniards: betrayeth an English Ship unto them. 66 Sea-Cows, their description, nature, and qualities. How they take them Pt. iii. p. 82. & seq. Spanish Lady, her singular constancy, and chastity. Pt. iii. p. 64 Ship (French) seized by Morgan. Pt. ii. p. 105 Ship (English) blown up with 350 men. ib. 107
T. TOrtuga, its description. Part i. pag. 8 —is possessed by the French, lost, and retaken. Pt. i. p. 14. & seq. is possessed by the West-India Company. ib. p. 20. they quit it again. ibid. Town of Aso. Pt. i. p. 27 —St. John of Goave. ib. p. 28 Tortoises of Land. Pt. 1. p. 44. of the Sea. ib. p. 27 Tobacco, how it is planted. Pt. i. p. 67. property of this plant. ibid. 68. Tortoises, four several sorts described. Pt. i. p. 89. their eggs. 90 where they lay them. ibid. the manner of fishing them. 91 San Tiago of Cuba, its jurisdiction: commerce: is taken by the Pirats. Pt. ii. p. 78 Trinidad (Island) taken by the Pirats of Tortuga, and put to a ran∣som. Pt. iii. p. 115 Tabago (Island) made a Colony by the Prince of Curland. Pt. iii. p. 116. possessed by Adrian, and Cornelius, Lampsins, in ann. 1654. for the Dutch. ibid. V. VEraguas, a Town in Costa Rica, pillaged by the Bucaniers. Part ii. pag. 50 Villa de los Cayos, a considerable Town of Cuba sackt. Pt. iii. p. 104 W. WIld Boars preserved. Part i. pag. 11 Wild Pigens. Pt. i. p. 12 —their bitterness at a certain season. ib. p. 13 West-India Company, of France, possesseth Tortuga. ib. p. 20. quit∣teth it again. ib. Wild Dogs of Hispaniola. Pt. i. p. 50. a notable History of these. ib. 51. persecution of them in Tortuga. ib. 52 Wild Horses in Hispaniola. Pt. i. p. 55 Wild Bulls, and Cows. ib. p. 56 Wood-pullets, or Pintadas. Pt. i. p. 57 Wild Indians, nigh Maracaibo, dwell upon Trees. Pt. ii. p. 14. Others, in little Islands, at Boca del Toro. Pt. 3. p. 78 Z. YEllow Saunder is called Candle-wood. Part i. pag. 10 Yo-tree. ib. 40 FINIS.
