F1384 12035265 52877
THE Passion-Flower: A SERMON Preached on the 30th day of January, BEING The Day of the MARTYRDOM OF King Charls the I. , Of whom the World was not worthy, Heb. 11. 38. By CHRISTOPHER FLOVVER, M. A. and Rector of St. Margarets Lothbury, LONDON. London, Printed for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhill. 1666.
Academiae Gantabrigiensis Liber.
To the truly Worthy His Honoured Friend Dr. BALDWIN HAMEY Doctor of Physick. SIR, OFten and seriously con∣sidering my manifold obligations, owing even my very life (next un∣der God) to your care and cure, as having not seldom pro∣long'd it, when twinkling on the socket; I determin'd rather to run the Gantlop of Censure from this capricious and over-curious age, than merit the sor∣did
Epithet of Ingrateful. And yet, if the gale of your Clemency drive mee cleer off that Scylla, I fear I shall split upon Charibdis, incurr the supicion, at lest, of pride and vain-glory, while I onely wish my Meditations immortal, whereby my thanks may run paralell with them. I must ingenuously acknowledg, this Discourse hath nothing to commend it to your accomplisht self, but the sincere loyalty of the Autor, and the weightiness of the Subject; compri∣sing some of the Unjust Sufferings of the Lord of Glory; in which, as in a mirrour, you may also view the Sufferings of our glorious Lord, King CHARLS the first of ever blessed memory; whose Anniversary merits (maugre all malice) a sable Monu∣ment
of solemn mourning to bear date with the utmost length of Time; that so the Enemies of his Regality. and Virtues may see the guilt and greatness of their Vices, and those of our Nation and Religion may discern our Reallity and Inno∣cence. Now would you deign to in∣quire what flegg'd this Discourse of mine to fly (tho with black wings) farther than your habitation, suffer mee to tell you (which I cannot with∣out a sigh) the supine negligence of som and the irreligion of others, which obstructs a religious ingress in∣to the sacred place of God's special Presence on the annual approach of this dismal day? So that, by an hap∣py Providence, this Sermon may reach som of their houses and pearch
on som of their hands, who make little, or no conscience of frequenting God's House on this solemn day. That I have made a good Choice in putting this weak child of my weaker brain, under your Patronage, none will or can deny; you having obtained one of the chiefest places among those , breathing Gods; who enrich dayly the world with wonders, in raising in∣firm mortals from sickness to health, & as it were from death it self. I may add, whose loyalty, learning, candor, integrity of life, and exemplary Cha∣rity, are as so many specifics against the Pestilential breath of detraction. If you shall vouchsafe (Noble Sir) to stick in the vernant Eden of your Study this Passion-Flower (which you are much more able than my
self to read a Lecture on) you will very much oblige him, whose highest Am∣bition it is humbly to subscribe him∣self Your devoted Servant, and witness of your merit, CHR. FLOVVER.
THE Passion-Flower. John 18. part of the 40th. Verse. —Not this Man, but Barabbas. The whole verse hath it thus, Then cryed they all saying, Not this Man, but Barabbas. THAT I may speak from this holy Mount to your greater benefit, and better bringing to pass of my pious design, which is (as much as in me lyeth) to melt your Hearts into a temper becoming the Solemnity of this day. I shall desire your Christian attention may accompany me to some preceding passa∣ges. In the beginning of this Chapter you may read Judas to betray Jesus: in which bold and impious At∣tempt
the Soldiers fall to the ground, vers. 6. Jesus is taken and led to Annas and Caiphas, v. 12. and in the 15. verse begins Peter's Denial of him. v. 19. according to the Contents of some of your Bibles, Jesus is exa∣mined before Caiphas. v. 18. you may read him arraign'd before Pilat, who accosteth them that brought him be∣fore him, first with this Interrogation, What Accusation bring you against this Man? v. 29. they reply, If he were not a Malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee. It is time now, I conceive, as early as it is, by way of Preface to my Text to take them to Task, and to examine the weight of their words, for all was not Gospel they said, though it be mentioned in the Gos∣pel. If he were not a Malefactor, as if they should have said, his Crime is so manifest that he needeth no Ac∣cusation; what, do you doubt of the Righteousness of our Proceedings who have done all things with de∣liberation? and have found him worthy of Death, and we exspect that you should proceed to give Sentence: Depth of Hypocrisie! Madness! and Malice! as if being a Prisoner, bound, and in Fetters only, was Crime enough, and deserved Death as a Malefactor? This was handsom indeed, high equity; sure! who can∣not perceive that they distrusted their Caus, and there∣fore cunningly by way of Anticipation spoke what they did, least they should have been compelled to prove him so, a Criminal, a Malefactor, as they pronounced him to be? He that runneth may read their Hypocrisy, they would by all means be thought to be Consoienti∣ous, as if they never attempted any thing, but what was just, and had never sought the Death of any but
of Malefactors; when it stands upon sacred Record as a base blot in their Escutcheon, that they unjustly slew all the Prophets that went before them. O the perfrict brazen Forehead! the Impudence of this Rout, to style Him a Malefactor, who had done Nothing but Good to their Nation. They should have asked the Blind to whom he restored Sight: The Le∣pers whom he had cleansed: The Lame to whom he gave Limbs, whether he was a Malefactor: But thus it was prophesyed, Psal. 35. 12. They rewarded Me Evil for Good to the Despoyling of my Soul, and Hatred for my Love. Yet Pilat, as bad as he was, being startled at their unjust Proceedings seemed to rid his Hands of him, with Accipite eum, Take ye him and judge him ac∣cording to your Law. The Roman Law forbidding to Condemn any before he be heard. Now do but see how they elude this, It is not lawful for us to put any one to Death: No, Then the Death of Stephen, lies at your doores, your present judgements confute your former practises: besides, what was it other then to be the Death of Christ, so violently to beg it, with open Mouth thus to go against Him, and like so many Blood-hounds to cry him down. It seems by their Law he should only have been stoned, by the Roman Law he must be Crucified; it was their in∣tent then, not only that he should Dy, but with the greatest ignominy, pain, and shame that mought be. Neither is Pilat yet satisfied, for being entred into the Judgment-Hall again, and having convened Jesus; he asketh Him, Art Thou the King of the Jews? In this he thought to have struck the Nail on the Head: as if
Christ would (upon that Demand of his) have con∣fessed Himself guilty of Treason against Caesar, and of disturbing the Peace of the Nation. But what said our Saviour? Sayest thou this of thyself, or did others tell it thee of Me? As if he should have said, Little dost thou think what thou sayest, the My∣sterie that those few words contain in them. For how couldst thou style Me King, since no Man can say Jesus is the Lord but by the spirit? Have it whence thou wilt, it is of weighty concernment, what thou hast said, didst thou but understand it. Or we may suppose this Interrogation to be a Reproof of Pilat; as if our Saviour should have said, if this proceedeth from thy own Suspicion, it is but an injust part thou dost Act, for that is not the Star a Judg should be led by, he ought not to be both the Judg and the Witness: If some others told thee so, why are not my Accusers brought forth? If to Accuse be enough to make a man Guilty, none will be Innocent, Judges are to proceed, secundum allegata & probata, according to what is alledged and proved: Our Saviour probably said this, to give him an occasion to speak what followed, Am I a Jew? This Pilat may be said to ask in Scorn to that Nation, hateful to the Heathens for their Difference from them in Religion: as if he should have said, How can I speak this of my self who am not a Jew, but an Ethnick, and what have we Heathens to do with your Rites? The Chief Priests of your Na∣tion delivered You to Me, and for This accused Thee to Me: they are the men that lay it to thy Charge, I neither Apprehended Thee; neither did
I Accuse Thee. Certainly he would not, had he been a Jew, and Christ his King; yet, as his Place empowered him, he examins him, Quid fecisti? What hast thou done? Our Saviour thought that Question answered it self, and therefore was not sollicitous to Reply to it, having done nothing worthy such usage. A Kingdome he dreads not to tell him that he had, but it was not of this World, v. 36. of this Chap. Therefore he need not be thought to stand in their Light who had Kingdoms, they might have room enough to Sway their Scepters in for all him. Yet it is very observable, He doth not say his Kingdom was not In this World, but not Of this World; whence it follows, That there is another world, which Pi∣lat, it is probable, dream'd not of; In which he that suffers the loss of never so many Kingdoms here, may be riehly rewarded there. This could not but cure Pilat of that shaking Palsy which Fear had put him into, our Saviour talking of a King∣dom. Now this our Saviour proceeds to make more manifest thus, If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants fight that I should not be de∣livered to the Jews; as if he should have said, I would not be so imprudent as to go only with a few un-armed Disciples, I would then be a little better Guarded, my Attendants should be many and mighty, such as know how to use their weapons, and to acquit themselves like Men: Smiling, as it were, at the Vanity, and Impotence of worldly Po∣tentates, who of themselves signifie little, but de∣pend on the strength of external power, which if it
fail, they fall: but having that they can do any thing, bring Others to their Bent or Bow at plea∣sure, have their Persons at Command, as they had his; Yet Pilat cannot but harp on that String, witness his Language, Art thou a King then? This could make but harsh Music in his ears, who could not but envy him that Title howsoever, where-ever his Kingdom was: He was loth to ask where his King∣dom was, least he should not be far from Happiness; sure: No, take heed of that, Me-thinks I see him tremble at what our Saviour answered: Thou sayest that I am a King; as if he should have said, What need I say it, when you your self say as much, your own Mouth hath pronounced it; and yet least the Man should be too much dejected at it, our Saviour addeth, To this end was I born, and for this Caus came I into the world; what? to raign like other Kings? No, but to walk Antipodes to them rather; as if he should have said, 'Tis an Error to think that I am Ambitious of any Mundan Reign, any worldly Soveraignty; 'Tis thus, That my Kingdom is Spiritual, I cannot, I will not deny: but will aver it either before thee, or any Caesar on Earth: Only know this, That it is the lest of my Intention to molest other Kings, or pompously like them to Reign. But to be a witness to the truth am I come: At this Pilat seems to be pretty well pleased, and asketh him, What is Truth? But alas! it was more out of Derision and Contempt, then to be Informed: As indeed prophane Spirits cannot endure to hear savoury words, but they turn them
off with Scorn: as if he should have said, I hope you will produce no other truth then your High Priests do teach, you will not seem wiser then they; will you? If you do, 'tis folly to declare it, I must interrupt you, for it is other Business that we are about, Your Life is in Question: He would not stay for an Answer, but, went out, saith the Text, because he thought Caesar's Laws sufficient, and the knowledg of any other Truth needless: Besides, he saw the Cloud to thicken; The Jews it is likely ban∣dying together, so that it was no time to hold con∣ference any longer with him: and the Jews feared, least Christ having obtained Liberty to speak for him∣self, he might so work upon the Judg, and melt the hearts of the rest on the Bench, as to frustrat their Design. Well, for all this, He that before went out to hear his Accusation, now goes out to excuse him to the People, to his Accusers. Behold him seemingly to heap Civility upon Civility upon our Saviour, even in the mid'st of his Severity. For first, Tho on the one side were Persons of great Rank and Quality, from whom he mought expect a Becoming reward for his Injustice, or dread their Displeasure if he did not act as they would have him: And on the other side Christ, who was mean and contemptible, in outward appearance, forlorn and forfaken, yet he gives it for him a∣gainst the Jews, casting their Malice, as it were, in their Teeth.
Secondly, He stands not only up for Christ, mau∣gre all their eager expectation of the contrary, but Confounds his Adversaries pronouncing Him innocent: and that not without an Emphasis, I find in him no Fault at all. And yet this Vulpone, this Fox, least their teeth so sharp set, should (for want of a Prey) fasten on himself, he tells them, you have a Custom; an ungodly one it was, what ever was the ground of it: Some think it was in memory of Jonathan, rescued by the People from Death, which his Fa∣ther had threatned him with. Others, that the Feast mought be celebrated with the more Joy and Glad∣ness. Others more probably say, it was in remem∣brance of their Deliverance from the Egyptick Bon∣dage. But if so, one would think the Paschal Lamb should have been Memorial enough for that, but they must do somewhat additional, though not com∣manded by God: Thus Hypocrisie is alwayes busie in preferring its own Figments before God's Com∣mands; yet I verily beleive the World would have been more happy then it is, had it not had worse Judges then Pilat was in some respects: For do but see how Industrious he seems to be for Christ's Re∣lease. For this end he rubs up a Custome of theirs, to capacitate them to Release him: he did not per∣vert an Old Law, or establish a New one: Setting up a High Court of Justice to try him by. Then he propounds them two, None is in Competition with him but Barabbas, a notorious Miscreant, whom he thought none would be for; Nay more, he seems to Beg him, or at lest to bid them choose him,
saying, Will ye that I release to you the King of the Jewes? scorning to mention Barabbas, whom our Evangelist stiles a Robber, and another a Murtherer, which serv'd as a Foil for their malice, if that needed any, to preferr such a one before Christ. But Pilat, it seems, was deceived, for the great ones before had been at the People to ask Barabbas, and to leave Jesus to undergo Death. The Multitude, which not long before was for Him, now unanimously bandy against him. For they cryed all again, say the words immediately preceeding my Text: Envy, you see cannot be quiet till it hath made the person it strikes at perfectly miserable: But why again? They cried all again: You may remember they before cryed, if he were not a Malefactor, we would not have deli∣vered him unto thee. That which they cryed again, was that which I cannot, it being my Text, but repeat again, Not this Man, but Barrabbas. Thus Beloved, having presented you with that Preface, which can be stil'd no less then Necessary. Come we to some Division of their words, whom it is a wonder, being so many as they were, to hear not Divided: Yet thus it was, Here was no crying some one thing, and some another, as at that uproar we read of Acts 19. The Wind and Tyde, Priest and People, both went one way, great and small, ho∣norable and ignoble, young and old, male and fe∣male, they cryed all not once, but again Non Hunc, sed Barrabam, Not this Man, but Barrabas. In which words you have the Peoples Election, and Repro∣bation, or if you will in Termes less offensive, less
to be excepted against, the Peoples Negative, and Affirmative Choice, such as it was: Negative, Not this Man: Affirmative, but Barrabas. To scan each by it self briefly, and to come to some suitable Appli∣cation of both. And first of their Negative Vote, or Choice. Not this Man. And pray, why not He, O ye Jewes? What harm did he ever do you, or could ye ever find in Him? How justly might it have been said to them concerning Him, I mean our Saviour, as The∣mistocles said to the Athenians, Are ye weary of re∣ceiving so many Benefits by one Man? If ye go to that, what good did he not do you? How could ye so soon forget the Evils that he cur'd? The empty Bellys among you, which He often fill'd; and fed? What house did he ever enter into, but Salvation enter'd with Him? Some alwayes were the better for Him: Not this Man? What! after so many Miracles wrought among you by his Divine power? Is he but a Man in your judgements? I had thought the inspired Magi, that fell down devoutly at his feet, when newly infanted, which you could not but hear of: The water of the neighbouring Flood turn'd by Him in∣to Wine, for the pleasuring of the Gallilean Youth, be∣ing with them at a Marriage, His forty dayes fasting, His feasting the Multitude with Bread that encreased betwixt the Dispensers hands, when more then All remain'd: His wonderful checking the boistrous Waves of the Sea with a word: His walking on that watry Plain with unsinking feet: Those damned infernal Spirits, Rebels to God, and the Light,
which hearing his Voice forsook their fleshly Habi∣tations, The blind by Birth, who to Him ow'd his Day; The Dumb that never spake till he loosned their Toungs. I thought these would have prov'd as so many Heralds to proclaim him more then Man: No, for all this, it's only▪ Not this Man, they were loth sure to believe Him to be God, lest the thoughts of it should have endanger'd their Conversion, or melted them into a better temyer. , non istum, so some render it, by way of diminution, and vilifying: not this worthless person. No, whom then? , But Barabbas, which is their positive Choice, or affirmative Vote, and comes next to be handled, I fear I shall not do it so roughly as it deserves. But Barabbas, an excel∣lent Choice indeed! a special, lovely dish this, to be serv'd in at such a Feast: Now this Fellow (to turn the istum upon him, which they undeservedly fixt on our Saviour.) He was notorious, I. For Rob∣bery, he was a Robber, saith our Evangelist. II. For Sedition, he troubled the whole City, saith S. Luke. III. For Murther, saith the same Evangelist, cap. 23. 19. This was the Idol they cryed up; the Miscreant they put into the ballance with Christ, the Son of God: a very nointed Villain he was, to have whom exe∣cuted every man's appetite but a little before was up: yet rather then Jesus shall live, Barabbas shall be releas'd, more Insurrections, more Murthers, more Seditions, more any thing rather then to be in danger of having Christ their King, He that was born King of the Jewes: Do but see how S. Peter
sets them out in their Colours, characterizeth them to their Heads, Acts 3. 14. But ye denied the Holy one, and the just, and desired a Murtherer to be gi∣ven unto you, and killed the Prince of Life. This was he that was thought only worth naming with them; Christ out of contempt, being branded with the Appellation of This Man: they had rather cele∣brate their Passover with that wretch, then with Jesus. And no marvel, for they knew this Fellow would prove no eye-sore them, would patiently permit them to do what they would, give them Liberty of Conscience, and so would be exellent company for them; alas, he was not for their Tooth, who came from Heaven upon Errands of Holyness, and Refor∣mation, whose Example would put Vice out of countenance, and upbraid their madness. No, they had too much of Him already, Not this Man, but Barabbas, what more intense blindness, madness, and malice could betray it self? What was this but to say, what I think, you cannot hear without trem∣bling, Occidatur qui suscitat Mortuos, & dimittatur qui Occîdit vivos, as one hath it; Let him die, who rais'd the Dead, and him be releas'd whose Trade it is to destroy the Living: Let Life depart, and Darkness remain. The Peace-maker be dispatcht, and the Seditious repriv'd. How by this Action, or Election of theirs, did the Jewes in the saddest sense, forsake the Fountain of Living waters, and betake themselves to a muddy, bloody, dirty puddle of water: They did not set free the Nocent only in∣steed of the Innocent, but put to death Him, who
was a constant, and faithfull Benefactor to them. And thus my Discourse all along (if you have ob∣serv'd it) respects the business of this Day, which is to be humbled for the horrid Murther of an in∣nocent Person, a good Benefactor to this Nation, under whom it had flourisht many years. First then, in this the Jewes betray'd superlative ingratitude, and high Baseness to preferr so vile a person before Him, who chose them from among all Nations, to be His peculiar People, his choice Inclosure. Secondly, here was their Malice, who car'd not how things went, so as in this they had their wills. Thirdly, this ar∣gues them Blind, (indeed Malice is blind) asking what they should have been against the death of their Saviour, and the Release of a Thief: and as they passionately desired, so it came to pass, hugging their Bane in Him, whom they were so hot to have releas'd. For the Vengeance, which such a Choice merited, did not long sleep, neither would it, If they had not made use of that Cabell, His Bloud be upon us and our Children, to pull it down more speedily upon them: For Titus (saith Josephus) besieging Je∣rusalem, when the Jewes (pincht with Famine) came forth in Multitudes to seek food for their famisht Souls, he daily caus'd a number of them to be Cru∣cified, in so much that at length, saith the Historian There was scarce any place to erect Crosses on, nor Crosses enough to fasten their Bodiesto. This, this was the Crop of severity, which their sinful choice yielded them. And how justly were they punish'd with death, who refused the Lord of life! so plgid
by that Tyrant, who cryed again, Non hune, Not this man, but Barabbas: But what? had not Pilate a Finger at lest in this, from the guilt of which he cleared him∣self, would have been thought to do so by washing of his hands? as if he should have said by that action, I am innocent, therefore look ye to it; that I condemn this man, O ye Jews, I do it not voluntarily, but being compell'd. I am innocent, I call Heaven to witness, it is you that are Nocent, and guilty of his Bloud. This Hypocrite he was as Scarlet, or Purple within as without, in Heart as in Habit, notwithstanding all that Formality of washing his hands: accessary he was to the Death of the Lord of Life in a high degree, being a faint-hearted Judge, afraid to give Inno∣cency its Reward. Had he bore up valiantly against the stream of the multitude, he had approv'd him∣self an honest man, and a good Judge. What could be more base and dirty, and sinful, then to confess he found no fault at all in Him, and yet not to find in his heart to acquit him, but to curry favour with the people adjudges him to be Crucified. Thus, Non rarò bo∣norum virorism Capitibus, ut Talis aut Tesseris Ludunt, saith one; 'Tis the Old Game of the world for the Heads, and Lives of good men to be plaid with like Dice, or Chess-men, by Great men, that they might ingratiate themselves with each other. I have read of an Apologue to this purpose, it run's thus; The Wolf, the Fox, and the Ass on a time came toge∣ther to Shrift. The Wolf confest, and was dismist, the Fox did likewise, and was absolv'd, but the Ass confest, and his fault was this; that being hungry
he took one straw out of the sheaf of a poor Pil∣grim travelling to Rome, for which he was severely punished; the Fox, and the Wolf straight fall upon him, and devour him, maintaining that the poor Asses Crime was so great as to deserve it. The Fa∣ble applys it self; To be sure where Pilat is Judge Barabbas shall be loos'd, and the Innocent condemned. I do believe unjust Sysamnes whom Cambises flead, and of his Skin made a Cushion for all succeeding Judges to lean, and look on, was a Saint to this Judge, as subtely as he carried it; And yet as madd, and malicious as the People were, they could not hinder their Prisoner from evading a Glorious King, though nothing but unworthy, base usage came from them. Glorious in his personal vertues, Glo∣rious in his Divine Graces, but most Glorious in his Constancy, and perseverance, in his Charity even amidst all his Sufferings, which nothing could more magnifie then this Choice of theirs, Electing Barab∣bas, and rejecting Jesus, not before they had done either good or evill; but after One had done all the Evill, and the Other for divers years together all the Good imaginable, then to elect the Robber, and reject the Saviour, what could more make against them, and for Him? Heere again how plainly through the Sufferings of the King of Saints, may one see the Sufferings of that Saint of Kings Charles the first, whose Murther we are this Day to lament, and be humbled for. I shall now descend to some suitable application. I. From the Competition precedaneous, to the Choice presum'd heere, but exprest in Saint
Matthew, , which of the two will ye that I release unto you, for so run the words, Math. 27. 17. Let us learn, that there is no office so sacred, or weighty but some either through favour or fear, will abuse it. whom will ye that I release? Corrupt wretch! to bring that in Question, Which it was in his power to put out of Question: and sure would have done, had he acted according to the Dictate either of his Wife by his side, or of that Scold his Conscience within him. For he knew that for Envy they they had de∣deliver'd him. Matth. 27. 18. Knew, yet would not doe what he should have done, but did forbear to acquit Christ, exposing him to the mercy of the Multitude, whose tenderest mercies are cruel. Not to save a Man, if it be in ones power, is to destroy him, so saith our Saviour, Mark 3. 4. Job brake the jawes of the wicked, and pluckt the Prey out of his Teeth, 'tis said. I have read that Sir George Blage, if I mistake not his Name, one of King Henry the 8ths. Privy Chamber, being condemn'd for a Heretick, was yet pardon'd by the King, he coming afterward into the Kings pre∣sence, Ah my Pig, said the King, for so he was wont to call him) yea, said he, If your Majesty had not been better to me then my Judges were, your Pig had been roasted e're this time, for certain, there is no such unsavory Salt, and more becoming a Dunghill, than a Pilate, or a Bradshaw, an unjust Judge. Envy not the pomp of such a one, whensoever your eyes shall behold him, (which I wish may never be) no more then thou wouldst a dead Corps its Garnish, and Gaiety.
II. Let this Competition mind us of that we are so much concern'd in. Tho God hath left the Heathen without excuse, yet he hath not left us without a choice, our Salvation is elective, both on God's part and ours, I would, but yee would not, 'tis God's own language. Hence likewise it is no less true, then a right saying, he that made thee without thy self, will not save thee without thy self; Indeed, were there but one Object within our reach presented to the Faculty of election in man as one Christ, one Holi∣ness, our receiving of him could not be call'd choice, but it mought be stil'd necessity rather. But since there are many Christs, aswell as Antichrists, and divers sorts of holiness, it will behove us to be wary what choice we make. To see that we have not so much Faith for the Alcoran, as for the Bible; and as much obe∣dience for the Devil, as for God, for the Law in our members, as for that of our mind. It must need's be more obliging not to say meritorious, for a Joseph to be chast at Court, than for another to be so in a Cottage, or in a Cell. For a Souldier to be tem∣perat in the Camp, where he is beleagured with Temptations to the contrary, than for another to be so at home. To be a Christian in Nero's hous than at a greater distance from danger. Thou art vir∣tuous becaus thou canst not easily be otherwise, this is a Commendation that leav's but a flat fare∣well behind it. 'Tis an Act, not only of Wisdom, but of God's great Goodness thus to order it, to leav the Christian  as it were in the Confines of two most distant people, improvable unto Good,
and capable of Evil. For Righteousness to go for thy refuge, and not for thy choice, as it doth where there is no Rival Sin, is to be content that should be without its Crown, and thy self without thy Re∣ward: which conducts mee from the Competition, to the Competitors, Christ, and Barabbas. From whence learn wee, 1. Not to build on the multitudes vogue or choice, to esteem no otherwise of its Applau, or Appro∣bation than of a whiff of Smoak, the best Emblem of its base inconstancy. But now they cryed Hosannah. Now they are all for Crucify him, Crucify him. Vox populi was not here Vox Dei, but Mors Dei. The voice of the people was not the voice of God, but the death of God rather. Follow not a multitude to do evil (saith the Holy Ghost) as if it did little, or nothing els, but do so. We must then get a pre∣servative against the Infection of the multitude (as well as that of the Plague) or els it is like to go ill with us. It is the worlds guize to elect what is evil, and to reject what is gaod; It is the nature of that ugly Ape to hug its Brats, as most lovely, and Beautiful. What more lively example of this is there, than the carriage of these Jewes at this time? How unworthily did they write all those Benefits our Saviour conferr'd on them, in water, witness their Praeteritition, or passing him by, and their Choosing a bloody Thief and Seditious, prefer∣ring such a one before him! This is that foul Sin St. Peter makes bold to tax them home with in his Sermon, laid it to their Hearts, and were Converted.
I do verily believ there is not a person that hears of this, but hate's this Action in the Jewes, Con∣demning it in their Thoughts, and were he askt, would say he did so. And yet how many are there who knowing the Judgement of God inflicted on them for it, do not only do the same thing in effect, but have pleasure in them that do it, to use that of S. Paul's language, Rom. 1. 32. There is no Sin but is as base as Barabbas, nay wors, for he had not been so vile, and base without it. How loudly doth the Swearer make one with these, Larding his Discours with Oaths, damnably confronting that strict Command, Swear not at all, for he will do nothing at all but swear, and so by consequence cry's, Non hunc, Not this man, but Barabbas. I shall only desire of such a Sinner, that he would tell me what fruit he can exspect, or ever any did reap from that Bramble, besides Gods Curs? Hell-fire is the punishment of such, whose toungs are so set on fire of Hell. Neither can the Hypocrit excuse himself, who seems to be for Christ, wearing his Livery on his back, but Ba∣rabbas his Favour in his Bosom, who was a Thief, and a Robber; so is he in his Shop, it may be, though not on the Road. What should I say of the unclean person, who is one of this Rout, of this Rabble too? How by making the Members of Christ, the Members of a Harlot, doth he day and night cry, Non hunc, Not this Man, but Barabbas. My advise to such a one shall only be this, to labour for a saving inversion of these words, as thus, to turn, when tempted, this Hunc into hanc, I mean, (upon Choice) to say,
Not this Woman, this Strumpet, were she more beuti∣ful then she is, but Christ. You would wonder now, if I should prove it possible for you to be crying up of Barabbas, even while you are hearing of Christ preached. Beloved, he that gives way to wanton, lustful looks, or wordly thoughts at a Sermon, suf∣fering them to take up his Mind, crie's with the Jews, Non hunc, Not this Man, but Barabbas. But see that yee refuse not Him that speaks, to speak in S. Paul's words, Heb. 12. 25. For if they escape not, that refused him that spake on earth, much more shall we not escape, if we turn away from him that thus speaks from heaven. The Jewes paid for their Nolumus hunc, We will not have this Man to raign over us, And for their Non hunc, Not this Man, but such a one: And so shall we too, if we repent not in time of our Recusancy. Let those then that hate and abhorr the Jews for this, indeed, to be lamented Choice, descend into themselvs by Examination, and see they be not guil∣ty of the same. What is there so base, and so vile but a corrupt mind will prefer before Christ. II. Hence as in a Mirrour we may see the Preva∣lency of the Actions of Great Men, the attractiveness of them. If Herod; and Caiphas do begin, Christ shall have fists enough abought his ears; there will not be wanting that will smite him with Toung, as well as with the Hand: Fly blow and blister his Fame to purpose. With Inferiours example doth more then precept, and like men in a Crowd they do not go, but are carried rather. Do any of the Rulers believ in him? This Question deterr'd many of the Vulgar,
from adhering to our Saviour: The weightiest Drops of whose blood, I do believ, fell (in the saddest Sens) on the Wisest of them: For had not They first preacht Him down in their Synagogs, the People had never cryed Him down in the Judgment-Hall: with a Non hune, Not This Man, but Barabbas. III. Here is matter of Comfort, in our vilified, reproacht Condition here below, As thus. I. That we cannot be lower than our Saviour was in the World's Repute. II. That his Disreputation hath Sanctified Ours. If such a one who had don so much Good could not procure a Good word from those he did it to, why should such Unprofitable Servants, as we are at best, be troubled if we be awarded with frowns for our Favors; with Cruelty from others from our kind∣ness to them. I'm sure this Lamb of God opened not his Mouth repiningly, was dumb before the Shearers, who, as much as in them lay, rob'd him of the whole Fleece of his Reputation; yet that which at first sight seems to make for his ignominy, realy conduc'd much for his Glory; For his Father would not have him ransom'd at such a rate, as to be beholding to the peo∣ple's Favour for his Repriev and live under the Notion of a Malefactor, who beeing innocent would be Condemn'd and Dy with more Honor, as he did to the stigmatizing of them, who were his Judges, and Persecutors with the Brand of perpetual infamy. In short, here is matter as of Comfort; so of Caution: least at any time we make our Teeth to meet in the rigid Censure of that Penson that die's not a Natu∣ral, but a violent Death. What is this but to con∣demn
the Generation of the Righteous? I remember, Lam. 4. 20. there is a passage to this purpose. The breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Iord is ta∣ken in their pits. Which was this that fell as a Morsel into his enemies Mouths, but a good King, one, under whose Government they pronoun't themselvs Happy, as it follows in the same vers. Beloved, it is unchristian to judg temporal punishments to be judgements due unto Sin. Suffer me to speak it, Thy wickedness is too triumphant, who will not acknow∣ledg that some afflictions are for Trials, and in or∣der to the increas of Grace, and Glory unto God's dear Children. 'Tis as much as to say, Christ could not be the Sun of Righteousness, because he did set in such a Cloud of wretchedness (at his Death) as to outward appearance, dying on the Cross in the midst of two Theeves, as if the chiefest Malefactor. 'Tis not it the manner of one's Death, but the Cours of one's Life that makes really wretched, or happy. To think otherwise is to pronounce thy self as much out in thy judgement, as these Jewes were in their Choice, when they all cryed, Non hunc, Not this Man, but Barabbas. I have now done with my Text, and it may be exspected I should speak somwhat of the Oc∣casion; For this is not only a Fast-day, but a Fune∣ral, which we Solemnize: The Funeral of as pious a King as ever England had to sway its Scepter: That litle that is to be found in Bad men the holy Ghost hath thought good to Register. David pen'd Saul's Epicedium, which runs thus, Saul, and Jona∣than were lovely, and pleasant in their Lives, and in
their Death they were not Divided, yee Daughters of Israel weep over Saul, who cloath'd you in Scarlet, and other Delights, who put Ornaments of Gold upon your Apparel, 2. Sam. 1. 23, 24. Which gives a sufficient warrant to mention, and not only so, but to com∣mend the Dead: which I intend not to do at this time. His incomparable worth want's not the var∣nish of my water-Colours to set him off. Neither shall I blister the air of this sacred place with men∣tioning of any of those who had a hand in his Death: since Justice is in pursuit of them, and its Iron∣hand will recompens the Slowness of its Leaden feet. But because some were eminently instrumental to bring to pass the Death of that just Man, shall Wee think our selves Innocent? God forbid. There are none of us of mature years, but by our Sins gave earnest for that fatal Stroak, which made three King∣domes Miserable at once. So that well may Wee as∣sume that passionat wish of the Prophet Jeremy, O that our Heads were Waters, and our Eyes Fountains of Tears, that wee may lament Day and Night for the shedding of the Innocent Blood of that good King, The Top-branch of which Royal Ceder, (to the root of which Envy and implacable Malice laid the Ax) the Lord preserv. Bless him O Lord, in his Body, and bless him in his Soul, bless him in his Going out, and bless him in his Coming in. Bless him whensoever he shall adventure upon the Water that dangerous, deceitful Element, be thou his Pilot: Bless him when he shall journey on the
Land, be thou his Conduct: Bless the Guard of his Body with Courage, and Fidelity; bless the Guides of his Soul with Sincerity of Life, and soundness Doctrine. May all the blessings on Mount Gerezim in this Life, and in the next all the blessings, Christ preacht upon the Mount, be multiplied upon him. And to this Prayer I doubt not but every Loyal Subject will from his heart, say, Amen: Specialy when he doth remember and resent (Horresco referens) this sad trilinguous Hexastich. MAP Ter Deno JanI Labens rex soLe CaDente Carolus eXutus soLio sCeptorqVe seCure. CHARLS, best of Kings, for God's Laws and the Land's Was Martyr'd, murder'd by UNHALLOWED hands. Dei Gratiâ & Regis Oblatio qualis-qualis EHMAMP. FINIS.
