F283 R20357 12293091 58927
A Faithfull Remonstrance, Of all the chiefe matters of Note which have happened in and about Dublin, and other parts of Ireland, from the 26 of January, to this pre∣sent, being the 1 of March, 1642. Wherein is truly set down, 1 An exact Relation of severall great Discomfitures given to the Rebels by the Protestant Army, with the number of men slain, and taken pri∣soners on both sides as neare as could be gathered. 2 How Sir Nicholas white, Alderman Ianes, and some others, all rich men both for lands and money, were committed prisoners to the Castle of Dublin, by the L. Chiefe Justices of Ireland. 3 The names of divers Townes which the Protestants have been forced to burne, to take away from the Rebels the benefit of housing, and to pu∣nish the inhabitants who concurred with them. 4 A very remarkable passage concerning Carnow Castle, which having been long besieged by the Enemy, was at last relieved and totally freed by the Politike invention and couragious adventure of a Gentlwoman by name Mistris Rochford. Lastly, how 65 chiefe Officers and Commanders over the Irish Rebels, with all and every of their partakers, ayders, or Confederates are pro∣claymed Traitors and notorious Rebels, against our most gracious Soveraigne Lord King CHARLES, his Crown and Dignity, which Proclamation was read in both Houses of Parliament, on Tuesday the 22 of Feb. 1641. Published by Authority. LONDON, Printed by a perfect Copy, for J. Wright, dwelling in the Old-Bailey, 1642.
FROM DƲBLIN. January 26. AT Swords, Fingals, Santry and other Towns therea∣bouts were lately burnt to take away from the Rebels the benefit of housing, and to punish the Inhabitants who concurred with them. So now Rathcoule and Tasagard are burnt by 200 of our Horse, sent out for that purpose. The two troops divided themselves, so as tho one half were at Rathcoule, and the other at Tosagard; those at Rathcoule were encountred by 1000 Foot of the Rebels, whereupon our Horses seemed to retreat: The Rebels pursued them. And when our Horse came to a place of advantage, to the small brook on this side Rathcoule, where two ways meet; the one to Rathcoule, the other to Tosaggard: there our Horse met and charged them, and the Rebels betook them to their heels, and so were routed: Our Souldiers fol∣lowed the executioners and therein slew 60 of the Rebels; and among them a Captain of 200 Foot, namely, Mr. Andrew Ley, brother to Mr. Ley of Rathbride in the County of Kildare, an English mans son. An∣drew married to Sir Richard Cooks daughter, sometime Secretary of State here. These Rogues had hardly any powder, and for match used weeks of candles. January the 27, 1641. THe last night some of our Horse sallied out to Racoule 6 miles from Dublin, where they met with 5 or 600 of the Rebels, which made as though they would have stood to a Skirmish, being the grea∣ter number by many hundreds: but proved otherwise, for our men slew 80 or 100 of them, and the rest ran away, our men brought in some pillage of Cattle sheep and swine, and came all safe in again, bles∣sed bee God for his gracious protection.
I writ of a report of a late onset of the enemy made upon Droghedagh which is yet continued to be true, which was to be done this day 7 night, but the Rebels have cut off all our passage by land, so that what we heare is by their own relation, which is, that our men have given the Enemy a great overthrow, having slaine 1500 men, whereof 2 were Lords, and one that was of estate in Lands, better than some of the Lords, in which as they themelves report, we lost not above six men, the Lord grant it may prove true. This week our Lords Iustices and Counsell have commited to the Castle of Dublin, Sir Nicholas White Alderman, Janes and Sedgrave of the Caberagh, all rich men, both for lands and money, and many in this City deserve the like, had they their due desert. Carnow Castle hath been long besieged by the Enemy, and yet holds out, but driven to a great strait, but in hope to be relieved by a Gentle∣woman which was in it, she being formerly wel acquainted with the chiefe of those Rebels: the plot was this; that she should go forth to him, with a complaint of their misery, not being able to indure it: she having a sister within the Castle in the like case, that if they might be freed, she would be a meanes that the Rebels might take the Castle, of which they were glad to heare of: she propounded the way, which was, that should he send with her, according to her directions, 5 or 6 of the chiefe, which she named, which she would undertake to bring into the Castle, and the rest to be ready, that when the Iron gate was opened for her to come in, these 5 or 6 should follow close to her, and keep the gate open, till the rest were come in, all which was perfor∣med, but with such a devise, which those in the Castle with her had devised with Iron Chaines, that when the few with her selfe were come in, they kept out all the rest, by which they in the Castle have got good prisoners into them to make their own conditions for what they want, or to hang their prisoners over the wall, which the Re∣bels will be very unwilling of, they being prime men amongst them, these Gentlewomen are of the Rochfords, who have 2 brothers here, the one a Captain, the other a Lievtenant, both of them valiant Sol∣diers, good Commanders, and true and faithfull subjects. January 31. Colonel Hugh, M. Phelym Birne, Collonel Roger, alias Rory O Moore, Collonel Sutton & others, to the number of 200, kept about the Haas, Lyons Newcastle, Oughterard and Kill. The Earle of Ormond attended by the L. Lamble, Sir Charles Coote, Sir Simon Harcourt, Sir Tho. New∣comer
and others, to the number of 2000 Foot, and 300 Horse, with 3 or 4 Field pieces, marched to Newcastle and burnt it to the ground: and also Lyons, Rathcridan, and Oughterard, and burnt also the roofs of the Castles in those parts, wherof there are many. Then they marched to the Haas (where the Rebels were so heartily entertained) plundred the Town, as it wel deserved, burnt Tipp, Midlaghcash, Newland, Kill∣cullen bridge, Castlimtin, and in their return Johnston and Kill and re∣turned home on Thursday, the Souldiers loaden with pillage. In all which places the Rebels that brag'd so much of their number and va∣lour, had not the courage to look our men in the face. I cannot yet learne that Edward Allen that is in possession of Castlewarming was met with, but I beleeve his fathers house in Oughterard escaped not. Feb. 1. This morning some of our Army both Horse & Foot, march'd with 8 pieces to new Castle Lions, 7 miles from Dublin, a Town wherein are 7 Castles, in which the Enemy kept their Campe, but before our Army came to the Town, the Enemy were sled and had taken away with them all the pillage, but our Army marched forward to the Nase where the Enemy had another Camping place 5 miles farther, but of their successe we yet heare no certainty of: The Lord, in mercy prosper them, and send them a victorious and safe returne, of which we hope and pray for. This last night Captaine Scout, with his horse all voluntiers went forth towards Clantarffe, and returning about breake of the day to Drumconran, which is but a mile from Dublin, they were beset by the Enemy both horse and foot, to the number of five hundred, and our men being not forty, yet they came off with honour, not loosing one man nor horse. The good Lady Offalie, with the young Lord and your brother, with the rest in that Castle, have been driven to great distresse, by reason of two of her servants, that would have betrayed them by a Rope from off the wall, one night when he should have watcht went to the Rebels and tould them, how to cut off the water from them in the Castle, which was done, whereupon they in the castle were forced to put their lives upon it to sally out, which they did, and when they had slaine ten or twelve of the Rebels the rest sled, so that by Gods good providence they in the Castle had liberty, and oppor∣tunity to relieve themselves, not only in water but in Corne which the Rebels had threshed for themselves, but none of their owne, those
in the Castle burnt the houses and Church, so as if they come againe there will be no shelter for them: since I have not heard from them, for they cannot send to me, nor I to them; the enemy lying in such abundance between them and Dublin, the Lord in mercy looke upon us all. Feb. 3. 1641. This day our Army blessed be God, are safely returned home, where they have done good service in burning fifteene or sixteene Rebelli∣ous Townes and Castles, which harboured the enemy, and brought with them Cattell and other pillage, but the Rebels themselves fled before our Army came to them, only one Castle where they dischar∣ged once, and so ran away; We have so many Papists and Spies on their part amongst us in this City, that we cannot do or intend to do any thing, but they have present notice given them: The Lord in mercy remove them all. Our Army have brought these prisoners, Mr. George Aylmer of Lyons, Mr. Tho. Ash and Tra. Ash of the Haas, and Higgam the Fryer, & they had another of quality, Mr. Bendly Britten, who married the widdow Aylmer of Lyons, but he escaped. February 9. Sir Nich, White is committed close prisoner, and Alderman Iames it is thought it will go very hard with the Alderman, hee is char∣ged with sending intelligence to the Rebels. This day grand Iuries are summoned to appeare for the Counties of Kildare, Wicklo, Meath, and other places, and I beleeve the Lords of the Pale, and most of the prime men who are active in the businesse will be indicted of Treason. Our Army hath not had any pay these three weeks, but are deferd upon the City, which doth prove very heavy and burdensome. God turne the wind, that we may have some ease and comfort by the Trea∣sure, least we should be ruined, as the poorer sort are already, some be∣ing forced to diet 6.8.10. some more, some lesse. February 12. This day 1000. of our men commanded by the Lord Lambte, mar∣ched to the Deames Grange, 5. miles off, where were above a thousand of the Rebels; our men fought with them, routed them, and slew a∣bove a hundred of the Rebels: and among them some, Captaines, and Lievtenants of the Cavenaghs, Sir Morgan Cavenagh himselfe was not there, but was gone to Art Cavenaghes at Threecastles
three dayes before. Our men tooke one of quality, Edw. Walsh second sonne of old Master Walsh of Clonmanim, who lookes now like a Rogue, and some fifteen more, who are inconsiderable persons. He and they will be hanged, which is a death too good for them; there was not one man kild on our side, and but one hurt. I hope Sir Morgan Cavenaghs son, who is now a prisoner in the Castle, will be hanged, seeing his fathers ungratefull treachery now appearing in Rebellion, discovers it, his and his sons comming hither 23 Octob. under the pre∣tence of taking a house there was for no good. February 14. Here is nothing but spoile and destruction on both sides, and when there will be an end of it God only knoweth, so many of all sorts in all places are involved in this fatall businesse, which will be the de∣struction of most of the ancient families in this Kingdome; many whereof were never oucht with the least touch or blemish of disloy∣alty before these unhappy times. In the County of Kildare, we have neer 300 indicted of Treason in the Kings Bench and the Bils found, among which are most of our prime Gentlemen, as Eustug of Castle∣mertin, Newland, Mollaghcash, and Cradockeston, Sutton of Tipp. Owgan of Rathcofsi, Sir Andrew Aylmer, Aylmer of Lyons, the old Countesse of Kildare, Sir Nich White, and his son Captain Nich. White, (whose Officers with his 100. Souldiers and Armes went to the Rebels in Novemb. last) and who not? In the County of Meath, all the Lords, and in that, and in the Counties of Dublin, and Wickle, most of prime men. God send a good issue, this Kingdome was never at such a passe: No man is sure of any thing in his own possession; and of what is in the hands of others, nothing can be had on any termes. February 15. Captain Cadogan came from Sir Fr. Tichborn by boat on the 5. of this Month, and then he was well, though in some want of victuals and other necessaries; and now he returns with those provisions, God grant them a safe passage. He assures us that Sir Fr. hath at severall times since he sat down in Drogheda flaine 1000. of the Rebels, and hath not lost by the hand of the enemy above six men. February 22. This day there was a Proclamation read in both Houses of Par∣liament, beating date the eight of February 1641. wherein Sir Philem O Neal, Sir Con Magenis, Patrick mac Cartan, and 62 more of the
chief Commanders, and other Officers over the Irish Rebels, with all their and every of their Partakers, Ayders, Maintainers, Comforters, Confederates, Complices and Associates, were proclaimed apparant, notorious, ungratefull, wicked, vile and unna∣turall Taytors and Rebels, against our most gracious Soveraigne Lord Charles, by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, &c. His Royall Crown and dig∣nity. Willing therefore, requiring, warranting and authorising all his Majesties good and loving Subjects, to pursue and plague with fire and sword, apprehend, destroy, and kill by all the ways and meanes they may, all the said persons, their partakers, &c. Declaring also to all men, as well good Subjects as others, that whosoever shall betwixt that time and the 25 day of March next, kil or cause to be killed any of the said Rebels, shal have for their reward as followeth, viz. For the head of Sir Philem O Neal 1000. l. Sir Con Magenis 600 Rory Magwire 600 Philip mac Hugh mac Shane O Rely 600 Collo mac Brian mac Mahon 600 And for the rest of the notorious Rebels nominated in the Proclama∣tion, 300 l. a head, and pardon for all his or their offences that shall kill and so bring in, or cause to be killed, and so brought in the said head or heads. This Proclamation issued forth under the hands of the Lords Iustices and Counsell of Ireland, whose names are as fol∣loweth, Ormond Ossory. R. Dillon. Cha. Lambart. Ad. Loftus. Cha. Coote. Tho. Rotheram. Fra. Willoughby. Rob. Meredith. J. Temple. FINIS.
