f2551 16437636 105394
A further and more particular ACCOUNT OF The Total Defeat OF THE REBELS in SCOTLAND; The Number of the Slain, Two Standards and 1200 Prisoners brought into Edenburgh: AND The CONFESSION of divers of the Prisoners, how they were drawn into this horrid Rebellion. A LETTER from Edenburgh, June 24, At Midnight. SIR, YOU have already heard the good Tidings of that eminent Victory obtained by His Majesties Forces against the Rebels; and this comes onely to satis∣fie you, in some particulars of that glorious Action, the success where of, hath caused a new face of things, disperfing all those black Clouds that seemed to threaten this poor Kingdom, which now appears in a posture of Joy and Triumph; and we do not doubt but in very few days we shall be restored to an intire Tranquility, for the Body of the Nation was not at all Tainted or Infected with the Rebellious poison, but upon all occasions are ready to express their Loy∣alty, whereof they have in this juncture given signal instances, by their ready and chearful coming out to serve His Majesty,
and the general abhorrence they every where express against these insolent Rebels, their Principles and Practices, and all that abet or comply with them. Of these vile wretches, no fewer than 1200 were this af∣ternoon brought in Prisoners hither, and for the present are kept in the Gray-friars Church-yard, under a very strong Guard. And we have a certain Account, that there were killed of their Party at Bothwell-Bridge, and about Hamilton-Park, 800 and upwards, besides the great numbers that have been slain up∣on the pursuit. Our gallant General, his Highness the Duke of Buchlugh and Monmouth, gave fresh proofs of his Conduct and Cou∣rage in this Affair, and we know not which we ought first to admire, his indefatigable Prudence in giving the necessary Or∣ders, or, his Courage and Bravery in charging the thickest of the Rebels, without the least apprehension of danger. Ani∣mated by his great Example, the whole Nobility and Gentry behaved themselves with a singular Gallantry; nor were any of our Troops wanting in their duty, or that deserved not a particular recommendation; especially Captain Graham of Claver-house, who with his own hands took the two Standards before-mentioned, his Troop remembring the slaughter the Rebels made amongst them, on the 29th of May, resolved now to have full satisfaction, and therefore utterly refused either to give or take Quarter. Likewise some High-landers belong∣ing to the Earl of Murry, and the Earl of Marr, charged the Rebels Left-wing with such fury, that the slain were left on the place as it were in heaps. The Rebels had 4 pieces of Cannon, one of which they threw into the River of Clyd, the other 3 were taken. And that you may judg of the temper of the Men, and what Cru∣elties they would have exercised, had they been Masters of the Field. I must not forget to inform you, that there were likewise taken two pair of Gallows, which they carried along with them; One was like our ordinary Tools of that kinde, and this was for the poorer sort. But the other, being in∣tended
for the Gentry, was of a mode wholly new, and so cu∣riously contrived, that I know not well how to describe it; 'Tis one streight piece of Wood with a Screw, having 12 or 15 branches which screwed up to the top, where there was a cross piece of wood full of long Iron Spikes, on which the Heads of Persons of Quality were to be fixt; and each of the aforesaid Branches had an Iron Hook at the end, to hang people on. Thus the insolent and cruel Rebels had prepa∣red, like proud Haman, their Gallows for the Kings good Subjects; but like him too, are themselves like to suffer on them, as they well deserve for their Treason. Just now News is brought, that Capt. Graham of Claver-house having pursued a Party of the Rebels Horse as far as Air, did there so warmely Engage them, that most of them are Killed or taken Prisoners; amongst which last, 'tis said, is Welsh, that notorious Preaching Trumpet of Sedition. There have been since Sunday killed in several places above 400, and divers of the Kings Forces are still abroad in Par∣ties in pursuit of them, and hourly pick up some of them; but the General with the Gross of the Army, is at present at Ruglen, and intend for Glascow to morrow. The Privy-Councel have ordered diligent search to be made amongst the Prisoners and the slain, for the Murtherers of his Grace the late Arch-Bishop of St. Andrews; and that if any of them be found amongst the Dead, their Bodies to be han∣ged up in Chains; if amongst the Prisoners, that they shall more strictly be secured in order to their Tryal. Many of the Prisoners seem to be very sensible of their Wickedness in joyning in this horrid Rebellion, and do Con∣fess, that their Ministers drew them into the fame, by bold and seditious Sermons, perverting and abusing Scripture, scandalizing and mis-representing the Government and chief Magistrates; and withal to encourage them, had given them great assurances of large Supplies and Assistance both of Men and Money from England and Ireland.
Take here the Names of the Heritors and persons of Note amongst the Rebels. The Lairds of Earlston, the elder and the younger. Two Brothers of the Earl of Galloway. The young Laird of Caitlaw. The Laird of Ketloch. The Laird of Blairquan. Cuningham of Mongrinam. Tho. Bogle of Boglehol. Hamilton of Kinkel, taken. Balfar of Kinloch, killed. Robert Hamilton Brother to Preston. Major Lermouth. Ministers known to be amongst the Rebels. John Welsh taken. John King. John Kidd taken. Will. Foster. Tho. Douglas. Sam. Arnot. John Rea. Geo. Barclay. James Semple. 'Tis not doubted but this total Defeat hath utterly crusht this dangerous Rebellion, and will very much contribute to the Peace of this Nation for the future; by opening the Eyes of the People, not to suffer themselves to be led into such wicked and fatal Enterprises, by a turbulent sort of Self-de∣signing Kirkmen. FINIS.
