g1080 19530814 109016
THE Good Old Test REVIV'D and RECOMMENDED To all Sincere CHRISTIANS. SINCE God and Caesar has given us Peace, let us enjoy it. Why should any be any longer Miserable, when a Universal Blessing bids all be Happy? We have had enough of Persecution, enough of Sequestring, of Seizing, of Confinements, of Prisons; enough of starving, of undoing Families, of Tortuning Consciences and making Orphans and Widows for God's sake. These have been the Evils We have hitherto groan'd under, and which have for many years deform'd Our Goshen with an Egyptian Servitude. But now, Heaven be Bless'd, and Thanks to Our Good Sove∣raign, we are call'd from this Slavery; these Heavy Burdens are taken off our Shoulders; We need no
longer dread the Black Writ, or a Summons; but may every one sit under his own Fig-tree, and eat of the Fruit of his own Vine. Away therefore now with all Animosities and Hatreds, let Jealousies and Plotting be banish'd from amongst us, let Factions and Riots be buried for ever; and let an Undistinguishing Charity unite us equally to every Neighbour. Let us have no other Test, but of Loy∣alty and Love. Let every one Serve God to the best of his Knowledge: And tho' we cannot joyn in Worship, yet let no Hatred divide us. Let Christians dread nothing, but from Infidels or Turks: If these are taught to hate us, to Revile and Rail a∣gainst us; if these have their Chains, their Prisons and their Slavery; Let these Turkish Entertainments remain with the Turks: For why should Christians prepare them for one another? Let us all joyn our Hearts and our Hands, to purge the Nation of these Barbary-Fashions: And let Railing and Reproching be no longer any part of Our Religion; These may sound well enough in a Mosch; But make no good Musick within Christian Walls: Let the Test of a Christian be no other than what was appointed by Christ. He Commanded us to Love one another: Let us all take This Test, This Christian Test. In this let us strive to out do one another: And let this be the chief Argument, by which we desire to prove, that We are Christ's Disciples. Oh! what a Happy Nation would This Charity make us? How soon would Peace and Plenty begin to over∣flow? How would our Neighbours abroad both Love and admire us? How would our Enemies swell both with Envy and Dread? And why now
shall we not be thus Happy, when we may? If we hinder it not our selves, our Guardian-Caesar will not permit it to be in the Power of others to do it. Let us apply therefore our Minds to the Promo∣ting this Union: Let us all endeavour to mend every one One. Let us all search our Inclinations, and examine our Hearts; if any one discovers there any Sowerness or Aversion to Peace; if any Melan∣choly arising at this General Joy: Let him purge and discharge it: Such Symptoms betray a cor∣ruption of Humours, and that the Constitution is not so Christian as it shou'd be. If any Grieve, be∣cause This Peace has lessen'd their Authority, or shortned their Power; let them examine, what this Power and Authority was: If 'twas a Power of Persecuting, a Power of Oppressing, a Power of Af∣flicting their Neighbour; let them Remember, that to a Good Man such a loss is desirable, and that Ty∣ranny is no proper Badge of a Christian. If any find an Inclination to be Railing against their Neigh∣bours; if they can never think themselves well, but when they are Trampling upon their Fellow-Christians; if they recommend their Perswasion, by making others Ridiculous; this may pass for a Zeal, but scarce according to Knowledge; This might do well enough, were it the Interest of Christians to destroy Christianity; were there any vertue in Passion, in Animosity, and Malice; or were it our Duty to Hate, instead of Love one another. But as our Gospel stands, Meekness, Charity, Com∣passion and Peace, are the better Vertues, and more Substantial Proofs of a good Religion. Since our Gospel therefore is a Gospel of Peace, let us improve
this vertue amongst us: And for all Snarling, Quar∣relling, Unneighbourly Tempers, let them be gone into Cadmus's Field, where Fighting is all the Fa∣shion; where no Man gets up, but tis to knock down his Neighbour, where Ruin is all the De∣sign. This is the proper place of such embitter∣ing Spirits; here let them fire all their Mouth-Gra∣nados, and beat up their Points of War upon Pulpit-Drums: But for us, let us live in Peace, we desire no such Champain Divinity. Our Gospel instructs us to Serve God, to Give Caesar his Due, and to Love our Neighbour; let this be our Profession and our Practice. Let those be admir'd, who encou∣rage these Vertues and Teach them. But for o∣thers who either openly, or by Sly Insinuations promote the contrary, let them be esteem'd neither for Good Christians or Loyal Subjects. LICENC'D, April the 2d. 1687. LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall. 1687.
