G1737 R216276 99828014 32441
GREAT NEWS FROM THE Polish Camp, and the Terms upon which his Most Christian Majesty proffers to make a Peace with the Republique of GENOA. From the Polish Camp at Soochin, the 2d. of October. 1684. THe Rain hath continued here, for four Weeks toge∣ther, which hath so swelled the Neister, that notwith∣standing all Endeavours, it hath ruined our Bridge, so that only a part of our Army got over. The Rains have so far incommoded us, that we as well as our Horses stand in Mud, and want forrage. We also, are not freed from an Invasion of the Tartars, for they in a great Body having already past the River, and laid the Country in ruin. His Majesty is much displeased, being prevented in his de∣signs if he had got over the River: But he resolves to put a good Garrison in Suaint and Soochin, and then to march for Camminack, with hopes, that though he cannot besiege that place, that yet he shall find an opportunity in Moldavia to get over the River. 'Tis said these Tartars are 60000 strong, under Command of the Cham and his Son.
Conditions, on which his Most Christian Majesty proffers to give a Peacet Genoa, are as followeth, Viz. 1. THat the Duke and four Senators shall come in per∣son and submit to his Majesty. 2. That the Genovees shall observe an equal Newtrallity, and not Engage in the affairs of other Princes. 3. That they shall dis-arm all their Gallies but six, and shall Arm no more without the consent of his Most Christian Majesty. 4 That they shall give free passage, and being to the Salt in Savonia, that so it may pass freely to Monferrat. 5. That all the French Kings Subjects, that are forced from their Goods and Estates, shall be restored, and re∣imbursed; and that Justice shall be Administred to the French Subjects, that have any pretences on those of Genoa. 6. That Restitution shall be made of those Goods taken out of the House of Fresque, and that 100000. Crowns shall be paid in part to the Earl of Fresque: But if they have any pretence, to any of the Goods be∣longing to that House, they shall be heard, and his Ma∣jesty will do them Justice. 7. In Case of Refusal, they must expect no peace or quiet with France, and that this was the last Resolution of that King. To all which the Genoa Resident (and Prisoner in the Bastile in Paris) answered as followeth, If the King will see the Duke and Senators, he must go and see them at Genoa, or fetch them per force, and that he could give no other answer. LONDON, Printed by E. Mallet, in Black-Horse-Alley near Fleet-Bridge, 1684.
