G1751 R11682 11998165 52131
GREAT SATISFACTION CONCERNING The Death of the Earle of Strafford, in a Discourse betweene a Scottishman and a Jesuite. With a serious consideration of certaine Conclusions observed from his last Speech vpon the Scaffold. I Follow the last Speech published, appealed to the Lord Pri∣mate of Jreland, Earle of Cleveland, Earle of Newport, Lord Rich, &c. observing the heads according to the paper by himselfe left upon the Scaffold: Scot. Iesuit. Scot. I pray you Sir, what is the matter, from whence come all these people so fast? Jes. Doest thou not know, every Child can tell through the whole City, that they came from the execution of the Earle of Strafford. Scot. Why, is the Earle of Strafford dead? Jes. He is beheaded upon the Scaffold at Tower-hill: he is dead sure enough, God comfort him. Scot. A my saule I am glad out with all my heart, the Earle of Strafford is dead? the best newes that ever I heard in my life: Ile away into Scotland, ham as fast as I can, and tell my Grannum this newes. Ile tosse my Cap for joy. Ies. Why doe you Scottishmen so envy the Lord Strafford? Scot. We doe not, nor never did envy his person; but he was
one of the troublers of the 3. Kingdomes: which could never be well setled for him, and such as he. But I pray you sir, tell me one thing. Did he dye well, and make a good end? Ies. He made an excellent Speech, and left us a worthy patterne against we dye. Scot. I pray you what said he? Jes. He first made a short Preface to the Lord Primate of Ireland, but the people made a noyse and interrupted him. Scot. But what said he? Did he repent: and confesse his just deserved death, to be inflicted upon him, for offending God? Jes. The first ead of his Speech was, concerning his Com∣ming to pay the last debt we owe to sin, according to St. Pauls saying, we are all subject to death. 1. Cor. 15.22. Now he did confesse, that he came thither by the goodwill and pleasure of Amighty God, to dye, as it is, Heb. 9.27. Scot. But I pray you tell me, did he yeeld up his spirit in the faith of Christ, under the hope of salvation by him, with re∣pentance, for all his sins? Revel. 14.13. did he fall a sleepe in Christ? 1 Thess. p. 13. What was the rest of his Speech? Jes. 2. He spoke cōcerning his rising to Righteousness. There is a glorified Righteousnesse, through Christ in the world to come both perfite and inherent, Psal. 73.24. And the Earle of Straf∣ford did declare himselfe, that he was confident, by the blessing of God, to rise againe through the merits of Jesus Christ, to Righteousnesse, and life eternall. Scot. But did he before his Death profit in true righteous∣nesse and holinesse, by meanes of those chastisements that God laid upon him: or if you will, that his sinnes brought upon him in this life? Did he behold the Majesty of the Lord in the sentence of his death? Isay. 26.9, 10. &c. It is not a flourishing vapour that brings a man to Heaven, but I pray you proceed in his Speech. Jes. In the 3. head, he did expresse that he did dye willingly. Now there is such a power in the Resurrectiō of Christ which hath loosed the sorrowes and discontents of death, and makes a man to dye willingly, Acts 2.24. And thus did he declare himselfe to be loosed from the sorrowes of death, insomuch,
that he submitted himselfe to it, with a very quiet, and con∣tented mind. Scot. Now here is the matter. Was he first wounded for the offence, then Reconciled to God, by the death of Christ, before he died, and rejoycing before the Lord did he receive the Attonement through Christ? Rom. 5.10.11. Ies. Jn the 4. place, he forgave all, which is the property of Gods Children, they forgive all, and of an humble mind, forbea∣ring, and long suffering. Coloss. 3.12.13. Thus did the Earle of Strafford freely forgive all the world, and that he exprest he did, not from the teeth outward, but from the very heart, pro∣testing before Almighty God, that there was not a displeasing thought in him, towards any creature. Scot. That was ve∣ry good, but did he find true testimony from Gods Spirit, in the forgivenesse of his owne offences, against God, and against his people, Confessing his sins humbly, and without guile, and powring out his soule before the Lord, till God sealed him a par∣don? Psal. 32. I pray you proceed in his Speech. Ies. He wished in the 5. place, nothing but prosperity to King and people; upon which particular he was something large. The 1. part whereof concerned his place, as he was Deputy. Now as the Scripture saith; fidelity to the King, and true Iudge∣ment to the people, are weighty matters of the Law, which con∣cerned his place, and ought by him to be done. Mat. 23, 23. And herein he glorified, and thanked God, that he could say from his Conscience, that he (in his place) never had any thing in the purpose of his heart, but what tended to the joynt, and individuall prosperity of King and people. Scot. Well, well. All is not Gold that glisters, nor are all Saints that have sine tongues: Rhetoricke and policie will not justifie a man before God. Had he sought the publick tranquillity of the King and people, in peace, and truth, and the quiet state of the Church of God, he would not have laboured to bring in, but to have freed it from both, forraine and Civill warres. 2 Kings 20.19. Jt is a strange and unwarrantable way for any that professe them∣selves Christians to seeke the joyning of King, and people to∣gether, and the prosperity of both, by confirming errours in the
Church, and by persecuting tyrannie, slaughters, & bloody warres to force the people to obey by constraint, Psal. 23.1. Ies. The 2. place, He declared himselfe to be misunderstood, and Moses Law shewes, that Iudges ought to keepe themselves from false matters, and from putting to death the innocent and righteous. Exod. 23.7. Now the Earle of Strafford conceived himselfe to be mis-judged, imputing it to the Errour of mis∣understādsting him. Sot. I am very sorry to heare that he was no more pnitent, having so many hainous crimes proved a∣gainst him, as to overthrow the right of Law by exorbitant power, to take away mens estates by force, to proceed against the Lord Mount-norris without all course of Law or Justice, with divers other Articles proved at large against him, alas! alas! that he should be so blinded to speake such a peremp∣tory word! Will he make his owne unjust proceedings con∣trary to law, to be justifiable, and condemne the sentence so justly denounced against him: so justly, and true? Surely hee thought all was but in jest, or that his golden mouthed lan∣guage would save his life, or some end he had best knowne to himselfe, for he could not be ignorant of his just deserved censure, according both to Common-Law, Statute-Law, and Parliament: but indeed, every one almost held him an enemy to all these. Jes. He shewed himselfe in the 3. place To approve of Parliaments. There is one thing, saith he, I desire to free my selfe of, and I am very confident that I shall bee beleeved: I did alwaies thinke the Parliaments of England were the happiest constitutions that any Kingdome or Nation lived un∣der, and next under God, the best meanes to make the King and his people happy, so farre have I been from being against Parlia∣ments. Scot. So farre, that is as much as nothing, he thought so, and he said so, and he knew so. David thought Ʋriah happy in having so faire a Wife, he knew and was sensible of the de∣light that was to be found in her, but what did that make for Vriah? He lost his wife by Davids taking notice of it: and his life too: so what is it that the Earle of Strafford know how happy the Parliaments of England were for the King and
people, and upon such his knowledge to hinder, and stop them, and to labour to deprive the Land of them: using meanes to have the strife ended by Warre, and Blood: rather then by Par∣liament and peace? But I pray you sir, will you be pleased to proceed to the rest of his Speech. Ies. 6. He submitted to justice, being in his intentions Inno∣cent. We reade, that when Stephen was stoned he kneeled downe, and cryed, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Acts. 7.60. Thus the Lord of Strafford imitated holy Stephen; saying, that he acquitted all the world, and heartily forgave them; plea∣ding his intentions to be innocent. Scot. Was he not in a trance when he pleaded Innocency, or was his wit too high to stoope to Iustice? What condemned of treason by so faire a tryall? Search and see, if all Histories can parallell with it? He whose Iudgement and wit is admired to pleade Innocency in so cleare a censure? To practise with another Governour of another Country to invade this Realme, is high Treason, although such practises be not put in the Dyer. 248. Is it not then treason too, to tell the King that he had an Army in Ireland, should reduce this Kingdome to obedience, to encoun∣ter, and fight, and kill, such as are the Kings souldiers, or assisting the King in his warres, is high Treason. 45. Edw. 3.25. Br. treason. 7.21. E. 23. Stamf. 1.1. Is it not then Treason to be the willing cause of the losse of New-castle of purpose to engage the 2. Kingdomes in a warre? To maintain the extollers or maintainers of the See of Rome? The first offence doth incurre ye danger of a praemunine: the second offence is high treason. 5. El. 1. D. Conce. 1. what then was the Lord Straffords fact, that to oblige them the more, compounded with Recusants at so low a rate? Such as shall doe or procure any thing, ad seditionem domini Regis, vel exercitus su i teason, saith Mr. Andrew Hornes booke, Speculum Iu∣stitiariorum so saith he, is falsifying the Kings Seales, &c. In a word, because many like cases of treason might happen &c. it was (by the statute 25. Edw. 3. ch. 2.) accorded, that if any other case supposed trea∣son, which is not as that Statute specified, doth happen, that it should be declared before the King and his Parliament, &c. These things I passe over ore fly, giving but a touch of them: by which we may perceive how great those offences were, whereby the Earle of Strafford expulsed ople out of their Families by men in Armes, his treachery against the tte and division betwixt the King and People by him wrought, as
may appeare in his Articles. But I will not interrupt you too long; I pray you sir, will you be pleased to goe on with the rest of his Speech? Ies. He acquitted the King constrained to, &c it was a great praise to the Kings of Israel, that they were mercifull Kings, 1 Kings 20.31. And this was a great comfort to the Earle of Straf that the King was so full of pitty and mercy to him, and he infinitely rejoyced therein. Scot. It is our comfort that we have a gracious King, but let not us therefore abuse his mercy. Did the L. Strafford make the God of Hea∣ven his salvation and pray unto him, and praise his name, forsaking his humane policy, and lying vanities, if he did not, I can assure you he for∣sooke his owne mercy and refused the true felicity. Ionah. 2.8. Ies. He besought to repent. The Lord himselfe admonisheth all men every where to repent, Acts 17.30. So did this Earle; he having wished to this Kingdome all the prosperity & happinesse in the world, desired that they would repent, yt they would lay their hands upon their hearts. Scot. I thought rather that he had been extreamely humbled with the sight of his sins, & said. Oh how many glorious starres shine in the Par∣liament, and my glory is Eclipsed. I will therefore turn unto the Lord, and confesse my sins, that so J be not clouded in darkenesse (in the world to come) but through my Saviour Christ may be a bright-shining starre in Heaven, against thee Lord have I sinned, and doe now most justly suf∣fer. Luke 15.17. &c. But I pray you goe on. Ies. He shewed in the 9. place. That it was a strange way to write the beginning of Refor∣mation, and settlement of a Kingdome in blood. The Lord denounceth a woe against them that build a Towne with blood. Haba. 2, 12. And the Earle of Strafford desired the people to consider whether the Reforma∣tion of the happinesse of a Kingdome should be written in Letters of blood. Scot. By Blood, there is meant blood-shed by iniquity and not by the Sword of Iustice. The Blood of Zimri and Cosby was shed by Phineas, which wrought a Reformation of happinesse to the peo∣ple, the wrath of God was thereby appeased, and the Plague then amongst them was stayed, Numbers, 25. and thus J hope will it now so be with us, Ies. He did beseech that demands might rest there which was the 10 head of his Speech. St. Paul would have every man to prove his own worke, to see whether he can rejoyce in it, Gal. 6.4. And thus would the Earle of Strafford have his death to be considered of in our Houses. Scot, Jn my conceit, it concerned him to have beene more diligent to search into his owne heart. Oh of what concernment was it of to him∣selfe, a then dying man, to have bent his heart diligently, to have purged his owne heart, and conscience from those sins in which he had lived, and for which he was then to suffer death, Hag. 1, 5, 7. J pray you how
did he proceed after? Ies. He prayed, that they might not call blood upon themselves; Lord lay not this sin to their charge, saith inno∣cent Stephen, when they stoned him. Acts 7.60. And thus the Lord Strafford prayed, that his blood might not rise up aginst any one of this Land. Scot. I am sorry to heare that he was so obstinate, that he would not acknowledge, that he was justly executed for his deserving sins, Rom. 6.23. I pitty him, it is now too late to pray for him, for his condition is setled upon him; as he must abide, either to eternall joy, or perpetuall woe. Ies. He dyed in the faith of the Church. St Iohn saith, writing to Gajus: I have no greater joy then these (saith he) that is to heare that my sonnes walke in verity, 3. Iohn 4. I professe saith the Earle of Strafford, that J doe dye a true and faithfull Sonne to the Church of England. Scot. But here lies the question, did he dye a converted man, did he die a true Christian, that as one who having the sense, and feeling of his owne basenesse, and prophanenesse being a vessell to Satan, and servant to sin, did he repent, and receive of the spirituall anoynting from the Lord? Was he endowed through grace with faith, and the Holy Ghost? Did he become a person dedicated to Christ? Rom. 5 6. 1. Pet. 2.9. Ephes. 2, 3. Ies. We leave that to God: He loved the Church of England and prayed for it which was the 13 head of his Speech. Pray for the peace of Ierusalem, saith holy David, they shall prosper that love her peace bee within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces, Psal, 22, 6 7. Thus the good Earle prayed, that peace & prosperity might be to the Church of England. Scot. I wonder what Church he meant, did he mean the Papisticall Church, the Iesuits & their crew, which hath too much encreased amongst us, or the Prelaticall Church of England, as it stands governed by Bishops, Arch-bishops, &c. is it their Hierarchy and tem∣porall glories and dignities, that he desires to prosper. Or doth he mean the distressed Church, which hath bin by them long subdued and kept in bondage, Doth he pray for those distressed soules, the faithfull mem∣bers of Iesus Christ whose soules have bin filled full of the mocking of the wealthy, and the despitefulnesse of the proud Prelates, Psal. 13, 24. Ies. He answered (such as shal object that he was inclining to popery) that since he was 21 yeares of age he never doubted of the Religion of the Church of England. Scot. Belike then he tooke all upon trust, what the Church did, that it seemes he beleeved is not this Popery to beleeve so, and so because the Church beleeves it, and so take all upon trust? Iesuit. How would you have men to beleeve? Scot. To beleeve in God, and to search and try the Scriptures, but I pray you what was the rest of the Speech?
Iesuit. So he concluded his Speech, Scot. J pray you what was his Conclusion, was that better then the rest of his speech? Ies. In his Conclusion 1 He reconcileth himselfe to God through Christ Iesus, Levit. 23.27. 2. His hope is in heaven, Rom, 5, 2, 3. He desireth the forgivenesse of every man, Psal. 32, 1. 4 He confessed his rash and unadvised words, and evill deeds, Iohn 1, 20. 5 He bids all earthly things farewell, Psal. 7, 6 He falls to prayer, Acts 10, 9. 7 His Faith is on God, on whom alone he trusteth, Rom. 3, 28. 8 He counselleth his friends, Zach, 6.13, 9 He dyes patiently, Acts 21, 13. And I trust he is ascended into heaven joyfully, Ephes. 4. Scot. I can assure you if this was all done heartily: he made a good Conclusion indeed, and I can tell you this indeed may give us some satisfaction to hope well of him. Ies. Even now you condemned him for making such a speech, and doe you yet like his Conclusion, doe you thinke it possible, that a change could be wrought in him on such a sudden? Scot. Though it is not common to find such presidents, yet we find that whilst Christ, and the two Theeves did suffer even at the place of execution, not one but both the Theeves, which were crucified with him Reviled him at the first: Matth. 27.44. But by and by even at the same houre we finde one of those Thieves rebuking the other, 1. Reconciling himselfe to God, fearest thou not God (saith he) 2. His hope was in peace seeing no∣thing to belong to him on Earth, but present condemnation he desires forgivenesse, confessing his sinne, we are indeed righteously here, and bids all earthly thing farewell: 6 He fals to prayer: Lord remember me when thou commest into thy Kingdome: 7. By which expression, he shew∣ed that his faith was in God, in whom alone he trusted, 8. He coun∣selleth the Thiefe, 9. He dieth patiently: then Iesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, to day shalt thou be with me in Paradice: Luke 23.39.40, 41, 42, 43. And who knowes that if not before yet even at this instant might the time be of his conversion; Gods m might fall upon him, even at the last gaspe. Let us leave him to Gods Tribunall, and judge charitably of him: for God is mercifull, if he were not; woe would be for us all: In a word, let us be thankefull to God that he is removed from trou∣bling our Church and States Laus Deo. FINIS.
