G1981 12409259 61470
AN Astrological Judgement TOUCHING THEFT, Wherein is demonstrated most Incomparable Secrets according to the best Rules in Art. First how to find out or discover Theft or Theeves, too much used in this Nati∣on, to the great damage of many People. Secondly to discover Fugitives and Beasts Lost or Strayed &c. Compendiously set forth for the good of all people especially to those that are not enemies to this Noble Art. A Peice not before Extant. By Anthony Griffin, Stud. in Astrology. Ex Astris optimae est haurienda Scientia. London, Printed by Peter Lillicrap, 1665.
TO His much Honoured Friend Mr. CHARLES CHIP, The Author wisheth all happi∣ness in this world, and Eternal fe∣licity in the world to come. SIR, I Made bold to Dedicate this small piece to you, though somewhat a stranger to you at pre∣sent, yet being desired by a faithfull friend of yours: who informed me of the great respect you owe to Art, I could do
no less; therefore good Sir, let me Crave your pardon in this my presum∣ption, and let me desire you to pass by my imbecilities, which I do not fear but that you will, when you have seri∣ously consider my Minority, and how hard a matter it is to comprehend the profundity of this most sublime Sci∣ence: and now to let you understand what moved me here to make my self publique, is the true love that I owe to my Countrey, and I hope most will receive benefit by those my weak indeavours, and upon this account one∣ly, I have presumed to make known to the world this little tract of Astrology touching Theft, knowing it must pass the Censure of various capacities, and from the unskilful I expect blots, but from the Judicious a friendly Correcti∣on, and if at last it may be crown∣ed with your Protection, my ex∣pectation is fully answered: who
faithfully desires to subscribe him∣self, Sir, your devoted servant for ever to Command, Anthony Griffin.
To the Judicious READER Reader, WHen I did seriously Consider what mischief is done by Thieves and Cheates, I could do no less but make pub∣lique this Little Treatise touching Theft, &c. Wherein Astrologically is plainly laid down some very excellent Rules of Art Experimentally amplyfied, easie to be understood by the meanest capacity, and certainly will be of much advantage, not onely to those who are well versed in this most sublime Science: But to most others that are desirous to
be instructed therein: and for the bet∣ter understanding I have here shewed you whether the Figure at the time of the question is Radicall or not: that you may not deceive your selves nor the querent: but certainly direct him how to find the Theif or goods stolen, &c. and sometimes it doth so happen that many things are mislaid, and not out of the querents house, but he judgeth it stole because theft is so much practised by servants, &c. Therefore I have de∣monstrated to thy view, whether it be stole or remain in the house (if so) in what part thereof it may probably be found. But if the goods are stolen, I have shewed thee the best Rules how to describe the Thief or Thieves, which way they live, strangers or familiars, &c. Likewise concerning Beasts, if they are stole or strayed, and Fugitives with many other matters very usefull and benificial, to all that are studients
in this Art, viz. Judicial Astrology: So Courtious Reader, let me desire thee to pardon my imbecilities, and if God permit me with Life and health, I shall furnish thee with another Piece Treating of the judgements of all horary questions, more perticular then any yet extant: and to all carping Criticks and fantasticall sencerers I thus make them an answer, Ʋt Ignam Caves Omnibus ignotis, Allatrant ita barbari; Quicquid non intelligunt Carpunt at damnant. Thine Anthony Griffin.
AN Astrological Judgment Touching THEFT &c First to know whether the Figure be ra∣dical or not. IF the Lord of the Ascendant and the Lord of the hour be both of one Triplicity the Figure is radical and Judgement may safely be given. Example. If Aries ascends and Mars be Lord of the hour the Figure is radical, the
same if Cancer Scorpio or Pisces ascends Mars governing that Triplicity: if that Sagitarius or Pisces ascends and Jupiter be Lord of the hour the Figure is Radical, and thus observe of all the rest: which by your own discretion you may easily find out. When the latter degrees of a sign ascends it is not safe to give Judgement unless the Age Corprature and Com∣plexion of the Querent doth agree with the degrees ascending. Also when the Second Third Fourth or Fifth degrees of a sign ascends, chief∣ly in signs of short ascension, it is not safe to give judgement unless the Querent be young and short of stature. Likewise if the Moon be in the first degrees of a sign or else in the Latter, give no Judgement, for the Querent comes to try thee and likewise for de∣ceit. Likewise if the Moon be unfortunate
or be void of course, or if Scorpio do as∣cendor if the Dragons-tail be in the first or seventh house, or if that the fortunes and infortunes be of equall strength, all these do signifie errours in Judgement, and an unlucky end of the question. Narrowly observe whether the se∣venth House or his Lord be aflicted, for then it is an Argument that the Ar∣tist shall not gain Credit by the questi∣on, for the seventh House signifies the Artist himself. Now I shall begin concerning Theft or any other thing lost. When a Question is propounded concerning Theft, it is very conveni∣ent to examine the Figure and see whe∣ther the thing enquired after be stolen or not, or whether it be in the Que∣rents house or not, which may be dis∣cerned several ways; as thus:
Choice tokens that the Goods are not stolen. If neither the Lord of the House of the Moon, or the Lord of the House of the Second seperate not themselves one from another, nor any Planet from, then the thing enquired after is in its own place. If that the disposer of the Moon, and the Lord of the Ascendant be in Con∣junction, then is the thing missing in the house of the Querent. If that the Lord of the Ascendant did separate from Jupiter, or from the Lord of the Second, then did the Que∣rent lay it down and forget it. If that the Lord of the Hour be in the Ascendant, the thing wanting is not stolen but in the Querents house. If that Cancer Ascends and the Moon be in the fourth, and the Lord of the
second be in the seventh, or in the sign of the eight, at a Sextile or Trine to the Moon, then the things enqui∣red after is not stolen, but taken away in Jest. If that the Moon be in the se∣venth, in the sign of the Lord of the Hour, the Lord of the hour be∣ing Lord of the seventh, the Goods are not taken away, but over lookt and mistaken. If that the Lord of the Ascendant and the Lord of the hour be in Conjun∣ction, the thing enquired after is not stolen. If the Lord of the hour, the Lord of the fourth, and Planet in the fourth, the Moon of her dispositer, any of these significators being joyned near toge∣ther, doth argue that the goods are not stolen but near the Querent. Having found whether the Goods be in the house or not, now I shall
show you in what part of the house you may discover them in, First I shall show what places every Sign doth re∣present. Aries, a place where small beast are kept, as Sheep and such like. In houses the Roofe Plaistering or covering of the house, Kitching slaughter-houses back-houses houses of office Chimneys fire-places distilling house, brew-house or a place where Iron is wrought on. Taurus, a Stable of great beasts and places where Implements of Cattel are laid up, low grounds and Cellars, and ground newly taken in, pastures and sowed lands. Geminy, uper Rooms Chests Trunks walls and plasterings of the house store-houses hay-lofts and Barns Hills and Mountains. Cancer, Wells Cellars Trenches Cisterns, a place where water is kept, or doth stand great waters, Rivers
Marshy grounds, ditches with Rushes and all kind of moist and slabby places. Leo, Fire places as Chimneys Stoves Furnaces Ovens, many times a place where a dog is kept, a Stable, a Park or Forrest or ground newly taken in. Virgo, Studdies, Closets Coffers Chests Trunks Cupboards Dayry-houses, a resting place for women, Ware-houses, a place of great Cattle as Horses Oxen Calves, &c. Libra, Grounds near Windmils out houses sides of Hills tops of Mountains a place of Hawking or Hunting, in houses high Chambers garrets, one Chamber within another. Scorpio, Sinks Kitchins Washouses, a place of creeping venomous Beasts, quaggy and stinking grounds, Ruinous houses Caves and Prisons, and likewise Gardens Orchards and Vine-yards. Sagitarius, A Stable of great beasts, as Horses Cows Oxen, and in houses
upper rooms where fire is or hath been kept. Capricornus, A place where old tools for husbandry are laid up, dark places in houses near the ground or threshold. Aquaries, Roofs or Eves in houses hilly grounds newly digged, a place of running waters full of pits, and grounds where no house is nigh them. Pisces, Watry grounds Springs Ri∣vers, Water-mills moats about houses Wells Pumps Cisterns Cunduits, and places where water is kept. Note if the Moon be significator and in Pises the the thing is hidden in a Well. To know in what part of the house the thing missing is in. First consider the sign Ascending, and the sign the Lord of the Ascendant is in and in what quarter, secondly the sign the Lord of the second is in, third∣ly
the sign of the fourth, and the sign the Lord of the fourth is in, and the Planet in the fourth, fourthly the sign the Moon is in, fifthly the sign where the part of fotrune is, sixtly the sign the Lord of the hour is in, and Collect all these testimonies together, and accor∣ding to the Major testimony so Judge. Example. If that the Major part of these Testi∣monies be Aiery signs, it is in some Chamber Garret or Eves of the house or in some Hay-loft, and so Judge of all the rest. If that the principal significator of the Major part of these be dropping betwixt two signs, the thing missing is fallen down betwixt two Rooms or between the Wainscoat and walls, or dropt between some flit or hole or the like.
Note that earthy Signs signifie neer the Earth, low places in houses, Cellars low rooms store-houses for Corn and Hay, places where old tools for hus∣bandry are laid up, dark places or the ground near the threshold or the like. In fiery Signs where fire is kept. If watrey Signs where water is kept a finke or some moist place, or a place near some Cistern, or where water doth constantly stand. ♈ East. ♉ S. by E. ♊ W. by S. ♋ North. ♌ E. by N. ♍ S. by W. ♎ West. ♏ N. by. E. ♐ E. by S. ♑ South. ♒ W. by N. ♓ N. by W. This Table doth show what part every sign doth signifie, and by it you may know in what part of the house the Goods are in, likewise it may direct the Querent to what part the Thief is gone, which afterwards will be de∣scribed more at large.
That the Goods are stolen. If the Lord of the House of the Moon, or the Lord of the Second do separate from any Planet it is stolen. If a Perigrine Planet give virtue to the Moon, or the Moon to him it is stolen. If the Lord of the Ascendant do give virtue to the significator of the Thief it is stolen. If that the Significator of the Thief be Perigrine it is stolen. If the significator of the Thief be in Conjunction, or Aspect the Lord of the Ascendant by Quartile or Opposition it is stolen. If the significator of the Thief be∣hold the Moon by Quartile or Conjun∣ction it is stolen. If any Planet be in the Ascendant and give virtue to the significator of the Thief it is stolen.
If a Perigrine Planet be in the As∣cendant or Second House it is stolen. If that the part of fortune or his Lord be unfortunate it is stolen. If none of these aforesaid Testimo∣nies be it is not stolen. But nevertheless in your Figure exactly observe and compare the testimonies, for not stolen, and these testimonies for stolen and see which is most weigh∣tiest and according give Judgement. How to find out the significator of the Thief. The significator of the Theif, is a Planet perigrine in any of the four An∣gles or second house, if not take the Lord of the seventh for he is the signi∣ficator of the Thief.
A description of the Thief by Saturn in any of the 12 Signs. Saturn in Aries. The Theif hath a hoarse voice, high forehead, great and full face al∣most black eyes, small hair on his Chin but thick on his head. Saturn in Taurus. A large great forehead, an ill favou∣red countenance, and looking down∣wards very sad and Melancholly, and an inconstant person having a thick nose. Saturn in Gemini. The Thief is moderate in his man∣ners, betwixt wickedness and gentle∣ness to them that are in his company,
one of a fair voice and a very well spo∣ken person, and gives good Councill and he esteems much of himself broad shoulders a small wast his beard of the Common fashion and he hath but little hair on his head. Saturn in Cancer. Black eyes a small face a broad great forehead a great space betwixt his eyes and one that is an unconstant person. Saturn in Leo. A lean face hollow eyes, a thick neck great Armes broad shoulders and looking downwards, one that is very forgetfull. Saturn in Virgo. A great head, and his hands very
hairy one of a profound Judgement yet unconstant in mind. Saturn in Libra. A great and a large forehead, long neck, black hair, his nose stretcheth our and often the nails of his hands goes off and he is one well descended. Saturn in Scorpio. A long and narrow forehead, fowl great shoulders and feet, a high stiffe neck, the whole body in general but mean, generally in the sign he hath much hair upon his head. Saturn in Sagitarius. An indifferent great body and straight, a great nose, and a great Countenance, his neck thick and
hairy, likewise a great mocker. Saturn in Capricornus. A long face and yellowish, a sharp voyce, a straight forehead thick feet and hands, and likewise very rough and hairy and a stammering in his speech. Saturn in Aquaries. A great head, round eyes a thine face towards his Chin, and his imploy∣ment most in moistness, as a Dyer, Shipwright or a fisherman, &c. Saturn in Pisces. Being strong and fortunate by good Aspects, he is a man of a good descent, and a noble Gentleman born, though Saturn be evil of himself, yet in this sign he hath the similitude of good manners,
great eyes, unequall teeth, one of little speech drawing his words as though it were with his tongue and swift of body. A short description of the other Planets Jupiter, Mars, Sol Venus and Mercury. Furthermore if the significator be Jupiter, and in the place of Saturn, it doth signifie a white mixt with yellow, if a man he hath a round Beard, if ei∣ther man or woman they have some darker sight then ordinary, one of some Gentility. If Mars be significator in the place of Jupiter, the Thief shall be of a yel∣lowish complexion drawing to redness a round face, a long and a sharp Chin, his brows bent like a bow or horn of the Moon, whose end doth reach to his nose, a thin beard, light and swift of going about his own matters, one of a
sharp wit and very bold, and confi∣dent. If the Sun be significator and in the place of Mars, the Thief is of a whitish brown, a very round face, a singer, a Taylor or a bocher. If Venus be significator in the place of the Sun, he or she is white, and void of all blots or marks, and hath an honest and a comely countenance, and very comely eyed, wonderfull gentle loving and tender. If Mercury be in the place of Venus & significator, it signifies a thin beard, little hair, of a sandy complexion, somewhat long visaged, full of speech and chat∣tering, without reason or discretion. but very ingenious and witty. A description of the Theif by the Moon being in any of the 12 signs. The Moon significator of the Theif
and in the first half of Aries, gives a mean stature, a thick ruddish coullour∣ed hair in the lust half of Aries mean stature and lean, a great head, high forehead, great eyes, long visiage, a long neck, and straight shoulders &c. The Moon in the first half of Taurus, gives the body to be gross: but in the last half, lean and mean, a fair stature black hair, and rough like a thornbush. The Moon in the first half of Gemi∣ni, gives the body to be mean and lean, but in the last half gross and thick, a round face, little mouth, long nose, a fair voice, and one of a good Councell. The Moon in the first half of Cancer, gives a mean stature and lean, but in the last half some what gross and tall, yet somewhat crooked, black eyes somewhat impedited, crooked teeth, and thehar inclining to a dark brown or quite black.
The Moon in the first half of Leo, gives a stature and thick in the last half tall and lean smooth hair, a smooth face, a little head, yet great eyes, short neck, one that is very rash and of great strength, and likewise a great voice. The Moon in the first half of Virgo, the body is inclinable to groasness, in the last half, to leanness, small eyes, indifferent long visaged, a long neck, much hair and of a brownish colour. The Moon in the first half of Libra, gives the body to be gross, in the last half lean, a mean stature, a long face, long legs, a fair voice, of a laughing countenance, a lover of women, and beloved of women. The Moon in the first half of Scorpio gives a mean tall stature, somewhat lean▪ but in the last half gross a small face, little mouth, broad thick lips, and very long legs and of at alborn coloured hair.
The Moon in the first half of Sagitari∣us, gives a tall stature, somewhat lean, but in the last half gross, a fair stature, a long face, a great flat nose, and some∣times Canker eaten, a sandy coloured hair, and one that delights much in Ri∣ding, and hath been hurt by some four footed beast, or else by Iron, chiefly if the Moon be unfortunate. The Moon in the first half of Capri∣cornus, gives a mean stature and lean, but in the last half semewhat gross, a brownish coloured hair, a narrow forehead, thick lips, broad nose, great hands; and his body looks as if it were withered, and one that is very wrath∣full. The Moon in the first half of Aqua∣ries, gives a short mean stature, in the last half mean and lean, one that much useth the water, and hath one leg shorter then the other, and if the Moon be unfortunate, hath been ei∣ther
hurt by Iron, or else hath had a brand in the hand. The Moon in the first half of Pisces, gives a mean stature somewhat gross, but in the last half mean, a great head, round eyes, and a great nose. The Marks of the Thief. Look to the Moon, and if she be significator, and in Scorpio, and infor∣tunate by Saturn or Mars, and Venus have any Aspect by the Moon, the par∣ty is hurt in the privy parts, by some woman, A Winchester Goose, generally if that the Moon behold the significa∣tor of the Thief or have any dignities where he is. If the Moon be significator of the
Thief, and she unfortunate, it shows some defect in the parties eye-sight, cheifly if she be in the Ascendant af∣flicted by Saturn Mars or the Sun. If Mercury be significator, and in Quartile or Opposition of Saturn, it notes the Thief to have some impedi∣ment in his speech. If Venus be significator and in any the signs of Mars, it notes a woman in∣famous for whoredom, Venus significa∣tor and in Quartile or Oposition to Mars signifies the like. Venus significator of the Thief, and in Leo, or with the Dragons-tail, denotes the Thief to have a Copper nose. Saturn or Mars in Opposition to the significator of the Thief shows that the Thief is sick or will be shortly. Venus significator and void of course gives a Mark in the face, or a gogle eye or a Wart, but if slow of motion, then
she gives a hollow Mould. If that the Moon have any dignities where a Perigrine Planet is, then there is a Mark where the Moon is, or where that Perigine Planet is, the sign will discover in what part of the body it is in. If that the Moon be in Quartile, or Opposition to the significator of the Thief in the second house, it notes a Mark in the neck, if in the third house in the Arms and shoulders and so in order &c. If that the Moon be weak or in Quartile or Opposition to Saturn or Mars, it denotes a mark to be in the sign where the Moon is. If that the Lord of the sixth be in∣fortunate, there is a Mark in the sign where he is, and likewise in the sign of the cuspe of the sixth. Also observe the same Method by the sign Ascending, and by the sign that
the Lord of the Ascendant is in. If the Lord of the Ascendant be infortunate then it is certain. If Saturn be infortunate in the as∣cendant, gives a bruise or the like in the head or face, Mars infortunate in the Ascendant signifies a cut in the head or face, or else damnified by Iron. If that the Sun be significator and in fiery signs and infortunate, it doth note a bald head and short curled hair. But unfortunate in watry signs, it signifies the Thief to have a scal'd head: Whether the Thief be of the family of the Querent or not If that the Lord of the Ascendant be in the Ascendant in his own sign▪ then is the querent robbed by himself▪ probatum est. If that a Planet be in the first house and his sign be on the second, then was
the querent robbed by his own coun∣cell. If a Planet be in the first house, and that Planets sign be on the third house, and that sign be feminine, say he was robbed by his sister or some Kinswo∣man or some neighbour near him, and so in order of the rest of the houses. If that both the Luminaries behold the Ascendant, the Thief is one of the family. The Lord of the seventh in the As∣cendant the same. If that the Sun and Moon be both in their own houses, it is one of the fa∣mily. But if only one of the lights doth behold the Ascendant, the Thief is one that is a familiar in the house but doth not dwell there. If the Lord of the Ascendant be joy∣ned with a Planet near the Ascendant, notes the Thief to be a private Thief in the house.
If the Lord of the Ascendant be in the second or sixth, it is one of the houshould servants. If the Lord of the sixth be in the se∣cond, or in the Ascendant, it is a servant belonging to the house. If the Lord of the seventh be in the sixth or eight from his own house, it is a servant, but if in his own house, then some Jolly fellow of great name and fame in the house. Which of the house may be suspested for the Theft. If the Sun be significator, it signifies the Father, Uncle, Grand-father or Master. The Moon the Mother, Sister or Nurse, or otherwise some Tankerd-bearer, or a Water-woman; a Chair∣woman or the like. If Venus, the Wife or Mistress, chiefly
in the tenth or seventh house. Saturn in the fourth accuseth the Father, or some old serving man or woman. Jupiter significator, accuseth some Gentleman of a good family that hath stained the reputation of his kindred, a great wanderer, and is not suspected and probably may be a guest in the house, and of a Sanguine complexion. Mars Significator denotes a Brother or a Prentice, a Son or a Daughter of the Querent. If Mercury it is some familiar friend, if he be in the eleventh house, other∣wise some runner of Errands, or some by servant of the house. Whether the Thief be of the kin∣dred of the Querent, or some neigh∣bour friend or stranger. If the Sun be in Opposition to the As∣cendant, it is an overthwart neigh∣bour.
If the Lord of the seventh behold the Ascendant by Trine or Sextile, it is an neighbour. If the Sun and Moon be both in their Triplicities it is a neighbour. If the significator of the Thief be in the house or exaltation of the Lord of the Ascendant, the Thief is of the kin∣dred of the Querent. The Lord of the Ascendant being in the house or exaltation of the Thief, it denotes Kindred. The Sun and Moon beholding each other by a Trine Aspect it denotes kindred. The Lord of the third or fifth in the Ascendant, or applying to the Lord of the Ascendant denote kindred. The Sun and Moon both in their faces, the Thief doth call the Querent Cozen. The Lord of the Ascendant in the second or sixth, the Thief is one of
the hushold Servants. The significator of the Thief in the ninth house it is a stranger. The significator of the Thief in a moveable sign Aspected of the Moon or Mercury, or in their houses, or in any of their dignities it is a stranger. If that the significator be in an An∣gle in the terms of Jupiter or the Sun the Thief is more noble then the Que∣rent. If that the Sun and Moon be both in the second, third, fourth, fifth, ninth, tenth, or eleventh house, it is signified that one of the house committed the fact. When you find the Thief to be one of the houshold, behold the significator and so Judge as I described before. Note that the significator of the Thief, is a Planet perigrine in any of the four Angles, but if none be there, then take the Lord of the seventh, he
is the significator of the Thief. To know how many Thieves there are. The significator of the Thief being in a fruitfull sign it notes more then one Thief. The significator of the Thief in a double bodied sign the same. If that the Sun and Moon do behold each other, it signifies the same. If that the significator of the Thief be in a sign, where there is more then one Perigrine Planet, it notes more Theeves then one. The Moon being in the fourth house in a common sign, there is more then one Thief. If that the Moon and Mercury be in equall signs it notes more Theeves then one. So many Peregrine Planets that there is but chiefly in the second or se∣venth
houses so many Theeves there are. If that the significator of the Thief be in a fixed sign it signifies but one Thief and no more. If that the Moon be in any Angle in a fixed sign, it notes onely one Thief. If that the Moon and Mercury be in unequall signs then there is onely one Theif. To know whether the Thief be a man or woman. If that the Ascendant be a Masculine sign and the Lord of the hour a Mas∣culine Planet the Thief is a man. If otherwise they be feminine it notes a woman If that one be Masculine and the o∣ther feminine, it shews two Theeves, viz. a man and a woman. Also if that the significator of the Thief be in a Masculine sign and the
Moon in a Masculine sign it denotes a man. If in faeminine signs then a woman, According to the major part of testi∣monies give judgement. How to know the Age of the Thief. If that the Sun be significator of the Theif and he betwixt the Ascen∣dant and the tenth house but cheifly in Aries, Taurus or Gemini, it notes the Thief very young almost in Childhood. From the tenth house, to the se∣venth house, but cheifly in Cancer, Leo or Virgo, it signifieth youthfull years. From the seventh to the fourth house, cheifly in Libra, Scorpio or Sagitarius it signifies the Thief is of a middle age. If the significator of the Theif be be∣tween the fourth house and the As∣cendant it signifies old age. If that the signifitator of the Thief
be in the house of Saturn or Aspected of him or in the latter degrees of a sign it signifies age. If that the signifitator of the Theif be direct and a heavy planet, or joyned with a heavy Planet, it signifies good Age, but if Retrograde then old. If that the significator of the Thief be joyned to a Planet that is Retro∣grade it signifies old age. Mars notes middle age, but not so much as Jupiter, nor Jupiter so much as Saturn. The Moon or a Perigrine Planet in the first degrees of a sign, notes youth in the middle of a sign, Riper years in the latter degrees of the Moon old age. If that Mars, Venus or Mercury be significators of the Thief, according as posited in the four quarters of the signs, so give judgement as before di∣rected. The Moon increasing the Thief is
young, the Moon decreasing the Thief is old. The Moon in the beginning of the moneth notes young, in the middle of the moneth middle age, in the end of the moneth it signifies old age. Two Perigrine Planets that are sig∣nificators in Quartile or Opposition of one another, especially from the first to the seventh house, it signifies that one Thief will accuse another, proba∣tum est. To know whether the Thief be in town or not. Behold the significator of the Thief, and if that you find him in the end of a sign direct or separating from combu∣stion, or applying to a Planet in a Ca∣dent house, say that he is gone or going out of town. Also if the Lord of the Ascendant
be in one quarter, and the Moon with the significator of the Thief be in ano∣ther above 90 degrees asunder. It de∣notes the Thief is out of Town a pret∣ty large distance from the querent. But if they be in Angles and apply∣ing to Planets in Angles, then say that the Thief is no large distance from the Querent, more especially if that the Sun and Moon be both in one quarter of heaven. If that you find the significator of the Thief going out of one sign into a∣nother, the Thief is either gone or go∣ing out of town. Say the same if you find the signifi∣cator of the Thief departing from the Sun beams. And according to the place and quarter that the significator of the Thief is in, and likewise the sign that he is in, judge that way he is gone. If that the significator of the Thief,
or one of them be in Angles, he is not gone out of Town as yet but is near the Querent. If in succedant houses not far from him, and chiefly if that the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon be both in one quarter. If the significator of the Theif be in a Cadent house then he is gone far, especially if that the Lord, the Ascen∣dant and the Moon, be more then 90 degrees asunder. If that the Lord of the seventh be in Angles with the Lord of the second, the Thief is not out of the Town and Parish of the Querent. Whether the goods be with or near the Querent. The Lord of the Ascendant in an Angle, the goods are in his hands. If that the Lord of the Ascendant
and the Lord of the hour be both in Angles, she goods are in the querents hands probatum est. If that the Lord of the Ascendant and the Lord of the house of the Moon be both in Angles, the goods are in the querents hands and are moveable. If that any of these Lords be in An∣gles, and in Trine or Sextile to the Lord of the Ascendant, the goods shall be had again. If that the Lord of the Ascendant, and the Lord of the houre be both in succedant houses, the goods are about the owner. If that the Lord of the second be in the Ascendant, they shall be found and not known from whence they come. If that the Lord of the house of the Moon be moveable, they are about the owner. If that the Lord of the tearm of the
Moon or the Lord of the second house be in succedant houses, they are not far from the owner. To know which way the Thief dwells from the Querent. Look in what sign and quarter the significator of the Thief and the Moon is in, and accordingly judge which way the Thief dwells from the Que∣rent. Tokens of the Thiefs house. If that the Moon be in Conjunction Quartile or Opposition of Saturn, the door or gate of the Thief is broken or black. In Trine or Sextile to Saturn men∣ded again. The Moon in Opposition Quartile or Opposition of Mars, the door or
gate of the Thieves house is burnt or damnified by Iron. In Trine or Sextile to Mars, mended again. If that the Moon is unfortunate the Door is either Crackt or broken. If that the Moon be increasing in light or in a fixed sign, his gate or door is part under the earth, or the house standeth under a banck side. The Moon in fixed or moveable signs he hath but one door. The Moon in common signs more then one door. The Moon in a moveable sign the gate or door is above the earth, viz. a step or two to go up to it. Note in what part of heaven the Moon in is, and in that part of the house the door openeth.
Of the distance of place. Behold how many degrees are be∣twixt the significator of the Thief and the Moon, and narrowly observe whe∣ther the signs are fixt moveable or Common. If in fixed signs account for every degree a mile, if in moveable signs so many Rods. If in Common signs, so many tens of miles. Or look what distance there is be∣twixt the Ascendant and his Lord, such is the distance between the thing lost and the place. Or look how many degrees the sig∣nificator is in his sign, so many miles are the cattle lost or strayed, and the place where the Lord of the fourthis, there is the place signified. Likewise note how many degrees are betwixt the Lord of the hour and
the Lord of the seventh house, so ma∣ny miles the Thief is gone. If that the Moon be within 30 de∣grees of the Lord of the Ascendant the Thief is near the looser of the goods. If the significator of the Thief or the Moon be within 70 degrees of the Lord of the Ascendant, then he is within the town or Parish of him that lost the goods. If 90 degrees from the Lord of the Ascendant, then the Thief is out of town. If that the Lord of the seventh be in a strong Angle, he is not out of the town where the Theft was done. Whether the Thief shall be known or not. Most Planets in Cadent houses, the Thief shall be openly known. The Sun in Quartile or Opposition to the significator of the Thief openly known.
The Sun in Quartile or Trine, then hidden or cloak't. Whether the Thief hath the goods in his own keeping or to whom he hath de∣livered them. If the Moon behold the significator of the Thief by Trine or Sextile, the goods are in the Thiefes hands. If the Lord of the house of the Moon doth behold the significator of the Thief, by Quartile or Opposition, then the Thief shall loose them again. If the Lord of the terme of the Moon doth so behold him; the same. If the significator of the Thief gives virtue to no Planet, then he hath the goods still in his own keeping. If That any Planet be in Conjuncti∣on with the significator of the Thief, or behold him by any Aspect, and that Planet hath more dignities in the sign
where the significator of the Thief is then the significator of the Thief, then the Thief hath delivered them to a∣nother. If that the Lord of the house of the Moon, or the Moon be with the signi∣ficator of the Thief, then he hath the goods still in his own hands. But by Quartile or Opposition the goods are stopped from the Thief. If that the Lord of the terme of the Moon, or Lord of the second be with the significator, of the Thief or Aspect him by Sextile or Trine, then the Thief hath them still, but with Quartile or Opposition they are stopped from him. If that the Moon give vertue to the significator of the Thief, then one Thief steals from another. If that the Lord of the Ascendant or any Planet in the Ascendant do give vertue to the significator of the Thief, Then the owner of the goods
hath Voluntary given them to the suspected Thief. If that the significator of the Thief keep his own vertue to himself, he hath the goods in his own hand. But if the significator of the Thief part with his vertue to any other Planet he hath delivered them out of his possession. If the significator of the Thief give his vertue to the Lord of the Ascen∣dant he will give them again to the owner either in part or the whole, according to the dignity or vertue he gives to the Lord of the Ascendant. If to the Lord of the third, to a bro∣ther kindred or neighbour of the owner &c. And so of all the twelve houses you may easily know to whom he hath delivered them.
Whether the Thief shall be taken or not? If the Lord of the Ascendant follow after the significator of the Thief he shall be taken. If the significator of the Thief be unfortunate by Mars he shall be taken. If the Lord of the Ascendant be in his own house the Thief shall be taken. If the significator of the Thief be in she twelfth house he shall be Comitted to prison. If unfortunate lye long, or dye there. If the significator of the Thief be unfortunate, the Thief shall be taken. Whether the suspected Party be guilty or not. If that the significator of the Thief be in Quartile or Opposition, to the Lord of the Ascendant the querent doth
suspect the Thief, as many Planets as be in the signe so many Thieves doth the querent suspect. If that the Cusp of the 4 Angles be all fix't It siginfies that the Party suspected is guilty. If the Moon be joyned to an evill Planet or in an evill sign the party suspected is guilty. If the Moon be evilly aspected the party suspected is guilty. If the Lord of the hour be in Oppsi∣tion, to Scorpio, or Capricornus, the suspected party is guilty. If that the Lord of the hour be in a South sign, and a night house the su∣spected is guilty. But if he be in an Occidental sign as Gemini, Libra, Aquaries, or in the Center of the earth, the suspected is no Thief, but the Thief dwells in the town where the goods are lost.
That the party suspected is not guilty. If the Moon be joyned to Jupiter, Venus or the Part of Fortune, the par∣ty suspected is not guilty. If the Lord of the Ascendant be in a Cadent house, and not joyned to a Planet in an Angle that receiveth him, the suspected is not guilty. If that the Ascendant be a moveable sign as Aries, Cancer, Libra, or Capri∣corn, and so much the more if that Sa∣turn or Mars have any Aspect to the Ascendant, or if that the Dragons-tail be in the Ascendant, the party suspect∣ed is not guilty and the report is false. If the Moon be joyned to a Planet in a Cadent house, the party is not guilty. If the Lord of the Ascendant be in an Angle and joyned to a Planet Ca∣dent, the party suspected, hath an
evil report undeserved. If the Moon be impedited in an An∣gle the party suspected is not guilty. If the Lord of the eighth be in the fifth or the eleventh house, or if the Moon be void of course, the party suspected is not guilty. Tokens that the goods lost shall be re∣covered. If the significator of the Thief, do apply to the Lord of the Ascendant, by Trine or Sextile they shall be had again. If the Moon apply to the Lord of the second house by Trine or Sextile, the goods stolen shall be recovered. If the Lord of the Ascendant be in his own house, the owner shall recover the goods himself. If the Lord of the terme of the Moon be in Trine or Sextile to the
Lord of the Ascendant, the owner shall have the goods again. If the Lord of the second apply to the Lord of the Ascendant it denotes recovery. If the Moon apply to any Planet by Trine or Sextile, and the application be in moveable signs, look how many degrees it is till they come to their perfect Aspect, and in so many days it shall be recovered, and if the Sun be in the Ascendant he like wise takes the Thief. If the Lord of the Ascendant apply to the Lord of the seventh, or he be in the seventh house they shall be had a∣gain by the care and diligence of the querent. If the Lord of the Ascendant be in the tenth house, it denotes recovery but with a great deal of care and la∣bour of the querent. If the Lord of the second house be
strong, and behold the Ascendant, and Lord thereof by Trine or Sextile, the goods shall be had a gain. If the Lord of the second house, be in the second house, or behold the se∣cond by Trine or Sextile, part of the goods may be had again, according to the strength or weakness of the Lord of the second give Judgement. If the Lord of the Ascendant be fortunate in the Diamiter of the firma∣ment, then the Thief shall bring again the thing from whence he stole it. If the Lord of the Ascendant and fourth house, be in the first house, and the Lord of the first, and Lord of the hour, be in the fourth house, the goods stolen or lost shall be had again. If the Lord of the Ascendant and the Lord of the hour be both in the Ascendant, it shall be found near or a∣bout him that stole it. If the Lord of the Ascendant and
Lord of the hour, or one of them be in the seventh house, it shall be found in few days. If the Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the hour, have a good Aspect to the Sun the thing lost shall be had a∣gain. If the Moon behold the Sun by Op∣position, the Thief shall be found, but the goods not to be had by any means. If the Lord of the second be bodily joyned to the Lord of the eighth or by Aspect, the querent shall have his goods again, or satisfaction for them of the thief. If the Lord of the second, doth ap∣ply luckily to the part of fortune, and the part of fortune be in the first, se∣cond, seventh or tenth houses, it gives knowledge of the goods, and the Thief that stole them. The Lord of the second and the Lord of the tenth, both in one house,
it notes discovery, and doth give good hopes of finding it again. If the Lord of the second be joyned by Sextile or Trine to any planet in the second it notes reovery. If the Lord of the hour be for∣tunately plac't and strongly aspecting the Lord of the first or second, it notes recovery. If the Lord of the second be fortu∣nate in the first, or the Lord of the first fortunate in the second, it signifies re∣covery. If the Moon Jupiter or Venus, be fortunate in the second or first, it shews good hopes of recovery, if the Moon applies to her disposer, or to the Lord of the terme she is in by Conjunction, Trine or Sextile, it notes recovery. If the Moon gives virtue to the Lord of the fifth, or Lord of the ele∣venth house, it notes recovery. If the Lord of the second be in the
second, or behold the Sun by Trine or Sextile, it notes recovery. If the Lord of the second and Mer∣cury be in Conjunction, it notes reco∣very, but with a great deal of grief and contention. If the Moon be in the Ascendant with any of the fortunes, it notes reco∣very. Yet nevertheless you must in gi∣ving Judgement go by the major part of Testimonies whether the goods shall be had or not, and in so doing you cannot erre. The time when the goods stolen or mis∣sing shall be found. The Moon beholding her own house by Trine or Sextile, it shall be had within three days. If the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon, be both in the Ascendant
and the Sun behold them by Trine or Sextile, it shall be found the same day it was lost, but if that he behold them by a Quartile it signifies a week, if by Opposition a moneth. The application of the Moon to any Planet by Trine or Sextile, if the ap∣plication be in moveable signs, look how many degrees they want of their Aspect, and so many days it shall be before it shall be recovered. And if that the Sun be in the Ascen∣dant it discovers the thief. Likewise, behold the two Planets that be applying and you may know by their application, the recovery of the goods stolen, and number how many degrees they are one from the others Aspect, and so judge of hours days weeks or moneths. If that the two applying Planets be in moveable signs, the degrees be∣twixt them will signifie weeks or
moneths, yet sometimes days, Judge that according to the swiftness or slow∣ness of their motion. If in fixed signs, then moneths or years. If that these significators be in Ca∣dent houses, then it doth signifie they will quickly be recovered. If the two significators be in Angles it shall be long first. Look to the Sun and Moon, and if that they be parted from the part of fortune, or be both or either of them joyned to the part of fortune, if not see then which is nighest the part of fortune, the Sun or Moon, and he that is nighest the part of fortune, either by application or separation, shall signifie the time, viz. how many degrees the nearest is to him. If that the part of fortune be in an Angle, it shall be so many days or weeks as is degrees be∣tween them.
If the part of fortune be in a succe∣dant house, then so many weeks or moneths. If the part of fortune be in a Cadent house then so many moneths or years. Note that the finding of the things by the Sun is sooner then by the Moon. Choice tokens that the Goods stolen shall not be recovered. If the Lord of the Ascendant be in Quartile or Opposition to the Lord of the seventh, then the goods will be stopped from the owner. If the Moon be in Quartile or Op∣position to the Lord of the seventh, it signifies the same. If the Lord of the terme of the Moon be in Quartile or Opposition to the Lord of the Ascendant, Idem. If that Saturn, Mars or the Dragons-tail
be in the eighth or second houses it shows small hopes of recovery. If the Lord of the second be Retor∣grade or Combust. Idem. If the Moon be Combust or under the beams of the Sun the same. If the Lord of the tearme of the Moon, and the Lord of the house of the Moon, be both diminishing motion and number and infortunes beholding them both, it is not to be Recovered. If the Lord of the eighth be in the Ascendant and the Lord of the Ascen∣dant in the eighth, it is not to be Recovered. If the Sun and Moon be going to a Conjunction under the earth at the time of the Loosing the goods, neither goods nor Thief shall ever be heard of. If that the Sun and Moon be going to a Conjunction or Opposition, the goods lost will not by any means be recovered.
Likewise if both the Luminaries be under the earth, the goods lost will hardly ever be heard of again. Also the Lord of the second in the eighth house no recovery. Of friendship and hatred between the querent and the thief. If that the Lord of the Ascendant and significator of the Thief, do be∣hold each other by Trine or Sextile, then is friendship between them, and so much the more if there be reception. But if they do behold each other by Quartile or Opposition, then do they hate one another. But if there be no Aspect between them, then they do neither love nor hate one another.
Whether the Thief be beloved of his neighbours or not. If that the disposer of the Moon doth behold the Moon by Trine or Sextile, it is one that all his neigh∣bours loves well, and he is very plea∣sant to them. If that the disposer of the Moon doth behold the Moon by a Quartile, he is neither much loved, nor much hated, some men speak well of him but the most part speaks ill of him. If that the disposer of the Moon doth behold the Moon by Opposition, it is one that all men speaks evill of and all his Neighbours doth hate him. If that the disposer of the Moon be in Conjunction with the Moon either above or under the earth the Thief is a buisy fellow in all matters and troubled in mind, yet cannot have his will.
That the Querent is Thief himself. If that Mars be significator and in the tenth house the querent is the Thief himself. If that the significator of the Thief be in the Ascendant the Querent is Thief; the more sure it is if the sign Ascending and the significator of the Querent doth agree with his Com∣plection. That the Theif and querent be both in one house If that the Lord of the sixth house and the Lord of the Ascendent be both together in an Angle, or if that the Lord of the house be with the Lord of the Ascendant in an angle: then the owner and the Thief be both in one house and the goods ready for the
owner: proved many times. Whether the Thief be married or not. If the Lord of the seventh house be in an Angle he is married, if in a succe∣dant house towards marraige, If in a Cadent then nether married nor like to be.
A Scheam erected concer∣ning a house Robbed in the Minories of thirty pounds-worth of Clothes the 29th of Sep∣tember 1663. 29 Septem. 1663 30 in. P. Mer' ☽ ab □ ☉ ad ✶ ♀ Diae Lunae. Hora Mercurij.
Judgment upon the foregoing figure. This figure is more difficult then ordinary in giving judgment by rea∣son that all the four quarters are con∣cerned in it, therefore I shall according to my Judgment give you the perfect discovery of it. First I find the sign of the seventh house a western sign. Seconly Mercury Lord of the seventh house and Lord of the hour in a northern sign, but in the south quarter. Thirdly the part of fortune in a easterly sign, yet in a northern quarter. Fourthly Mars Lord of the fourth and disposer of the part of fortune in an northeren sign, but in the western quarter. Fifthly the Moon being in Quartile with the Sun he being in a westerly sign.
Sixthly, the Dragons-tail being in a Westerly sign, but in the North quar∣ter, the which doth signifie the de∣voiding, and the sale of the goods to be north-west from the querent, not∣withstanding the greatest part of the goods went to the South-east, but yet where after that they were devoided. Because that that the Moon was in a South sign, but in the East quarter next applying to Venus, she entring an East sign, and in an Easterly quarter, but this I shall describe more at large here∣after. Therefore according to the a∣foresaid testimonies, I sent the querent to Cow-Cross, or about the lower end of Long-lane London, which it did so appear after discovery that they were devoided in an Alley near Cow-cross, and by this means did I discover it. First, I find the Moon in the first house, and she applying to Venus, she having exaltation in the third, and en∣tring
the sign ascending, she being La∣dy of the tenth house, which is the house of discovery. Also Venus being a feminine Planet and the sign of the third a feminine sign, where Venus hath exaltation, and the part of fortune being in the third, I told the querent that the goods would be discovered, and that by a sister of hers, or some kinswoman that dwelt that way, and so it was for it was discovered by her own sister after this manner. One of the Thiefs sent a woman to sell the Clothes at the querents sisters house, and her sister knew the goods by which means they were all taken. The querent had some part of satis∣faction, but not all, as the Dragons-tail in the second doth show. But there was grand testimony of discovery, because the Moon was in the first house.
Secondly Saturn Lord of the second in the ascendant with Jupiter Lord thereof. Thirdly the Moon in application to Venus, she being a fortune, and Lord of the tenth, which notes discovery. Concerning the distance I thus judged. Finding the Sun and Moon casting their Aspects to the part of fortune, and within 5 degrees of the true Aspect and both of them newly separated and in moveable signs, I did judge it to be some five or six furlongs North-west, and so it was. Likewise I found three theeves by the figure, two women and one man. First I find Mercury Lord of the se∣venth, in the tenth a sign feminine and likewise the house feminine, which doth signifie one woman. Secondly, the Moon in Capricorn a
feminine sign perigrine, and applying to Venus a feminine Planet, I did dis∣cover another woman. Also finding the Sun in Opposition to the part of fortune, I did discover another which was a man and this was true, for the man made his escape, the two women was taken and Comitted to New-gate and both of them were condemned to dye yet one was Repre∣ved and the other was hanged. Concerning beasts or any li∣ving thing lost or strayed. First the beast are not stolen but strayed First of all if that the Lord of the se∣cond, or Lord of the sixth, or Lord of the house of the Moon, do separate from any Planet then strayed, but if that any Planet separate from them then led away.
If that the Moon give virtue to Sa∣turn or Mars, or to the Lord of the eighth, or to any Planet in a Cadent house, especially by Trine or Sextile, the beast are strayed of themselves. Note that the separation herein na∣med, is that when one Planet separates from another by ♂ and no otherwise. If that the Lord of the house of the Moon, or the Lord of the second, do separate from any Planet, or from their own houses, if the signs be fixt then stolen, but if moveable fled of them∣selves. That the Cattle are driven away or stolen. If that any planet doth seperate from the Lord of the house of the Moon, they are driven away or stolen. If that any Planet doth seperate
from the Lord of the second house they are stolen or driven away, If that none of these things be the beast are not far from the place they first went from. Where the Beasts are. If that the Lord of the sixth be in fiery signes they are Eastward in woods where are bushes or brambles or where fire hath been. But if in Angles in fiery signes then in a close pound or under a lock. If in earthly signes then south in Grounds. But if in an Angle close poun∣ded in succedant houses, in Closes on the Right hand of the Querent. If in Cadent houses on the left hand of the querent. If in Aiery signes then are they westward in marshy Grounds. In an Angle the beasts are housed or pounded.
In succedant houses west on the right hand of the querent. If in Cadent houses on the left hand of the querent in a Common going away. If that the Lord of the sixth be in watry signs North, in a low place. If in an Angle, in a close or pound northward. If in a Cadent house, on the left hand of the querent northward going awayward. If that the Lord of the sixth be in moveable signs, they are in hilly grounds. If the Lord of the sixth be in fixed signs, they are in mrrshy grounds where new buildings are. If in Common signs, then they are in grounds where ditches and water is, and where Rushes grow. If that the Lord of the terme of the Moon, be in fixed signs, they be in
places newly taken in, or near some new buildings. If in moveable signs, in a place full of hills. If in Common signs in watry places or Marshy grounds nigh ditches or pits. Whether the Beasts be in the pound or no. If the Lord of the sixth be in the twelfth house, then are the Beast in the pound. If the Lord of the sixth, or the Moon be unfortunate, they shall be pounded. If the Lord of the sixth or twelfth be in the tenth or nineth, they are in the custody of some Justice or Officer, or under lock. If the Lord of the twelfth do apply to the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Ascendant unto the Lord of the 12th,
and either one or both of them be un∣fortunate the beasts will be pounded. If the significator of the beast be un∣fortunate in the eighth house the beast will die in the pound. If Mars doth Aspect the Moon in the twelfth by Conjunction Quartile or Opposition, they will be killed in the pound. Whether the beast be dead or a live. If the Moon doth apply to the Lord of the eighth house dead. If the Moon doth apply to the eighth house or the disposer of the Moon doth apply to the eighth house or his Lord, dead or will be speedily. If the Moon doth apply to the Lord of the eighth house, from the place where she is, then dead.
To know if the beasts be lost. If the Lord of the sixth be unfortu∣nate by Saturn or Mars, then the beasts are lost. Chiefly if the Lord of a Cadent house. If that the Lord of the sixth doth be∣hold the Lord of the Ascendant by Quartile or Opposition, they are like to be stopt from the owner. If the Lord of the sixth doth so be∣hold the Lord of the Terme of the Moon the same. If the Moon and the Lord of the house of the Moon, doth behold one another, by Quartile or Opposition, they will be stopt from the owner. Whether the beasts shall be had again or not. If the significator of the sixth house
be fortunated by Jupiter or Venus, and they or either of them be in the second fifth or eleventh houses, the beasts shall be had again. If the Lord of the Terme of the Moon, or the Lord of the fourth house be with the Lord of the Ascendant, or with his Almuten, the owner shall have his goods again. The Moon in Trine or Sextile to the Lord of the Ascendant they will be found. The Moon in Trine or Sextile to the Sun, then they may be found. The Sun in the Ascendant except in Libra or Aquaries the goods will be found. The Lord of the Ascendant, or the Lord of the second house, in the house of the significator fortunate, they shall be found. As you have the explanation of small beasts by the sixth house and his
Lord, after the same manner Judge by the twelfth house and his Lord for great beasts. Concerning Fugitives. How to find out the significator of a Fu∣gitive. If that a question be proposed con∣cerning one that dwelt in the house with the Querent, then take the Planet in the Ascendant not being the Lord thereof. But if none be there then take the Planet that is in the sign or house where the Lord of the Ascendant is, if that none be there, then take the Moon, she shall be the significator of the Fugitive. But if that he enquires for his ser∣vant then take the sixth house and his Lord, if for his brother or sister then
the third house, if for his child then the fifth house. If for his acquaintance his publique enemy or for his wife or sweet heart, then take the seventh house, if for his friend, then take the eleventh house, and so be sure to take the right signifi∣cator. Whether the Fugitive will be found or come again. If the significator of the Fugitive be in the Ascendant he comes of his own accord. If the Moon be separated from the Lord of the Ascendant, and then im∣mediately doth apply to the significa∣tor of the Fugitive, you shall hear news of the party fled, for some or other will tell you where he is. If the significator of the Fugitive be Combust, or entring into combustion,
the Fugitive shall be found though he hide himself secretly, this hath been of∣ten proved. If that the Moon doth separate from the significator of the Fugitive, and then doth immediately apply to the Lord of the Ascendant, then the Fu∣gitive is sorry that he went away, and will send one to treat that he may come again. If that the Moon be joyned to ill Planets, as Saturn or Mars, or the Dra∣gons tail, or to a Planet Retrograde he shall be found, or come again of his own accord. If that the Lord of the Ascendant doth behold an evil Planet from the house signifying the Fugitive, the que∣rent shall then find the party fled. If that the Moon do separate from Jupiter or Venus, he shall come back again, or a thing lost shall be quickly found.
If that the Moon doth behold her own house, by Sextile or Trine the Fugitive shall return in three days. The Moon being in Virgo, he that flyeth shall soon return. If that the Lord of the Ascendant be joyned to the significator of the Fugi∣tive or applying to them, the Fugitive or applying to it, taken. The Lord of the Ascendant in his own house, he shall be taken. The significator of the Fugitive un∣fortunate by Saturn or Mars then taken. The Moon in the Ascendant with Jupiter or Venus he comes again. The Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon applying to the Lord of the tenth, or to the Lord of the house of the Moon, the Fugitive shall be found the Moon unfortunate he shall be ta∣ken, but chiefly when she is unfortu∣nate
in the tenth house. The Moon and Lord of the Ascen∣dant in the Ascendant, and the Sun be∣holding them by a Trine or Sextile, the Fugitive shall be found the same day, but with a Quartile Aspect in a week, with an Opposition in a moneth. When the significator of the Fugi∣tive comes into the house of the Lord of the Ascendant, then comes the Fu∣gitive into the hands of the querent. If that the Moon be in evill termes, and with Saturn or Mars, or either of, them be in the house where the Moon is, he is with some poor strange people who will bring him again. Where the Fugitive is. If that the Moon give virtue to Sa∣turn or Mars, or be in any of their houses, then he is with some kinsman as evill as himself.
If the significator of the Fugitive be in the seventh house, he is hid in the house of him that knows him well. If his significator be in an angle he is in a house, if in Ascendant house he is in a close or street, if in a Cadent house he is in a Common, an indfferent large distance off. If that significator of the Fu∣gitive or the Moon, be in a strong Angle within three degrees of the Ascendant or his Lord, it notes the Fugitive to be in the Town or Parish of the querent and very near him. If that he be within seventy degrees of the Ascendant or his Lord, he is yet in Town but cheifly if that he be in an Angle but if that he be above seventy degrees and in a Cadent house, then he is gone far. If that the significator of the Fu∣gitive be in the fourth six or tenth houses, he is gone but a litle way, but if
he be in the third or nineth houses then he is gone far. If you find any Planet that hath dig∣nities where the significator of the Fugitive is, if that Planet doth seperate from the Lord of the Ascendent; And apply to any Planet in the sixth eight or twelf house, he is then out of town, if that the significator of the Fugitive be going out of one signe into another then he is new gone out of town. If that significator of the Fu∣gitive doth behold the Lord of the Ascendant with a Quartile aspect he is gone out of Town. If that the significator of the Fugi∣tive be departing from the Sun he is gone out of Town. The significator of the Fugitive se∣parating from the Lord of the Ascen∣dant, especially if he have any dignities in the place where the significator of the Fugitive is, and he applying to a∣ny
Planet in the sixth, eight or 12th houses he is gone out of town. To know the distance between the Que∣rent and the Fugitive. If that the significators of the Fugi∣tive and the Lord of the Ascendant be in fixed signs, account for every de∣gree between him and the Lord of the Ascendant three miles. If in common signs one mile. If that the significator of the Fugitive be in the fourth sixth or tenth houses, he then is gone but a little way, but in the third or nineth houses he then is gone far. Another distance. Mind the distance of the aspect that the Moon hath from the signe or Cusp of the significator of the Fugitive or from the Fugitive himself.
And for one degree in a Common sign give five paces, and for one degree in a moveable sign give seventeen paces. And for one degree in a fixed sign give 1000 paces. Note that one mile gives 1056 paces. Consider likewise whether the Fugitive be in town or not, then give distance accordingly and so observing thy di∣stances aright you cannot erre. For which way the Fugitive is gone you must note that the Moon hath a grand significator for Fugitives, there∣fore look to the significator of the Fugi∣tive and to the Moon, and according to the strongest of them judge, and in the sign and quarter that the strongest is in, say that way the Fugitive is gone.
A Table of the Escential dignities of the Planets according to Ptolemy. Signs Planets Houses Exalti∣on. Triplic. Ds. No. The mes of the Planets. the faces of the Planets. Detr. Fall. ♈ ♂ D ☉ 19 ☉ ♃ ♃ 6 ♀ 14 ☿ 21 ♂ 26 ♄ 30 ♂ 1 ☉ 20 ♀ 30 ♀ ♄ ♉ ♀ N ☽ 3 ♀ ☽ ♀ 8 ♀ 15 ♃ 22 ♄ 26 ♂ 30 ☿ 10 ☽ 26 ♄ 30 ♂   ♊ ♀ D ♌ 3 ♄ ☿ ♀ 7 ♃ 14 ♀ 21 ♄ 25 ♂ 30 ♃ 10 ♂ 20 ☉ 30 ♃   ♋ ☽ N / D ♃ 15 ♂ ♂ ♂ 6 ♃ 13 ☿ 20 ♀ 27 ♄ 30 ♀ 10 ☿ 20 ☽ 30 ♄ ♂ ♌ ☉ N / D   ☉ ♃ ♄ 6 ☿ 13 ♀ 19 ♃ 25 ♂ 30 ♄ 10 ♃ 20 ♂ 30 ♄   ♍ ☿ N ☿ 15 ♀ ☽ ☿ 7 ♀ 13 ♃ 18 ♄ 24 ♂ 30 ☉ 10 ♀ 20 30 ♃ ♀ ♎ ♀ N ♄ 21 ♄ ☿ ♄ 6 ♀ 11 ♃ 19 ☿ 14 ♂ 30 ☽ 10 ♄ 20 ♃ 30 ♂ ☉ ♏ ♂ D   ♂ ♂ ♂ 6 ♃ 14 ♀ 21 ☿ 27 ♄ 30 ♂ 10 ☉ 20 ♀ 30 ♀ ☽ ♐ ♃ D 3 ☉ ♃ ♃ 8 ♀ 14 ☿ 9 ♄ 25 ♂ 30 ♀ 10 ☽ 20 ♄ 30 ☿   ♑ ♄ N ♂ 28 ♀ ☽ ☿ 6 ☿ 12 ♃ 19 ♂ 25 ♄ 30 ♃ 10 ♂ 20 ☉ 30 ☽ ♃ ♒ ♄ D   ♄ ♀ ♄ 6 ☿ 12 ♀ 20 ♃ 25 ♂ 30 ♀ 10 ☿ 20 30 ☉   ♓ ♃ N ♀ 27 ♂ ♂ ♀ ♃ 14 ☿ 20 ♂ 26 ♄ 30 ♄ 0 ♃ 20 ♂ 30 ☿ ☿
The Contents. FIrst to know whether the Fi∣gure be Radical or not. Page 1. Concerning Theft or any other thing loft. p. 3. Choice Tokens that the Goods are not stolen. p. 4. To know in what part of the house the things missing are in. p. 8. That the Goods are stolen. p. 11.
How to find out the significator of the Thief. p. 12. A description of the Thief by Saturn in any of the 12 Signs. p. 13. A short description of the other Planets Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus and Mercury. p. 17. A description of the Thief by the Moon being in any of the 12 signs. p. 18. The Marks of the Thief. p. 22. Whether the Thief be of the family of the Querent or not. p. 25. Which of the houses may be suspected for the Theft. p. 27. To know how many Thieves there are. p. 31.
To know whether the Thief be a man or a woman. p. 32. How to know the Age of the Thief. p. 33. To know whether the Thief be in Town or not. p. 35. Whether the goods be with or near the querent. p. 37. To know which way the thief dwells from the querent. p. 39. Tokens of the thiefs house. p. 39. Of the distance of place. p. 41. Whether the Thief shall be known or not. p. 42 Whether the Thief hath the goods in his own keeping, or to whom he hath de∣livered them. p. 43.
Whether the Thief shall be taken or not. p. 46. Whether the suspected party be guilty or not. p. 46. That the party suspected is not guilty. p. 48. Tokens that the goods lost shall be re∣covered. p. 49. The time when the goods stolen or mis∣sing shall be found. p. 54. Choice tokens that the Goods stolen shall not be recovered. p. 57. Of friendship and hatred between the querent and the Thief. p. 59. Whether the Thief be beloved of his neighbours or not. p. 60. That the querent is thief himself. p. 61.
That the Thief and querent be both in one house. p. 61. Whether the Thief be married or not. p. 62. A Scheam erected concerning a house robbed in the Minories. p. 63. Judgement upon the foregoing Figure. p. 64. Concerning the distance. p. 67. Concerning Beasts or any living thing lost or strayed. p. 68. That the Cattle are driven away or stolen. p. 69. Where the Beasts are. p. 70. Whether the Beasts be in the pound or no. p. 72.
Whether the Beast be dead or a live. p. 73. To know if the beasts be lost p. 74. Whether the beasts shall be had again or not. p. 75. How to Find out the significator of a Fugitive. p. 76. Whether he Fugitive will be found or come again. p. 77. Where the Fugitive is. p. 80. To know the distance between the que∣rent and the Fugitive. p. 83. A Table of the Escentiall dignities of the Planets. p. 85. FINIS.
