G470 R21728 12683971 65717
AN ESSAY TOWARD THE AMENDMENT OF THE LAST English-Translation OF THE BIBLE. OR, A Proof, by many Instances, that the Last Translation of the BIBLE into English, may be Improved. The First Part on the PENTATEUCH, OR Five Books of MOSES. By ROBERT GELL D. D. Minister of the Parish of St MARY Alder-Mary, LONDON. Ad intelligendam Parabolam, & Interpretationem, verba sapientum, & aenigmata eorum. Prov. 1.6. Da Sapienti occasionem, & Sapientior erit; fac scire justum, & ad∣det doctrinam. Prov. 9.9. Animalis homo non percipit ea quae sunt Spiritûs Dei. 1 Cor. 2.14. LONDON, Printed by R. Norton for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the signe of the green Dragon in S. Pauls Church-yard. 1659.
A PREFACE To the godly-learned Reader. THe main Scope of the pure Reli∣gion and undefiled, is to render the man like unto his God: For it seems to be the dictate of Nature, what the Prophet saith;Mich. 4. v. 5. All peoples will walk every one in the name of his gods: And let it be our resolution, to walk in the name, nature, or being of the Lord our God for ever and ever; to be holy as he is holy, pure as he is pure, merciful as he is merciful, perfect as he our heavenly Father is perfect. For this end, he hath given us a perfect Ca∣non, Directory, and Rule, the holy Scriptures; which, as they testifie of him, so they teach us to know him, and are able to make us wise unto salvation, through faith in Jesus Christ. But there have not been wanting some in all ages, who, either out of ignorance, or want of care, or out of zeal to their own chosen opini∣ons and parties; or such as, upon credt of others learning and authority, have taken
their Religion upon trust; or such as, out of malice, have acted the envious mans part, and sowen their tares among the good seed; from one or other of these principles, either they have mis-translated the original text of Scri∣pture, or, if rightly translated, they have cor∣rupted it by mis-interpretations and false Glos∣ses imposed upon it. And thus by perverting the holy Scriptures, to their own by-ends and purposes, they make them speak every one their own sense and private interpretation; as Demosthenes said, that Philip had bribed the Oracle, and made it , Speak in favour of Philip. This, the Philosopher tells us, they do, who corrupt the Judge, , they make the rule crooked like the Lesbian rule, because the thing to be judged, is so. The Apostle saith, that this hath been the endeavour of unlearned and unsetled men, , they wrest S. Pauls Epistles, as also other Scriptures, to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. But whereas such is the Majesty and Au∣thority of holy Scripture, that not only the sense and meaning of it, is breathed and instil∣led into it by the Spirit of God; but also the words themselves are dictated by the same Spi∣rit, and accounted so sacred, that, as Eusebius saith out of Philo, the writings of Moses were
kept so unviolable, that there was not one word altered for more then two thousand years. Euseb. de praepar. lib. 8. When therefore the Scripture is to be turn∣ed into another language, no doubt, all care, study, and endeavour ought to be used, for the due rendring of it; and above all, most earnest prayer is to be made to the only wise God, for a like minde to that which enlivens and breathes in the Scripture; that thereby the Translator may be guided into the truth of the sense, and furnished with sutable expression of proper words; That herein he deny himself, and his own opinion, and siding tenent, misleading to a private interpretation, and studiously follow the Word and Spirit shining before him, as the pillar of fire; and that, as much as is possible, , even word for word; and (because vocabula sunt rerum vehicula, words carry mat∣ter) sense for sense; lest he be wildred in his own imagination and invention. Yea, although some Scripture, in its native meaning, may seem strange and uncouth, yea, absurd and inconsequent, yee it is not safe therefore to im∣pose our own sense upon it: Because the holy Word is not onely literally to be understood; but also mystically; yea, even the most literal text, according to the judgement of the best learned men, may, beside the Letter, have
also a spiritual meaning. And therefore when we meet with such seeming unfruitful Scri∣pture, which affords not much matter in the Letter, we may then judge, that, according to the manifold wisdom of God, there is a ground of some more notable meaning of the Spirit; as where rich Mines are, there the surface of the earth yields not much fruit. And if we will , John 5. Search the Scriptures as for hidden treasures, Prov. 2. we shall not take offence at the surface of the Letter, though more barren; but, from that occasion, humbly and docibly enquire into the true treasure of the spirit hidden under that poor and beggarly Element. We shall meet with instances of this kinde, as elsewhere, so especially Exod. 12.9. of which I have spoken in its due place. And another I remember, which I shall not reach in this work,2 Kings 13.21. 2 Kings 13. where our Transla∣tors render the words thus. And it came to pass as they were burying a man, that behold, they spied a band of men, and they cast the man into the Sepulchre of Elisha: and when the man was let down, and touched the bones of Elisha, he revived, and stood up on his feet. Even thus it comes to pass in Israel, when Elisha is dead and buried there. Thus it falls out in the Church, when the Lord Jesus, (God
the Saviour, that's Elisha, is dead in it: Thus it happens in the soul, when Jesus Christ is dead in it; presently all things are out of order. While he lives in Israel, the Church, the souls of his believers, he bears and rules all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1. The Syriac word there used is  to contain, compose, u∣nite, and knit together; as a King, saith the Wiseman, doth Continere hominum multitudi∣nes, containes and unites multitudes of men together; as a binding chord in Musick makes all tunable, what otherwise would be dissonant and jarring dis-harmony. And while the King Christ who is our peace, rules and umpires differences in our hearts, Col. 3.15. (the word is ,) he unites and knits all the thoughts, wills, and affections of the soul together in subje∣ction to himself, 1 Cor. 10.5. But when Elisha is dead, when God the Saviour is dead and bu∣ried in Israel, dead in the Church, dead in the soul, all that which was united and knit toge∣ther before, all falls a pieces. What was one before, is now multiplyed and broken into ma∣ny. We read often in the book of Judges, There was no King in Israel; every one did that which was good in his own eyes. Now Elisha was dead and buried; and the Moabites (who abuse the Law of the Father, signified by Lot, the hidden Word of God, they are the true Mo∣abites,
the children of their father the Devil, as S. Augustine interprets the Moabites;) Then also the Syrians, ver. 22. Pride and deceit, and the curse of God upon the sinful soul (such spiri∣tually are the Aramites or Syrians) these and all other inward enemies oppress Israel. What remedy is there for this? Let such a man be cast into the grave of Elisha, let him be dead and buried with Christ, God the Sa∣viour. He is now a man lost in the world; he is become as a dead man. When a man hath left his sin, he is not, Gen. 5.24. the sinners leave him, and he them. When he is dead to the sin, what remaines but that he should be buried? But where it is said, they let him down, we shall finde no such matter either in the He∣brew, or Greek, or Chaldee, or Latin Tran∣slation. The Hebrew text hath , and he went. The LXX have , he went. The Chaldee Paraphrast hath, he descended. The Syriac, he went into the Sepulchre. So Tre∣melius, and the Spanish translation, and the Italian of Diodati. Martin Luther also, and two Low Dutch translations. As for the Ti∣gurin Bible, that hath Devolutus, he was rolled into the grave of Elisha. So the French transla∣tion. So likewise two of our old English tran∣slations. But Coverdale thus renders the word,
when he was therein, and the Geneva Bible turns it, when he was down: our last translati∣on lets him down gently. The Tigurin, French, and some of our old English translations tumble him down for haste. But what need all this curiosity? I dare not depart from the letter of the Scripture, or fa∣sten mine own sense upon it, as many of these have done: And indeed it is neer a contradi∣ction to themselves. For first they say, They cast the man into the Sepulchre, which must be in part for fear of the Moabites: and then they say, they let him down, which must be gently and leisurely. The holy Spirit of God oftentimes intends a mystery, and so leaves the letter seemingly absurd. Such seeming absurdities as these, are lest for the honour of Gods Spirit, which clears the difficulties, and sets all right. This man is called twice  with an Emphasis, That man. And although they go about to bury him, he is never said to be through dead. The words are thus to be rendred. And the man went and touched the bones of Elisha. First, He went. Secondly, He touched. 1. He went. Here is set before us a figure of one who was dead in trespasses and sins; who is now dead un∣to sin, and buried with Christ. The fallen man is not wholly destitute of all strength, as I
shew elsewhere. Therefore the man is said here to go and touch. There must be some conformity between Christ and us if we touch him. The man is accessary, and must be so to his own death unto sin, and his own burial of all sin, and iniquity. Its said of this man,  he went and touched the bones of Elisha. The Lord requires of us not only a mortification and dying unto sin, but also a burial of all sin. They are two Articles of the Faith: 1. That Christ was dead. 2. That he was buried. And so, through the Spirit, the sin must be put to death, Rom. 8.13. and buried by holiness and love. Ye have both together, Psal. 22.1. whose unrighteous∣ness is forgiven; the word signifies, taken away and removed as dead; and then, whose sin is covered; there's the burial of it. This is that which the Apostle teacheth us, that love co∣vers a multitude of sins; yea, all sins, Prov. 10 12. The 2d Act of the dead man; he touched the bones of Elisha. 1. What bones of Elisha were these? & what is it to touch the bones of Elisha? For it seems by this text, that Elisha was very lately buried; and so his bones could not yet be touched. By the bones of Elisha, we understand the strength of God the Saviour: so  the word here rendred bones, signifies strengths. That man is said to touch into his bones, when he became a member of his body, of his flesh,
and of his bones, Ephes. . When he became flesh of his flesh, that is, of a tender heart of flesh to receive impressions of the Spirit; and bone of his bone, when he became strong and able to effectuate those impressions. A ver∣tual touching is here meant, even the drawing neer unto the Lord Jesus by faith, hope and love. For so Hebr. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart and  fidei, fulness of faith. And Hebr. 7.19. That better hope whereby we draw near unto God. And love is affectus unionis, that affection of union, whereby we cleave unto God, dwell in him, 1 John 4.8. and become one spirit with him, 2 Cor. 5. draw grace, life, and vertue from him: For so he who hath the Son, hath life, 1 John 5.12. By this and many like examples, it may appear, how necessary it is, that we preserve the Letter of the Scripture intire; how uncon∣venient, yea, how absurd soever it seem to our carnal reason; as here, that a dead carkase should walk, or go, &c. The letter may be the foundation of a spiritual meaning, however happly what that is, for the present, we un∣derstand not. And lest this Translation before us, should seem so exact as many have conceived, that it needs no Essay toward the amendment of it; I shall propound unto the judicious Reader,
the Heads of many frequent mistakes which they may finde in it, few of which I shall mention in the ensuing Essay. Whereof some possibly will not be thought to change the sense of the Scripture, but the Word only, and retain the sense: others per∣vert the sense also. Examples of the former kinde, are Meta∣phores mistaken, and used one for another; as when , which signifies to blot out, as having reference to an Image or Picture, or to a Writing, its rendred to destroy, as Gen. 7.4. which is taken from building. Thus Meta∣phores are waived, and the supposed proper sense taken in lieu of them,Josh. 2. v. 9. as Josh. 2.9. The inha∣bitants of the land melt from, or before your fa∣ces. Our Translators turnn  faint, which there and often elsewhere signifies to be melted. And the holy Spirit explains the metaphorical use of it, Psal. 22.14. Ezech. 21.7. Herein, although haply the same sense may be intended, yet it is not safe to vary that Metaphore which the holy Spirit intends and dictates. So although to spoil, in the English tongue,Col. 2. v. 15. may signifie to disrobe or devest, yet that will not so well answer the Metaphore, Col. 2.15. , which I render, having de∣vested, unclothed, or uncased the hypocritical spiritual wickednesses, the Principalities and
Powers, the evil Spirits which clothe them∣selves with shewes of piety, and fit themselves with a garb sutable to those whom they would deceive. As the Serpent took upon him the habit of a Friend when he tempted Eve, as knowing that Tuta frequens{que} via est per amici fallere nomen; a safe and frequent way it is by friendship to deceive. Our Lord therefore pulls off his Mantle of Hypocrisie, devests him, discovers him, and exposeth him stark naked, and makes him known to be such as he is. And therefore , Gen. 3.1. may be as well rendred naked as subtil; For tis as true (though the other signification better fit that place) that the Serpent is more naked then all the beasts of the field; as having no clothing of his own; but as a Stage-player (so  properly sig∣nifies) he suits himself, as becomes the person whom be would represent, and according to the humour of such as he lies in wait to deceive. This Metaphore is rather here used by the A∣postle, as having respect to the Cross immediate∣ly before mentioned; because Malefactors, a∣mong the Romans of old, were crucified naked. There are many such oversights as these in the Translation; which yet are more tolerable then those which pervert the sense of the Scri∣pture; as in Supplements. Its true indeed, that in the Hebrew tongue there are some genuine
defects proper to that language; As  im∣plyes the want of a Verb. There are also other Syncategoremata or Consignificants, without which an Axiom, and consequently truth and falshood cannot, or at least not fully be expres∣sed: And therefore these, of necessity, must be supplyed. But beside these, there hath been a liberty taken by the Rabbins of conjecturing, that so or so a word ought to be rendred in this or that place; when yet no other reason appears, why it should be so read. This they call  Conjecture. This liberty is taken oftentimes by our Translators, as when they adde, or take away, or invert and change the order of the words. Wee shall meet with examples of all these kindes. I shall name one of each, and leave the courteous Reader to his own observation of other like. Of the first kinde,Matth. 20. v. 23. Mark 10. v. 40. is what we read, Matth. 20.23. To sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my Father. This Translation makes our Lord absolute∣ly to deny, that he hath any power to give the honour of sitting at his right hand and left; and so they rob the Lord Jesus of his Regalia, his Royalties, and those honours which he hath right and authority to bestow.
2. Besides, they wholly discourage the fol∣lowers of the Lord Jesus: For what Souldier will follow that Commander in Chief, who nei∣ther is at present able; nor for the future will be able to reward him? Saul knew what was a pre∣valent motive with such men, 1 Sam. 22.7. Will the son of Jesse give unto every one of you, Fields or Vineyards, and make you all Ca∣ptains of thousands, and Captains of hun∣dreds? And if the true son of Jesse, that is, the Being it self, Christ the Captain of our salva∣tion, Heb. 2. profess plainly to his Souldiers, that it is not his to give them, to sit on his right hand, and on his left; and that he hath no right to bestow those honours on them, will not this prove a great discouragement unto the follow∣ers of the Lord Jesus? 3. By this Translation, they make a foul breach even in the Deity it self: For whereas it is said, I and my Father are one, John 10.30. He that hath seen me, hath seen the Father, John 14. and 16, 15. All things that the Father hath, are mine, 17, 18. and many the like; the Au∣thors of this Translation, take away all power from the Son, of bestowing honours upon his followers, and so render all those testimonies of no force. 4. They make the Lord Jesus speak con∣tradictions, and gain-say that in these words,
which elsewhere he frequently affirms; as I shall shew anon. Meantime, our last Translators were not the prime Leaders into this Error, but were themselves mis-lead by others; as Vatablus, Piscator, Beza, and the Ministers of Geneva who translated the French Bible; to name no more. Piscator tells us, there is an Ellipsis which is to be supplyed, by these words, , which our Translators follow, and adde, It shall be given. I render the words thus, leaving out the Supplement [it shall be gi∣ven;] To sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give, but (or, unless) to those for whom it is prepared of my Father. These words of our Lord then are not any denial, that he hath power or right to give, but an Exception only. He saith not absolutely, It is not mine to give; but, It it is not mine to give unless, or except unto those for whom it is pre∣pared; as in the parallel we read, Mark 10.40. to a word; which text is also corrupted by the same Supplement. That which deceived the Translators, was; they considered not, that  is here all one with , unless, or ex∣cept, And so that which Matth. 17.8. they lifting up their eyes, saw none, , save, or except Jesus only: that Mark 9.8. ye finde, they saw none . So Mark
4.22. Matth. 24.36. John 17.12. So that the Lord Jesus denied not, that the divine honours were his to give, but only that they were not his to give to others then those for whom they were prepared. And this Translation sutes extream well with the context. The Disciples would have had the Crown of glory before they had striven for it. No, saith our Lord, it is not prepared for such; It is not mine to give unless to those, for whom it is prepared of my Father; that is, for those who suffer with the Son, Rom. 8.17. And as this agrees well with the con∣text, so with diverse other translations, as the Syriac and Arabic, and that of Martin Luther, and that of the Low Dutch, and the Spanish translation, Pagnin also, Castellio, and Tremel∣lius: some also of our old English translations have hit upon it; as that of Coverdale, and that dedicated to King Edward the Sixth. And here the Authors of the late Engiish Annotati∣ons were in the right, who say thus; Christs power of disposing of it, is not denyed; but he sheweth only, to whom it is to be given. Answerably hereunto we may say, To sit on Christs right hand and on his left, is Christs to give to those for whom it is prepared. This As∣sertion is point blank contradictory unto that sense which our Translators have given of the words; To sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give.
Now that Christ hath right, and de facto, that he doth and shall bestow the divine ho∣nours of his kingdom, upon persons duly qua∣lified, appears evidently by Matth. 19.28. Ye who have followed me in the regeneration, shall sit on twelve Thrones, &c. Luke 22.29. I dispose un∣to you a kingdom, &c. Father I will, that they, whom thou hast given me, be with me, &c. John 17.24. The reason why the Lord Jesus hath this right to confer divine honours upon his followers, to set them on his right hand and on his left, may be considered from the vertue and merit of his fufferings. For as a son, while yet under his fathers immediate authority, Quicquid acquirit, acquirit patri, what he gets, he gets for his father. But if the son get spoil in the wars, with hazard of his life, which the Civilians call Peculium castrense, that is properly the sons own. And thus, be∣cause the Lord Jesus descended into the lower parts of the earth, was dead and buried, Ephes. 4.9. when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive & gave gifts unto men. Which was figured by David, distributing his spoils to his friends, 1 Sam. 30. Yea, our Lord saith ex∣presly and properly to this purpose, Rev. 3.21. To him that overcometh, will I give to sit in my throne, even as I have overcome, and sit in my Fathers throne.
By all this which hath been said, its evident, that this Supplement, [It shall be given] to say no worse of it, is a superfluous: redundancy. We meet with an example of the second kinde, 1 John 3.18, 19, 20. which they render thus; my little children, let us not love in word,1 Joh. 3. v. 18.19.20 and in tongue, but in deed, and in truth. And hereby we know, that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him; For if our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and knoweth all things. In the 20 verse of this Paragraph, [] is twice found in the Greek text. The former the Translators turn amiss; the later they quite leave out. I would render and open those words thus; My little children, let us not love in word, and in tongue, but in deed, and in truth. And herely (viz. by our loving in deed and in truth) we know that we are of the truth; and shall assure, or rather perswade () our hearts before him: , Because, if our heart condemn us, (viz. for any former failing inci∣dent unto little children, to whom he directs those words, ver. 18.) , that God is greater then our heart, (namely, in wisdom, grace, mercy, and goodness;) and knoweth all things, even the present frame and disposition of our heart, in the truth of love. And this exposition is most agreeable to the persons to whom the A∣postle
writes, the little children; and to the duty which he exhorts them unto, to love in deed, and in truth: and to the effect of that duty, the assurance and perswasion of their hearts before God. Thus whereas many a poor soul dejects it self, out of a meer mistake of this Scripture ill rendred, and worse understood, it being truly turn'd, and the genuine sense thereof given, its a strong consolation to the little children. Howbeit, lest these little children should rest in this age and estate, the Apostle proceeds; Beloved! if our heart condemn us not, accord∣ing to 1 Cor. 4.14. we have boldness (or confi∣dence) towards God; and whatsoever we may ask, we receive of him; because we keep his Commandements, and do those things which are pleasing in his sight. An example of the third, (which is inversi∣on of the words,) is Hebr. 10.34. which the Translators render thus; Ye took joyfully the spoyling of your goods,Heb. 10. v. 34. knowing in your selves, that ye have, in heaven, a better and more en∣during substance. That we may the better know the mis-translation and undue inversion of these words, we must understand, that the goods, whereof the Hebrews were spoyled, were either their temporal goods, whereof S. Paul saith, he robbed either them, or other Churches,
taking wages of them, to do service to the Corin∣thians; the spoyling of these goods, the Hebrews took with joy. Or else, These goods may be also spiritually under∣stood, and that in the worst sense; for such as  seemingly, and to the yong professing Hebrews. appeard to be their goods, which re∣ally and truly were their evils. Such were the goods of Sodom, which Abraham would not receive or own, Gen. 14. The spoiling of these goods, by him who is Maher-Shalal Hashbaz, who in hastening the spoil, makes speed to the prey, Esay 8.3. the taking away these seeming goods, but true evils, the Hebrews took with joy also. The inversion of the Text, is in the follow∣ing words. Knowing in your selves that ye have in heaven a better and enduring substance. A little labour sometimes does a great deal of work. The mo∣ving of the Helm, turns the Ship quite another way. The same letters distributed and placed differently, make all the different words; and so the same words placed in a diverse order, make extream different senses. Such different senses arise from the different placing the words of this text. For the words are inverted and changed from the genuine order of them, which is ex∣tant
in the Greek. , which I render thus; Knowing that ye have in your selves better wealth in heaven, and that which will endure. What a difference is here? Knowing in your selves, that ye have in heaven a better, &c. This translation perswades men, that they shall have hereafter, in heaven, a better kinde of wealth. The true reading of these words, Knowing that you have in your selves, &c. sup∣poses believers to have already a real possession of the better and enduring substance in them∣selves; so that they take the spoiling of their outward goods with joy. The words , in heaven, are not in the Vulg. Latin, nor in some of the Greek, nor English Manuscripts. And with the Vulg. Latin agrees the French Bi∣ble, the Spanish, and Italian, the High Dutch, and one Copy of the Low Dutch. So like∣wise Pagnin and Vatablus, with the Tigurin Bible. Which order of words is wholly negle∣cted by all the printed English Translations that I have yet seen: And hereby the sense of the holy Spirit is much obscured, which points at the present and real possession of the better and durable riches, which wisdom hath and brings with her to the believing soul, Prov. 8.10. Ac¦cording to which, the poor are said to be rich in faith and heires of the kingdom, Jam, 2.5. and rich towards God, Luke. 12.21.
What is here said, that they have in them∣selves better wealth, a learned Critick under∣stands to be only a right unto it hereafter: Di∣cuntur rem habere ad quam jus habent, loquendi genere etiam Juris-consultis usitato. But the usual manner of speech in Scripture, is not to be over-ruled by the usual speech of the Civil Lawyers. For the Scripture doth not entitle Gods people in a right to an estate in reversion only, but enstates them in a present and real possession of the heavenly goods, Prov. 24.4. Luke 16.11. Heb. 11.26. For whereas the eternal life is the true riches, they who believe, have real possession of it, John 3.36. and 5.24. &c. and, by direct consequence, they who love the bre∣thren, 1 John 3.14. 1 Cor. 15.19. if the posture of  only, be rightly understood. What reason can be rendred of this mis∣translation? No doubt but some there were, who rendred the words so, upon designe: Why? namely, for the avoiding and pre∣venting of that (as too many esteem it) exe∣crable errour of inherent righteousness; lest any man should collect from the true transla∣tion of these words, that there is any righteous∣ness, any goodness, any vertin in the people of God but what they have a right unto, that is reser∣ved for them in heaven, till hereafter. Adde unto these, Prov. 16.51. The hoary
head is a Crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness: That Supplement [if] overthrows the text. The words are Catego∣rically true, without [if] the conditional Sup∣plement: And the Wisemans speech is an ex∣position of them; Honourable age is not that which standeth in length of time; nor that is measured by number of years; But Wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. In this way of righteousness, the Crown of glory is found, Wisd. 4.8, 0. Thus extream often they mis-translate [] which is a Discretive, and render it by a Co∣pulative [and,] as Gal. 5.17. as I shew largely toward the end of this Book. But this , this errour, is so frequent in the translation of the New Testament, that truly I have been weary of the observation; because the exam∣ples are so many, whereof some will appear in the ensuing Essay, which give me too often occasion to complain. This fault is not small, in proportion to the Particle; but indeed very great, as Logicians know; since the mistaking of one of these, for the other, changes the nature of the Axiom or Sentence; and so perverts the Word of God. And may be accounted to those little things, whose substance is small, but which have great effects, James 3. That which lead them
into this errour, may be the difficulty of ma∣king sense of some diversity, if left so. However, no doubt, it is better to deal faithfully and truly with the Scripture, and leave the diffi∣culty as we finde it, then to force the text, and impose our own conjectures upon it, to make it seem sense to us. For there may be even in such words a good sense intended by the Spirit, when yet there seems an absurdity in the Let∣ter, as hath been shewen. Beside these, there are many  in the Hebrew, Greek, and other Tongues; many diverse, yea, some contrary significations con∣tained under the same words, as  which sig∣nifies Mercy; and according to some, unmer∣cifulness, or reproach, as elsewhere, so Prov. 14.34. whereof others doubt. In this case, Good men would wish, that what is best and most fit for the Context, might be put into it; but what seems to the Translators for the present, to be not so proper, that it were put into the Margent. For the Scripture was-written for several Ages, several Worships; some Legal, some Evangelical; and consequently given to several people; so that what seems severe, cruel, yea capital in one age, by a temporal and po∣sitive precept, is disalowable and laid aside in another. Witness Luke 9.54.55. Wherfore else did the Jews persecute Paul? Yea, why was
it, that they who killed the Christians, should think, they did offer God an acceptable Sacri∣fice, John 16.1. This the Translators were aware of; and accordingly they have placed some different significations in the Margent; but those most-what the better; because when truth is tryed by most voyces, it is commonly out-voted. And in that case, which is very often, it is rejected, and cast into the Margent, as less proper to the Context: So that they very frequently put quid pro quo; and waive what makes against their private interpretations; and choose that for the Context which suits best with their own interest of opinion. I shall give one or two instances of this. I finde often in the New Testament , disobedient, rendred as all one with , unbe∣lieving; which with some allowance, possibly might sometime pass, were not the former word turn'd unbelieving, upon a dangerous designe. For, whereas they understand faith in Christ a perswasion and belief, and that their sins are remitted for Christs sake, that he hath done and suffered all things for them, as compleatly as if they had done and suffered all in their own persons; such a faith leaves no∣thing for them to do or suffer out of obedience; as tis evident, the Apostle understands such a
faith as brings forth obedience; and so he cals it obedience of faith, Rom. 1.5. and 16.27. Such an example we meet withal, John 3.36. He who believeth in the Son, hath the everlast∣ing life; but he who believeth not; the words are, , but he who obeyeth not, Acts 14.2. But the unbelieving Iews, the words are, , but the disobedient, &c. So Hebr. 3.18. To whom sware he, that they should not en∣ter into his rest, but to them who believed not? The words are, , but to them who obeyed not. And there are many the like. Also whereas  imports either active∣ly and in the middle voice, effectual or working,Gal. 5. v. 6. as Gal. 5.6. faith is , operative by love; or passively, and so signifies wrought; this later signification must be voted into the Margent; lest it should tell us, that the man, by confor∣mity unto Christs sufferings, should have any hand in working out his own salvation; as S. Paul implyes, he hath, 2 Cor. 1.5, 6. As the suffe∣rings of Christ abound in us, so our consola∣tion also aboundeth by Christ: And whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation, : Which salvation is effectual in the enduring the same sufferings which we al∣so suffer. How to make good this translation, or indeed, to make sense of it, that salvation is
effectual by enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer, I confess ingenuously I know not; but I commend it to better judgements, since to be effectual, qualifies the efficient, which here are the sufferings of Christ; so that salva∣vation the effect, of them cannot be effectual. Yet must the true translation [wrought] be dis∣honoured into the Margent, because it made not for their purpose. I shall name but one instance more of this kinde, Rom. 6.17. which they turn, Ye have obeyed that form of doctrine which was deli∣vered unto you. The Greek words are, . The translati∣on of these words, is evidently contrary to the Greek Text; as it is clear by their own margi∣nal acknowledgement. For the Greek words are thus rendred in the Margent, whereto ye were delivered: and as contrary to the scope and drift of the Apostle in those words. For was that form of doctrine delivered unto them, that they might mold and fashion it according to their own conceiving? as our Translators too often have done; or were the Romans and we all delivered unto that form of doctrine, that we might be molded and fashioned and made con∣formable thereunto? as the Apostle here ex∣presly teacheth. Wherefore having observed many such
mis-translations byassing the holy Text, and making it to serve the Translators Mistress, their Diana, their ruling opinions; (as, to the same end, the last Low Dutch translation, how ever cryed up, it very much wrests the holy Scripture, upon examination, as judicious and pious men affirm.) I thought it therefore a business well worthy my pains and best skill, and more time then I am likely to have in this world, to endeavour to the utmost, the vindi∣cating of the holy Scripture from false translation, and mis-interpretation; whether grounded thereupon, or upon true translations; and con∣forming it unto the Original tongues wherein it was first dictated by the holy Spirit of God; and spoken and written by the Penmen of the same Spirit. A work, I freely and ingenuous∣ly acknowledge, very much above my ability; and such as requires the labours of the most Pious and Learned men; howbeit, I was long pressed in my spirit, nor indeed could I have rest, until I had atempted something herein, whereby I might give occasion to men who are every way more able, and such as have much more leisure then my self, both to amend what I have assayed to do, and to finish the work. Whereunto I doubt not but they will be indu∣ced, if they shall consider the necessity of an exact and perfect translation of the holy Bible.
It is true, that the holy Scriptures, in the first times of the Christian Church, were not com∣municated unto all men all at once. For the Primitive Fathers wisely considered how ex∣treamly perillous it might be to expose the whole Scripture unto ignorant mens use and judgement, or indeed, abuse rather, and want of judgement: Surely more dangerous and per∣nitious it might prove unto their souls, then to leave a whole Apothecaries Shop open to a diseased person, who might as well choose and take deadly poyson to his destruction, as a Sove∣raigne Medicine to the recovery of his health. And therefore they imparted unto the young believers, only some part or other of it, ac∣cording as every one had need, and was able to hear; grounding this their practise on our Lords, John 16.12, 13. and his Apostles, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. whence it was, that they who were weak and not well rooted and grounded in the faith, for fear of death, delivered up those books they had, to the Persecutors; and thereupon they were called Libellorum traditores, Betray∣ers of those little books of Scripture, which were imparted to them. Had the souls of men bin so carefully watch∣ed over by their Governours, and such porti∣ons of Scripture wisely and fatherly dispensed unto them, as might, with such holy reserved∣ness,
have met with mens proficiency, surely such prodigious Monsters had not been coun∣terfeited out of the Word of God, by the Spi∣rit of opinion, as in these later dayes we have seen, and lament to see: Africa semper aliquid apportat novi; some hideous shape or other daily is brought forth; and every one fathered on the Scripture. What remedy remains for so great evils, God alone knowes, and will in his time pro∣vide. But since now all the holy Scripture is made publick unto every Nation, and eve∣ry person in his mother-tongue, without doubt a true and impartial translation will do less hurt, and be more beneficial to mankind, then one wrested and partial, which speaks the language, and gives authority to one Sect or other, as our last doth. Yet is not all the blame to be laid upon the Translators, but part of it to be shared with them also who set them a work; who by rea∣son of State, limited them, (as some of them have much complained) lest they might be thought, not to set forth a new Translation, but rather a new Bible. Yea, part of the blame ought to be laid on them, who undo that, which they had well done. For whereas many mis-translated words and phrases, by plurality of voices, were carried into
the Context, and the better Translation most-what, was cast into the Margent, those margi∣nal notes have been left out, together with the Apocrypha, to make the Bible portable, and fit for the Pocket. Yea, such is the ignorance and boldness of some, that they have left out of their Impressions, the Apochryphal Scriptures; whereby they have gotten this whereof to glory; that they have done That which no wise or honest man hath ever done before them, (so far, as I have yet known,) or, I hope, will adven∣ture to do after them. Nor ought this mine endeavour to be mis∣construed, and thought presumption; since I humbly thank the Searcher of my heart, I can truly say, what I have done, I have done it before the face of the Lord,2 Sam. 6. v. 21. in the integrity of my heart. And herein I follow the Transla∣tors themselves, who profess, that they assayed to make that Translation before them, better, which they thought to be good: which is their own reasoning in their Preface to the Reader. And though I think our last Translation good, yea, far better then that new one of the Low Dutch so highly extolled, yet I doubt not but Ours may be made much better then it is. Nor have I herein sought glory of men, as he the same God best knowes, who alone search∣eth and knoweth all our hearts.
But indeed of whom should I expect it? The unlearned, or the most of them are alrea∣dy Catechized & principled in such doctrine, as is inferred from a mis-translation. Many of the Learned, I shall finde zealous for what they have learned, and for the honour of their Authors, of whom they have learned. Besides, the work it self is plain, and not baited with strong lines, whereby to take the rude multitude, who most greedily devour the frothy discourses of empty Verbalists, and judge all things they read, good and true, without difference, if they be well larded and season'd with handsome words, and elegant phrases: which yet being judiciously analysed and re∣solved into their Arguments, like gay Butter∣flyes pressed and broken, they soon vanish in∣to smoak. But as for this piece, it comes forth as a plain Matron, in an honest, though an home∣ly dress. Much adorning, however fashiona∣ble, (though I have been much blamed for not preaching in the fashion, yet) is not without some suspicion of lightness. I have ever affe∣cted perspicuity, as the best elegancy. For , or clearness of expression, is one of the best flowers of Oratory; and too many Rhetori∣cal colours, keep out the light; and excess of embroydery obscures the ground of truth.
Nor indeed can any, who know my week∣ly imployments, look for any other then plain work from me; but that such as the Women call Plain-work, which is lasting, necessary, and handsom enough, and will, I believe, in time, work out all vain and superfluous curiosities. Let the truth of God appear in its native lustre and beauty: And let all Philology and all humane learning be as a dark ground and foyl to set it off: or like an ill-favoured Wait∣ing woman who improves the beauty of her fair Lady. Such must the captive Maid be, as S. Hierom compares her;Deut. 21. v. 12. who must have her head shaven, & her nayles made to grow, (which is the readier way to make nayles, according to the Hebrew, then to pare them; as our Tran∣slators turn that phrase beside its scope;) and all means used to make her ugly and deformed, 1 Cor. 11.6. that the divine truth alone may be fair and beautiful in our sight. As for those men, who now for many years, have rendred me odious unto such as know me not; and have endeavoured to smo∣ther me, like a Rat behinde the Hangings, traducing me, as a man of an erroneous judge∣ment; a dangerous man; one who turns the Scri∣ptures into Allegories, &c. I heartily pray to the Lord for them, that he will incline their minds unto a right judgement; and that they may be
truly such, as they pretend and give forth them∣selves to be, Orthodox. But meantime, what means or way have I left me now in mine old age to approve my self to be of a right judgement, beside this Sori∣cina naenia, this free discovery of my self unto those who otherwise know me not? that all men, and especially the godly learned may hereby judge, what my errours are; and whe∣ther I am so dangerous a man to any but to the Devils kingdom; which, I confess, I endeavour to discover, & by the spiritual armory mighty through God, utterly to destroy, in my self and others. Let them also judge, whether Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apo∣stles, and the Fathers of the Church have not allegorized the Scriptures. Yea, whether it ought to be imputed as a fault unto the chil∣dren, that they do Patrizare, imitate the fa∣thers; and whether that, which was ascribed as an ornament of praise unto them, should be laid as a reproachful blemish, yea, and a crime upon their followers. And where the Apostle having allegorized many things in the Law, and saying [of which things I cannot now speak particularly,] whether by this , or preterition, he doth not forcibly infer, that afterward himself or others might particularly speak of them as Allegories, Hebr. 9.5.
Howbeit I well know, I shall have many mouthes open against me; yet my comfort is, the testimony of my conscience, that herein I serve God and my generation. Nor do I doubt but some there are, who will approve of my labours herein; yea, and many more, when the Day-star is risen, (whose light now dawns apace) will experimentally finde the truth of these things. Meantime I beseech those, who, in some things delivered in this work, are of a contrary judgement unto me, that, however I may be despicable in their eyes, yet, that they will not rashly and hastily condemn or slight what is presented unto their view; but well weigh in the balance of the Sanctuary, what is here of∣fered unto their serious consideration, and that they would remember, they are not infallible; but that is possible, they may be deceived, as much as other men. But be the Work, and their opinion of it, what it will be; it must now stand or fall among men, according to the Readers opinion of it; Judicio Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli. It is now at length come forth, but with great dis∣advantage, by reason of long expectation. Howbeit, so long delay is excusable in equi∣ty, if these things be considered: the length of the work; part of two sharp Winters, which hin∣dred
the Press long time together; Intervention of other important and instant business at the Press; my necessary absence and sickness (Causa sontica) disabling me from furnishing the Press some time with Copie; which truly (except three or four Sermons) then began to be, when it began to be printed; and like an hasty birth, was conceived, and born, written and printed al∣most together. Consideration also may bee had of my manifold avocations incident in the interim unto my place and calling. Concerning the whole matter, thus much I seriously profess, that what is true and good in it, I own the good God, and God of truth for the Donor of it; who, I am well assured, hath been powerfully present with me in it: How∣beit, in regard of humane weakness, no man shall have a meaner opinion of it then I my self have. However, so some good may be done toward the undeceiving, enlightning, informing, and edifying of those who fear God; I value nor work it self, nor pains, nor credit, nor time spent in it. Before I conclude this Preface, I must give the godly-learned Reader a more particular account of my Method, and way of proceeding in this Work. When I was entring upon this Essay, I intended only an endeavour to make a Mis∣cellaneous
discovery of such  and over∣sights in the Translation, as were more gross and notorious; and so to have observed either no Method at all, or that next to none, —ruere in medias res; to take them as I found them. But I corrected that intention, by considerati∣on, how necessary a certain method is in all things: And that the Order wherein the Books of the Holy Scriptures are placed, must needs be the very best, and most satisfactory to all: where∣fore I resolved upon that, and to take what mis-translations I should finde in reading of the Scriptures. Howbeit foreseeing that the work, by that means, would be very long, should I take no∣tice of all oversights, amend them, and explain them at large. And on the contrary, that should I only rectifie such obliquity, without ex∣plication, it would be very short, and so ob∣scure; I thought, that the Skeleton of meer Criticisms (though they be more profitable then some men conceive, yet) would be use∣ful to the Learned only. But since I ought to serve my generation, and to condescend unto the capacity of the meanest understanding, I have clothed that Skeleton of Criticisms with such moral Explications and Applications, as I thought needful to the use of edifying; if it so may please God, that the Spirit
may enter, and the dead and dry bones may live. I have endeavoured to follow the Clue of the Original Tongues, as Pagnin, and more exactly Arias Montanus have done. And al∣though some learned & good men have some∣what condemned the later, as if he were too curious, and have affirmed, that he hath, in some places, made the Scripture scarce to speak sense; I confess, the Idioms of every Lan∣guage, and so of the Hebrew tongue, are such, that they must seem harsh, if expressed in ano∣ther Language. Yet I leave it to the due con∣sideration of godly learned men, whether less violence will not be done to the holy Text, by rendring it  and expresly, though in a phrase more harsh to our English ears; then to impose our own sense upon it, though in a phrase and manner of speech to us more familiar and better known. For albeit the expression be uncouth and strange, it will be the Preachers duty, bu∣siness, and comfort, to explain it unto the people, together with the spiritual meaning of it: How else can he be said to teach them? For many of the people are, (at least in their own opi∣nion,) so skilful in the Letter of the Scripture, that they disdain to be further taught: So that one said, (I say not how wisely) that he would not go cross the way, to hear what he knew not al∣ready. Is it said in vain, They shall seek the
Law at the mouth of the Priest? Malach. 2.7. Therefore it is said of the Levites; That they read in the Book of the Law of God, and gave the sense, Nehem. 8.8. Whence it appears, that the Letter of the Scriptures, and much more the spiritual meaning of it, was obscure even to the Jews themselves, especially after they bad been in Babylon. And may we not think, that the Letter of the Scripture must be yet obscure to the Christian Church, which, in S. Peters dayes, was in Babylon? 1 Pet. 5.13. And is it yet come out of Babylon? When now I had sometime proceeded ac∣cording to this method, and digested the more material mistakes of the Translation, into Ar∣guments of plain weekly Sermons, (both because I wanted other time properly to be bestowed upon that Subject, as also that the Amendment of the Translation, might appear not Arbitrary, but necessary) and had applyed the several f∣fyps unto life und manners: Although I had for brevity sake, wittingly passed by many o∣versights in the Translation, especially in the three first Books of Moses, and had scattered enough for any man to glean after me, yet I perceived, the Work swelled beyond my first intention: And therefore considering, that the further wo proceed in survey of the Scri∣pture, the Translation is the more faulty, as
the Hagiographa more then the Historical Scri∣pture, and the Prophets more then the Hagio∣grapha, and the Apocrypha most of all; and ge∣nerally the New more then the Old Testa∣ment. Considering also, that the Work would be very long, if I should proceed thorowout the whole Scripture according to the same large measure of Application. Lastly, percei∣ving the infirmities of old age already upon me; and that Ars longa, vita brevis, the business is long, and life but short; I thought meet in mine Essayes, to take notice of the mis-transla∣tion of other Scriptures as well as these of the Pentateuch observed in this Volume. And therefore although at first I put all Scriptures quoted promiscuously either in the Margent, as in the beginning; or, (because that was more troublesome to the Compositer) in the Context; afterward I placed all such Scriptures cited in the Margent, against the translation of which, I conceived, there lay any just exception. For the discovery of these mis-translations I have used the help of diverse of my friends, especially Dr. Thomas Drayton, Mr. William Parker, and Mr. Richard Hunt: who, beside that, hath also taken great pains in making a Table of the Sermons contained in this Book; also an Index of such Scriptures as either pur∣posely, or occasionally are opened in it; and also
hath made a Catalogue of the more notable Er∣rata in the whole Volume: a labour much be∣low his worth and ability. The Lord, in mercy, be pleased to give his blessing unto these my weak Essayes and endea∣vours, that they may tend, as they are intended, unto his honour and glory, in the illustration of his serviceable Word, and the edifying of his people in their holy fear, faith, and love! He be pleased to stir up many far more able then I am, so thorowly to furbish and shar∣pen the two-edged Sword of his Spirit, the Word of God, that it may cut down the known sin and the false righteousness, the outward and inward iniquity; that I and these my labours may be as nothing, in comparison of such instruments as the Lord may raise up; that the testimony of Jesus may be cleared, and may witness of him; that all the people may be gathered unto Shilo, Gen. 49.10. 2 Thess. 2.1. and may give testimo∣ny unto the truth in Jesus, even the putting off the old man, and putting on the new, Ephes. 4.21, 22. That all may be so reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, and saved by his life. That all may hear the voice of the Father, and see his shape, Phil. 2.6. and may have his Word abiding in them, and receive the Son whom he hath sent; and may come unto him, that they may have life, John 5. That the Son of God may
obtain the end of his coming; who is therefore come that men may have life, and have it more abundantly, John 10.10. in Faith, Prowess, Ex∣perimental knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly love, and Common love; whereby an entrance may be administred un∣to us abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. So great grace, the God of all grace vouchsafe unto us all, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord! Amen!
GEN. 1, 2. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters. EVery Scribe taught into the Kingdom of Heaven, is like unto a Man an housholder, who bringeth forth out of his Treasure things New and Old, Matth. 13.52. The Old is the Figure; the New is the Spirit, saith S. Basil. And the Lord Jesus maketh the Ministers of the New Testament able Ministers, not of the Letter, but of the Spi∣rit. Now should any Man purchase a Field yielding a plenti∣ful Crop, and well worth his money, yet if he who sold him that Field, should, beyond his bargain and what he looked for, discover unto him a rich Mine and a Treasure hidden in that Field, surely he should do the purchaser no wrong. Nor have the pious Ancients, Jews, and Christians, Greek and Latin Fa∣thers who delivered the holy Scriptures unto us, done us any injury when, beside the literal sense, which onely some look after, they shew us a spiritual meaning also; especially of the Penteteuch or Five Books of Moses, which Juvenal calls an hid∣den Book; Tradidit arcano quodcunque Volumine Moses. And of that hidden Volume, the Book of Genesis. Yea, and of that Book, the three first Chapters, which, as all agree, contain many mysteries; which therefore were inhibited unto Novices. Nor is it every mans businesse to search after this Mine. Un∣godly men, who turn not from their iniquities, shall never un∣derstand Gods truth, Dan. 9.13. and 12.10. the same Prophet denounceth their doom, None of the wicked shall understand. Who then? it follows, But the wise shall understand, that is, the godly wise; the beginning of whose wisdom is the fear of God. For God giveth to a man that is good in his sight, wisdom and knowledge, and joy, Eccles. 2.26. And our Lord Jesus John 7.17. promiseth, That If any man will do the Lords will, he shall know of the Doctrine, that is, if any man have a will () to do the Law of God,
which is the will of God the Father, Psal. 40.8. he shall know of the Sons Doctrine, which is the Gospel. But let us come to the words propounded, And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.Gen. 1. Ver. 2.] In this Chapter the holy and blessed Trinity meets for the Creation of the Macrocosm or greater World. And the Microcosm or lesser World, the compendium and breviat of the greater, Verse 26, 27. As concerning the Macrocosm or greater World, the Thargum of Jerusalem turns  in the beginning ver. 1.  that is, In Wisdom; which indeed is no other then what David Psal. 104. having paraphrased on the works of God in the Crea∣tion, Verse 24. he saith, In wisdom hast thou made them all: and the like, Psal. 136.5, 6. To which may be added other like Scrip∣tures. This Wisdom is the Son of God; and therefore the In∣terlineary Gloss interprets, In Principio, in the beginning, in Filio so, In his Son, by whom all things were made, John 1.3. Which also the Apostle ascribes unto the Son, Col. 1.16. who, saith he, is , the Beginning. So Revel. 1.8. He is called the Beginning; and 3.24. the Beginning of the creation of God. Heaven and Earth, the Interlineary Gloss expounds Spiritual Mon who meditate on heavenly things; and Carnal Men, who have not yet put off the earthly Man. Alcuin briefly explaines the first Verse thus. In the beginning,] The Son; who being made Man, it appeared who were heavenly, who earthly, so he. And therefore it presently followes; The Earth was without form and void. Which very words Jer. 4.22, 23. applies to the foolish people and sottish children who have no understanding, until they receive the form of Doctrine. So Gloss. Ordin. The Spirit of God moved.] The Hebrew word  signifies the motion of a Bird while she hatcheth Eggs, or moveth her self over her young ones. We finde the same word so used Deat. 32.11. which the Vulgar Latin hath Supervolitans flying over: Arias Montanus turns Motitabit, She will move her self often; and our Translators render well, She fluttereth. And why the same word may not be here used, I know not. The Spirit of God is here said to flutter on the waters, that is, mystically, saith the Ordinary Gloss, noting hearts which have lost the rest of the minde. In regard of the quickning power and tender love of God to his New Creatures, he takes on him the affections and acts of Birds, which are most loving to their young ones. Thus in the place before named, Deut. 32.11. God the Father is com∣pared to an Eagle, and to Birds flying, Esay 31.5. The Son to an Hen, 2 Esdr. 1.30. I gathered you together as an Hen gathereth her Chickens under her winge. Which the Son applies to himself, Matth. 23.37. And the Spirit of God appeared like a Dove, Mat. 3.16.
So that the Holy and Blessed Trinity is ingaged in the work of the outward and inward creation. That this Translation may yet appear the more fit, we may take notice that some of the best Philosophers have compared the Fire and Air, to the Shell and White, the Water and Earth to the yolk of an Egge; upon which the Spirit of God here is said to sit and move it self. The LXX hath here : which Tertullian turns Supervectabatur, was carried over the waters. The Chaldee Paraphrast here useth the word  which signifies to breathe, as proper to the Spirit, which the Arabick follows. But I adhere to the translation which I have already given. For the Syriack Interpreter hath a word like that in the Hebrew, which signifies the act of a Bird sitting upon Eggs and hatching young ones. Nobilius turns the Syriack word, Fovebat aquas; the Spirit of God nourished the waters. Martin Luther useth the word Schwebet, as also Piscator, which in his Latin Scholia he turns Incubabat, the Spirit sat upon the waters as a Bird on Eggs, cherisheth them and quickens them, that young ones may be hatcht and brought forth out of them. Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life] which we may better turn word for word,Gen. 1. Ver. 20. the living soul. So the French, Spanish, and Italian Bibles have the words. And the Tigurin translation and Pagnin. The like we may say of Verse 21. and 24. where our Translators have, every living crea∣ture, the translations now named have according to the Hebrew, Every living soul. Thus that manner of speech may be made familiar, which otherwise is uncouth, 1 Cor. 15.45. The first man Adam was made a living soul. Cattle and creeping thing, and beast of the earth.] I rather render the last word, wild beast of the earth.Gen. 1. Ver. 24. For although  signifie both the tame and wilde beast, as the English word Beast may do, when it is alone, as 1 Sam. 17.46. Yet when  is ad∣ded, as here it is, this signifies tame, that wilde. So Genesis 8.1. Levit. 26.22. and in many other places. GEN. 2.2. On the seventh day God ended his work. IF thus we read the words, it will follow,Chap. 2. Verse 2. that God wrought also upon the seventh day; for to finish a work is to work. And if God finished his work on the seventh day, then he did not rest the whole seventh day: and so it should be said, that God rested a part of the seventh day. For the avoiding of this obje∣ction the LXX plainly corrupted the Text, and instead of the
seventh day, put the sixth, and read the words thus, , God finished his works on the sixth day. This seems to have been their constant reading: For Hierom so read it in his time; and it is so and no otherwise extant at this day. According to the Letter, this Knot may be loosed, by saying, that the word  used Genesis 2.2. which we render, ended, Perfecit, in the Preter tense, may be as well turn'd into the Preterpluperfect tense, Perfecerat, He had ended; because there is but one Preter tense in the Hebrew, which is put for all the parts of time past. Howbeit Gods resting after the Creation, is not literally only to be understood, but also spiritually. God rested in his Son, through whom he made all things. And so we may read the words as now we do, in our last Translation without that criti∣cal distinction of Tenses. God finished his work on the seventh day; that is, on and in his Son by whom he made the Worlds. He is the true Sabbath. Gods well-beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased, Matth. 3.17. and 17.5. of whom the Father saith, Esay 42.1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, or , innitor ei, I will rest upon him (so Vatablus turnes those words) mine elect in whom my soul delighteth. So S. August. Sabbato enim significa∣tur spiritualis requies: For by the Sabbath is signified the spiritual rest-whither men are called by the Lord himself, saying, Come unto me all ye who labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Matth. 11.28. As for Gods cessation or privative Rest after the Creation, our Lord Jesus denies it: For when he had comman∣ded an impotent man, who had been sick thirty eight years, to carry his bed on the Sabbath-day, John 5.5.—16. He saith to the Jewes Verse 17. My Father worketh hitherto, and I work, viz. works of righteousnesse, which he hath alwayes wrought with∣out beginning, and shall alwayes work without end. He rested on the Sabbath from making new kindes of creatures: But he ceaseth not from his preservation, government and ordering of those creatures, which he hath made. The Carpenter leaves the House, and the Shipwright the vessel, which he hath built; and it is all one to him, whether it sink or swim. But the great , as Plato cals the wise Master-builder, He having made the World, leaves it not, but governs it. Yea, he works hitherto, even on the seventh day, even on the Sabbath-day. Ideò dicitur Deus requievisse, quia jam creaturam nullam condebat. God is said to have rested because now he made no creature, saith S. Aug. that he may admonish us, that we shall rest after our la∣bours; and that we should not hope for any rest unlesse we re∣turn to the similitude wherein we were made. For so God rested after he had made man after his image and similitude. Thus also S. Hierome, in Hebraeo, Habetur die Septima, &c. In the
Hebrew its said, God finished his work on the seventh day. Wherefore, saith he, we shall straiten the Jews, who glory of the Sabbaths rest; because even then in the beginning the Sabbath was dissolved while God works on the Sabbath; therein finishing all his works. An help meet for him.] The Marginal reading is, as before him,Gen. 2. Ver. 18. which answers to the Hebrew , and again, Verse 20. This I prefer before that in the context; both because it answers ex∣actly to the Original; and because the Woman the Church, whereof the Woman here to be made, was a type, is said to be , before him, that is, before Christ, Ephes. 1.4. For as Adam was a figure of him that was to come, Rom. 5.14. so was Eve a type of the Church; and therefore called  be∣cause she was the Mother  of all the living. Of every Tree in the Garden thou mayest freely eat.Gen. 2. Ver. 16.] Doubtlesse the better translation is in the Margent, as it is evident from the words immediately before: The Lord God commanded the Man, saying, Of every Tree in the Garden eating thou shalt eat. The words are a command, not a permission, as the context speaks them. Thus also the French Bible, the Spanish and Italian, as also Luthers translation and the Low Dutch. Yea, all our Old English translations. That which, I beleeve, moved the Tran∣slators to cast the true version into the Margent, and make the words a permission, not a command, was their humane conside∣ration of a seeming impossibility, that the Man should eat of all the Trees in the Garden. They seem not to have remembred, that in Parables and Allegories many things are improper in the figure, which yet are made good and proper in the truth and thing figured and signified. To eat of a Tree, is not proper, but of the fruit of it: Howbeit to eat, partake of, and enjoy Christ who is the Tree of Life, yea, the Life it self, its proper. Yea, where it is said, Revel. 2.7. To him that overcometh, I will give to eat, , word for word, of the wood of Life. Or, if it signifie a Tree, rather a dry Tree then a green: which is not an Hebraism, but an Hellenism. For whereas the word  signifies wood and a tree, hence the word  often signifies a tree. But neither tree nor wood of the tree, is properly food. How then shall we eat of either? We may partake of that which is signified by both, viz. the Crosse, patience and sufferings of Jesus Christ, who is the tree of life. That's the wood that makes the bitter waters sweet, Exod. 15. And Blessed is the wood, by which righteousnesse cometh, Wisd. 14.7. Surely the true trees of the Garden, whereof the Man is com∣manded to eat, and that of all of them, are the Plants of our heavenly Fathers planting, every grace, every vertue, all the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentlenesse, Goodnesse, Faith, Meeknesse, Temperance. Unto these Nine, the Vulg. Latin addes three other, Modesty, Con∣tinency and Chastity, twelve in all; and so many we read of Revel. 22.1, 2. A river of living water or water of life, flowing from the throne of God, and the Lamb; that is, the holy Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son, according to John 7.37. Out of his belly (the heart of the believer in Christ) shall flow rivers of living waters; this he spake of the Spirit. It followes, that in the midst of the street, and of either side of the river, was there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, &c. These fruits must be exceeding plenteous, there must be Gods plenty of them. And so there is; For as the Father hath life in himself, so he hath given to the Son to have life in himself, John 5.26. from whom flowes righteousness as a mighty stream, Amos 5.24. to water the Paradise of God. And peace like a river, Esay 66.12. And joy unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1.8. For the end to which the fruits of the tree of life serve unto, require abundance of fruit, so much as may satisfie all Nations. For Christ is the desire of all Na∣tions, Hag. 2.7. And when that desire comes, it is a tree of life, Prov. 13.12. Which gives life to the world, John 6.33. And that in more abundance, John 10.10. And as the fruit must be plenteous, so must the leaves, the outward profession and practise: They are to heal the Nations, Revel. 22.2. to heal the diseased. So the Sun is not only the cause of life, but of medicin also. Therefore the Poets made Apollo the Sun, the Author of both. Which is true of the Sun of Righ∣teousnesse in both respects, Mal. 4.2. For unto those who fear the Lords Name, the Sun of Righteousnesse shall arise with healing in his wings. The same tree of life affords both, Revel. 22.2. Hitherto we have heard the Lords first precept, which is af∣firmative. The second followes, which is negative; But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evill, thou shalt not eat of it. Through the subtilty of the Serpent, the woman given for an help to the man, fell a lusting after her own will, to be some∣what her self, by that desire she had to eat of the tree of know∣ledge of good and evil. And hereby she desired in a way con∣trary to Gods command, to be like unto God, to see and know all what God sees and knowes. And of this forbidden fruit she her self did eat, and gave her husband also to eat of it. And so fell away from the light and life and wisdom and will of God to her own vain opinion, earthly wisdom and will of the flesh. This is that we call the fall of man, whereby the life is mingled with the death, good with evil, light with darknesse, truth with errour. This is the Mother sin and Nurse of all other. Hence it is that man was driven out of the light of life, out of the Para∣dise of God, and hath lost the power to eat of the tree of life. It must be given him anew.
Do we consider all this only as a most antient History, and look at it as done only so many Ages since? Or may we not finde the same acted over and over many ten thousand times since in all after generations, and even in our own selves? I might name many Scriptures: I shall note but one, which, I be∣seech you, read and consider well of it, 1 Cor. 11.2. And let us observe the direfull effects of our fall, and what an evill and bitter thing it is that we have departed from our God, and feed not upon the trees of His Paradise, but upon such Plants as are not of our Heavenly Fathers planting. For whose plants are envy, division, contention, strife and discord, which grow up ranck among us, as they say, The Serpents teeth did-seges clypeata? Whose plant is pride, the beginning of sin, as the wisman calls it? Whose is coveteousness the root of all evill? Whose is wrath and revenge and other roots of bitterness? Whose plants are lasciviousness, luxury, gluttony, surfeting and drunkeness, and other such like Pot-herbs? Whence grow the briars and thorns, the heathenish cares, the curses of the earth? These, all these are sown and planted and grown up thick in us. Are these of Gods planting? O no; The envious man hath done this. All this wickedness is grown up as a tree, Job 24.20. Of which the fallen man eates freely, & contrary to the Command of God. The rib which the Lord God had taken from the man,Gen. 2.22. made He a woman,] What they turn made, is in the Hebrew built, as in the margin. Which I prefer the rather because it answers to  to edify or build, which is very often applyed to the Church, as the Truth of this type. Act. 9.31. & 15.16. and 20.32. 1 Cor. 14.4. This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh,] Word for word, This for this once is bone out of my bones,Gen. 2. Ver. 23. and flesh our of my flesh. And so it answers to the LXX, and to the Apostle, Ephes. 5.30. : and the words following prove this translation, Because she was taken out of man, implying that the Church is taken out of Christ: which S. Paul calls a great mystery, Ephes. 5.32. For so we receive from Christ a suffering flesh, 1 Pet. 4.1. as he promises to us an heart of flesh Ezech. 36.26. a soft heart and sit to receive impressions from the Spirit of God; as Josiahs heart was tender 2 Kings 22.19. We receive also bone from his bones. The word is  and signifies strength as well as a bone, Job 21.23. and elsewhere. And hereby we are enabled to act and do according to divine impressions made in our tender and fleshy heart. And hereby we become strong in the Lord and in the power of his might Ephes. 6.10. and able to do all things through Christ, who thus inwardly enableth us Phil. 4.13.
SERMON I.SERM. I. The Law and Gospel preached from the begining. GEN. 3.15. ANd I will put enmity between thee and the woman,Gen. 3. Ver. 15. and between thy seed and her seed, &c. The obscurity of the Scripture pro∣ceeds much what either from mistakes of Translation, or else from false Glosses and mis-interpretations. The words I have propounded now for my Text, may prove an instance of them both. For whereas in reading of the Old Testament, Moses hath a vail upon his face, 2 Cor. 3. v. 13. And not as Moses which put a Vail over his face, that the children of Israel could not stedfastly look to the end of that which is abolished. In reading the three first Chapters of Genesis, Moses is double vailed: And therefore those three with the book of Canticles and some other Scriptures were by the wise men of the Jews prohibited to be read by Novices, lest they might make ill constructions of them, as I shewed be∣fore in part. This was needful to be premised, because the Text propoun∣ded is a part of the third Chapter, and hath in it more difficulty then appears at the first reading of the words. And therefore whereas the Apostle saith concerning the Jews, 2 Cor. 3.15. that When Moses is read, the vail is upon their hearts; but that vail is done away in Christ; The Lord be pleased to turne all our hearts unto himselfe, that that vail may be done away. Moses having described the fall from verse the first to the se∣venth he brings in God the Judge examining the fact and making inquiry into the causes of it, searching out this sin (not unknown to himselfe before) from Adam to Eve, and from Eve to the principall malefactor the Serpent. Wherein we may note how the Lord Parts laesa yea Laesa Majestas the highest majestie the party offended, how wisely,Obs. 1. justly, mercifully he proceeds in this and the two following sen∣tences. Yea hence we may take notice,Obs. 2. that although the Lord permits sin for the tryall of his creatures and the manifestation of their weaknes and inconstancy in the good, wherein they are not un∣moveable, like himself; yet he will certainly call the offenders to an account afterwards.
Whence also we learn, that he is greater then the Devill and all that sin against him;Obs. 3. both in knowledge to finde out, and in power to punish all wickedness. Herein the Judge of all the world gives a pattern to the Magi∣strates his Vice-gerents;Obs. 4. Proverbs Chap. 25.2. It is the glory of God to conceale a thing: but the honour of Kings is to search out a mat∣ter. Yea herein he gives us an example of judging our selves,Obs. 5. La∣ment. 3.39, 40. Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sinnes? Let us search and try our wayes and turne againe to the Lord. The sentence denounced against the Serpent is either more proper to himself, as vers. 14. because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattell and above every beast of the field, upon thy belly shalt thou go and dust shalt thou cat all the dayes of thy life; or with reference to man kind as vers. 15. which is my Text. From which I shall not now longer detaine your thoughts, foreseeing an occasion that I may have to open the former part of this sentence. Come we therfore more precisely to the words of my text. Here is a fuid between two great families, and the effect of that fuid. The fuid is between the Serpent and the woman; which is Gods own doing: he saith, I will put enmity between thee and the woman. This is a lasting fuid, which ends not with the parties between whom it is first put, but is continued unto the posterities. I will put enmitie between thee and the woman and between thy seed and ket seed. This fuid is not smothered as enmity may long be, but this fuid breakes out into open and irreconcileable hostility to the wounding, bruising, breaking one the other; all which will appeare in the handling of these Axioms. 1. The Lord saith, he will put enmity between the serpent and the woman, 2. That he will put enmity between the seed of the Serpent and the seed of the woman. 3. That the seed of the woman shall breake the Serpents head. 4. That the Serpent shall bruise his heel. The Lord saith, he will put enmity between the Serpent and the woman. Wherein we must inquire, what the Serpent is. Secondly what is the woman. Thirdly what is the enmity which the Lord saith, he will put between the Serpent and the woman. The word we turn the Serpent is  which properly signifies a Searcher. He is named diverse times in this Chapter, as vers. 1.2.4.13.14. but never without his note of emphasis
that Serpent, implying that he is the same and no other than which long after is called the Old Serpent, &c. Revel. 12.9. and the great Dragon was cast out that Old Serpent called the Divill and Satan which deceived the whole world. What the Serpent here is, I hope we have found. But 2. what is the woman? 1. what is she not? surely not Eve alone: for then Adam should not here be included, but left out. No nor can it be understood of woman-kinde alone; for then that sex alone should hate the Serpent, and not men also. Nor is it to be understood of the B. Virgin Mary alone: for then this promise should stand at too great a distance from the first mercy here in∣tended to the whole race of the fallen man; and should be pent up in too narrow a scantling, yea this great inconveniencie would follow, that the Serpent should reign from Adam to Moses, yea from Moses to Christ in the flesh, without opposition, or at least without subduing and overcoming. 2. what then is the woman? Surely as the Serpent is not literally here to be understood but Mystically also, as I have shown; so is this woman some mysticall thing in both our first parents, and in all fallen men and women, or those that might or may fall. This woman is something that is taken out of the spirit of man, and is made an help unto him. And it is no other than his mind, understanding, thoughts and memory, through which he may stand or fall, Rom. 1.20.21. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, &c. They knew the eternal power and God-head which required of them a sutable glorifying of God, but they became Vain in their imaginations and their foolish heart was darkned; Ephes. 4.17.18. The Gentiles walked in the Vanitie of their mind and had their understanding darkned and so became alinated from the life of God. By those the Gentiles fell, and by the same the Jewes fell also. Jer. 7.23, 24. They walked in the counsell and imagina∣tion of their own heart. Thus yee read the minds or thoughts compared to Eve: 2 Corin. Chap. 11.3 I feare least by any meanes as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his sublilty so  your mindes or thoughts rather should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. The fathers as S. Austin, Gregory and others here understand an inward and mysticall woman. The enmity is put between the Serpent and the woman, and between their seeds: and therefore I shall here speak generally of it in this first point, and more particularly in the second. Here then we may understand generally by enmity some what that dissoders, and raveles that amity and friendship which was knit and contracted between the woman and the Serpent by reason of the fall. How be it we are not here to understand, that God puts any enmity reciprocally between both the woman and the Ser∣pent. For surely he puts no enmity at all into the Serpent or his
seed against the woman or her godly seed. That enmity which Satan hath against the woman and her godly seed, it is aboun∣dantly sufficient, and needs no addition or increase, but is his own purchase which he hath made by his fall from God. The woman therefore is here to be understood as the ubiect of his enmity which, God saith, he will put into her which shall be exercised upon the Serpent and the Serpents seed, as the proper objects of it. The reason why the Lord puts enmity between the Serpent and the woman, appeares from the precedent act and depravation of Satan which the Lord here mainly intends to demolish and destroy; and therefore it is but reason that the remedy should be applyed to the malady; wherefore as Satan begun his destructive seducing and deceit in the mind and understanding, as I have shewn, so in reason the Lord must begin his work of reparation and renewing there; as we find he does Ephes. 1.17.18. where the Apostle prayes that God would give them the Spirit of wisdom and revelation for the acknowledgment of him, the eyes of their understanding being inlightned that they may know, &c. Col. 1.9.18. The Apostle prayes that they might be filled with the knowledge of his will: &c. So he prayes for Timothy, Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things! 2 Tim Chap. 2. vers. 7. Besides; thoughts and counsells are the begining of every affection, word, and work: and therefore as when these are corrupted, the foun∣dation is layd for corrupting all the rest: so when these are duely informed, a sutable reparation will follow of all the rest. Now because we by the fall, are not able to thinke any thing that good is of our selves as of our selves, the wise and good God Vouchsafes a sufficiency to thinke and doe. 2 Cor. 3. vers. 5. not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiencie is of God. Hence we learn,Obs. 1. that although our God be love it selfe as he is called. 1 Joh. 4.8.16. he that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love. &c. and goodnes it selfe  so that essentially there is none good but God; yet hath this love and goodness its enmity against the evil whether it be open and manifest evill, or else appearing and seeming rightousness, wherewith it is gilded and hansomed over, Psal. 5. vers. 4.5. For thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickednes, neither shall evill dwell with thee, &c. Thou hatest all workers of iniquity, first the wickedness, then the wicked men, workers of iniquity that will not part with it; and Psal. 11.5. but the wicked and him that loveth violence his soule hateth. Pro. 6. vers. 16.17. these six things doth the Lord hate. &c. Zacha. 8. vers. 17. and let none of you imagine evill in your hearts, &c. These are manifest evills; there are other varnished over with shewes of righteousness, Esay. 1.13.14. bring no more vain
oblations, &c. and 61.8. I hate robery for a burnt offering &c. And this enmity against the evill is no lesse gloriouss unto God and his Christ than his love unto the good: Psal. 45.7. thou lovest right∣eousness and hatest wickednes, &c. 2.Obs. 2. Hence we know the reason and ground of that promise which the Lord made afterward more explicitely and plainly, Ezek. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk, &c. which is the enmity or a part of it, which the Lord promises to put into our understandings and thoughts against Satan and his machinations: thus Col. 3.10, The new man is renewed in knowledge, &c. 3.Obs. 3. Hence appears the Etymology or the reason of Eve her name: Adam called the name of his wife  after the promise made of the enmity, because she was the mother  of all living, or all that which liveth: for whereas the will and affections and all actions which proceed from thence, follow the direction and guidance of the mind, thoughts, and understanding, if God put the enmity as a principle of life into these,  will bring forth ; that principle of life will bring forth living ones such as shall be answerable unto the life of God, as living wills, affections, words, actions. For that principle of life in the thoughts, minds, and understanding, is enough to work out and take away all darknesse and blindnesse, and furnish the man with the light of life. 2. Axiom. The Lord saith, he will put enmity between the seed of the Serpent and the seed of the woman. We have heard what the Ser∣pent, the Woman, and generally what the enmity is. It re∣mains to be enquired, what the seed of the Serpent and the seed of the woman is; and what it is to put enmity between them. The seed of the Serpent is all rebellious motions, all false per∣swasions, with all lying promises and contradictions unto Gods word. But it is not so clear nor agreed upon by Expositors, what is here meant by the Womans seed. The most, by the wo∣mans seed, understand Christ as he was the Son of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and him onely. But this cannot be true: for the Woman here meant is clean another thing, as hath beon shewn; viz. The Minde, Understanding, Thoughts, and Memory; so the seed of the Woman must be also another thing. For there was, and ever hath been since the fall, an enmity between the Serpent and his seed, and the Woman and hers, before Christ appeared in the flesh. Besides, God the Father cannot be said to put enmity against the evil, into his Son: for then some time there must have been, when the Son should not have had an en∣mity against the evil, but an amity with it, before God should put it into him; which is at least absurd to affirm: yea, the Son of God hath ever had, by inheritance, an enmity against the evil
in all fulnesse, Psal. 45.7. Thou lovest righteousnesse, and hatest wickednesse, therefore, &c. What then is the seed of the woman? What else can be the seed of the fallen woman but disobedi∣ence unto God, and consequently obedience unto the Serpent? What else can be the fruit of the fallen mans thoughts? the cor∣rupted thoughts can bring forth no better thing then themselves are; Water ascends no higher then whence it descends; That which is born of the flesh, is flesh, John 3. Jer. 6.19. The fruit of their thoughts: and 7.23. and 24. Verses: Obey my voice, &c. But they walked in the counsel and in the imagination of their evil hearts. Thus murder is the fruit of the corrupt thoughts, John 16.2. The time cometh, that whosoever killeth you, will think that he doth God service, or rather brings God an Oblation or acceptable Sacrifice: So  signifies. And Acts 26.9. I thought that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. The fuid between the Serpent and the Woman is great, which yet increases in the seed of both. What then more specially is the enmity between the seed of the Serpent and the seed of the Wo∣man? Surely the enmity put into the seed of the Woman must be opposite unto that evil which is in the seed of the Serpent. That evill first is subtilty, Genesis 3.1.2. The Serpent was more subtill, &c. 2 Corin. 11.3. The Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty. Therefore the Apostle saith to Elymas, Acts 3.10. O full of all subtilty, and all mischief, &c. Opposite hereunto the Lord puts simplicity, even the simple life of Abel, which breatheth from God and breatheth towards God: So Abel signifies: and this winde or breath is in order to regeneration, John 3.8. The winde bloweth where it listeth, &c. This simple life once Paul li∣ved until Sin by the Law deceived him and slew him, that is, it made him confident and proud upon the righteousnesse of the Law, Rom. 7.9, 10, 11. I was alive without the Law once, &c. 2. The evil in the seed of the Serpent is  an easinesse to commit wickednesse, as the word properly sig∣nifies. Therefore S. Paul saith thus to Elymas the Sorcerer, Acts 13.10. O thou full of all subtilty and full of all mischief, : The enmity opposite hereunto, which the Lord puts into the seed of the woman, is the work of the Law in us, both disco∣vering sin and righteousness to a knowledge of our condemnation for sin, and a sense thereof, whereby our will, and readinesse, and easinesse to commit sin is curb'd, and checkt, and broken in us, and some inclination unto obedience out of fear of Hell, is wrought in us. As the first enmity is Abel, so this second is Sheth, which signifies a positive Law. This Sheth is the Father of Enosh, the miserable and wretched man, as the word signi∣fies: for then men began to call upon the name of the Lord for mercy (as our Translators turn the words, which shall otherwise
render, as Saul or Paul did, Rom. 7.24. O wretched man that I am, &c. Acts 9.11. Behold be prayeth. This no doubt is a blessed en∣mity, and a good preparation for our conversion unto, and our reconciliation with God, Psal. 94.11, 12. The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man that they are vanity: Blessed is the man, &c. and Psal. 119.67. Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now, I have kept thy word, Vers. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. 3. The third evil in the seed of the Serpent is enmity unto all righteousnesse, as Paul saith further unto Elymas, Acts 13.10. Thou enemy of all righteousnesse, &c. And therefore the third en∣mity hereunto opposite is the glad tydings of grace and mercy unto salvation, life and righteousnesse, signified by John The grace of the Lord, which sweetly melts the heart into godly sorrow, & in∣clines it unto the love of all righteousnesse and to serve God free∣ly out of love and good will, Psal. 130.3, 4. If thou Lord shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? but there is forgivenesse with thee that thou mayest be feared. John 4.10. 4. The fourth evil in the seed of the Serpent, is Caput mali, The chief evil, even the son of Satan himself, the son of Perdition. 2 Thes. 2.3. That man of sin to be revealed the son of perdition. And therefore Paul cals Elymas, The child of the Devil, Acts 13.10. And therefore opposite hereunto the Lord puts the great enmity, even Christ the Son of God, working in us to will and to do according to the minde and will of God, and against the lusts and will of Satan. Thus 2 Cor. 5.19. Christ is reconciling the world, &c. Ephes. 2.14. For he is our peace, who hath made both one, &c. and hath broken down the middle wall of partition between us, &c. and in 15, 16, verses, Having abolished in his flesh the enmity even the Law of Commandements, Col. 1.21, 22. And you that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your minde by wicked works, &c. and 2.14. Blotting out the hand-writing of Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, &c. All this is done meritoriously and exemplarily by Christs sufferings for us; but effectually by his spirit, his Crosse and sufferance in us, but most fully when we in the second and new birth are made of one heart and spirit with him, 1 Pet. 4.1. For as much as Christ hath suffered in the flesh, arm your selves with the same minde; for he that hath suffered in the flesh, hath ceased from sin, that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.Obs. 1. Hence we learn, That the only wise God who suffered the man to fall, he well knew how to recover him out of his fall; unlesse the man himself should prove the only obstacle and hin∣drance of his own restitution: Otherwise, no doubt, he had not permitted the man to fall, but that he could and would turn it unto his greater glory, and the greater shame and confusion of the enemy.
The Lord repayes and requites his enemies in their own kind, by an ,Obs. 2. Lege talionis, by rendring them like for like as he did to Adonibezec, and he acknowledgeth it, Judges 1.7. As I have done, so God hath requited me. Thus here the most righteous God puts in an enmity against him, who had first brought in the enmity against and between God and man. Obs. 3. There was no other way to recover and save the fallen man then to breake the inward league and amity between him and the Devil, and so to reconcile the man unto himselfe; for that outward pacification and atonement, which Christ pur∣chased by his death, could not alone and by it self prove availeable unto salvation, without a divorce made, and a deliverance wrought from Satan and his kingdom, and communion with him. Nor could we have had communion with our God again in his spirit, presence and Kingdom without this enmity first wrought and put into the woman and her seed. Agree then with thine adversary; Consent unto the law that it is good. Let us who love the Lord, be like unto him, and he will the more love us: Similitudo est causa amoris. Now wherein should we expresse our love unto him? even by hating sin and iniquity, it is the Prophets exhortation; Ye that love the Lord, see that ye hate the thing that is evill: Psal. 97.10. Such an hater of evill and the evill one, was holy Iob, who had his name from  whence  the word in the text. With allusion hereunto, he speaks unto the Lord, Thou hast reputed me  for thine enemy: as if he should say, thou hast changed my name from  to  Job 13.24. If such enemies we be against the evil, hence it will come to pass that the Lord will put a perfect enmity into us, so that wee shall hate the evill with a perfect hatred; and the seed of the woman shall breake the Serpents head. Axiom. 3. It shall bruise thy head, &c. These words with those following contain the effect of the fuid between the seed of the Serpent and the woman, wherein we must inquire First what is meant by the head: Secondly, what it is to bruise the head. Third∣ly, who it is or what it is that shall bruise it. 1. The word here turned head is  which is the chiefe part of the man or beast, whence the chief of any thing hath the name. In the French Chefe is from  the head. In it all the senses and their instruments the sinewes are centred. This is in the body as a watch-tower whence the watch-man foresees what ever good or evill is to come; whence is the German word haupt, from  to see or foresee; unto this part, the Iudgment is referred: whence to heed or consider hath the name from the head; hence is the direction of the members in their functions: whence Aquinas saith, the two parts of wisdom are to Judge and
Direct▪ And to the members the head administers power of motion and action, whence  strength is from  the head. 2. What is it to bruise the head? The word  that signifies to bruise, may as well be turned to breake, or as Coverdale turns it, to tread down: as LXX Psal. 139.9. . To bruise or breake the head of the Serpent, what is it but to destroy and marre that whereby the Old Serpent is most mischievous; for there is no head above the head of a Serpent, saith the wiseman. Ecclus. 25.5. Or as the Vulgar Latin, nequius more wicked then the head of the Serpent, as that wherein his main Subtilty and strength lies; And being himselfe Caput reproborum, the head of all reprobate and wicked men, whom he directs; as the head its members; and acts in them, and gives them courage and strength, and makes them to do his lusts; which is no other than his dominion and workmanship in men. To bruise or breake or tread down this head, must be a work of very great wisdom and power; let us therefore inquire who or what that is which bruiseth it. 3. It shall bruise thy head. The Pronoun , which we ren∣der, it, is used to signifie either person or thing. Howbeit the word in Moses writings is ordinarily written  with  but read  with , whence it is, that the Old Latin Translation with Hierom, read the Text, Ipsa conteret, Shee shall break thine head; which they refer to the woman. But the Hebrew Text evidently refers the act of bruising or breaking the Serpents head, unto  the seed, which is of the Masculine gender, and so it must be read . And although  seed in the Greek be Neuter, yet the LXX here use , either under∣standing the person of Christ, He shall bruise thy head; or else referring to  seed, which is Masculine: and so it will prove the same with our translation; It shall bruise thy head. Howbeit, because there hath been a different reading & that in the Hebrew text, as appears by Hierom and the vulgar Latin  and  Ipse and Ipsa, He and Shee; nothing must be lost, we shall finde, that here is a truth in both. 1. The holy seed He, that is, Christ, shall bruise or break the Serpents head. 2. She, that is the pure minde and understanding of the Woman, the Church, by vertue of Christ the holy seed working in her, she also bruiseth & break∣eth the Serpents head. Thus ye read both: the former, Rom. 16.20. The God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly. 2. The later; This Woman compasses the Man, Jer. 31.22. The Lord hath created a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compasse a man; and brings him forth, John 16.21, 22. 1 Cor. 11.8, 11. And where∣as the first seed of the Woman is disobedience unto God, this seed, by the enmity, becomes opposite unto Satan, who first be∣gat it, as they say, the poyson of the Basilisk darted back upon it, destroyes the Serpent it self; as David slew Goliath with his
own Sword; The wicked which it a sword of thine, Psal. 17.13. Thus wrath and fiercenesse is the seed of the Woman, and by it Men work not the righteousnesse of God, James 1.20. but give place to the Devil, Ephes. 4.26, 27. But when men are angry with themselves and sin not, then they give not place to the Devil. And thus the Woman breaks the Serpents head and kingdom, as the Serpent had formerly broken the kingdom and dominion of God in Man, Esay 26.5, 6. The lofty City he layeth it low, &c. Zach. 10.5. They shall he as mighty men, which tread down their enemies in the mire of the streets in the battel, and they shall fight, because the Lord is with them, &c. As for reason of this point; for this end the Son of God was revealed , that he might dissolve the works of the Devil. When he ascended up on high, he received gifts for men, even for the re∣bellious; which cannot be meant of Rebels against God, but such as resist and rebel against Satan, whom they had before obeyed: thus Hezekias is commended for rebelling against the King of Assyria, 2 Kings 18.7. who signifies him who goes about seeking whom he may devour. And God, his Angel, and his Prophet Esay assisted him. Obs. 1. This may give us a view of the present evil world, which, S. John tels us, lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. The Greek words are, , lies in the wicked one, or in the Devil. Thus we understand Ephes. 2.2. That the Prince of the air workes in the children of disobedience. Thus when ye read of Nahash the King of the Ammonites; what understand we mystically but the Serpent, that's Nahash, bearing rule over the populacy by his feed in them, their secret sins that is, . I know not how truly the Devil spake to our Saviour Luke 4.6. All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them; for that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it. For certain it is, that the Rulers of the world are too usually governed not by the wisdom of God, but by worldly policy and wisdom, which is earthly, sensual, and devilish: And therefore our Saviour calls the Devil The Prince of this world. The same is signified by laish, Judges 18.7. They came to Lish, and saw the people that were therein, how they dwelt carelesse, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet and secure, &c. This is the government of the whole world, untill the enmity restrain men, and they through the power of the stronger one resist the Devil. If there be no stronger one, if no enmity restraining, what re∣mains but that Dan come, viz. The judgement of God to their destruction. Obs. 2 Behold here a summary or breviate of the law of God the father, as also of the Gospell of Jesus Christ, both couched together closely in a very few words. 1. The Law, that's signified by the enmity, Ephes. 2.15. having
abolished in his flesh the enmity, even The law of Commandements. This, God the Father puts between the Serpent and the woman and their respective seeds; This was figured by Saul a turbulent man; and the Law is turbulent, where ever it comes, and therefore, 1 Samuel 14.47. Whithersoever he turned himselfe, he vexed them, that's the property of the law, to be a vexer, to provoke and fret, or as the Hebrew word there,  signifies, he condemned them, which is the work of the Law; the letter is the ministry of condemnation 2 Cor. 3. It is not said, that Saul overcame them; No, the law is weak, and while we are under the Law, we are weake with it; as it is said, that the people under Saul, followed him trembling. 1 Sam. 13.6.7. The Law is as a weak purger; it serves onely for a preparative, it provokes and stirs the humour, but it's not able to purge it out; that's the work of the stronger one: Rom. 8.3. What the law could not doe in that it is weake, &c. 2. The Gospell that's signified by the holy seed breaking the Serpents head. This, Saul the figure of the Law, could not do; This was left for the spirituall David, 2 Sam. 22.38.39.40.41. I have pursued mine enemies and destroyed them. &c. this is indeed the worke of the Gospell which is therefore said to be the power of God to Salvation, Rom. 1. Therefore when the Angels brought the glad tydings unto the shepherds that watched over their flock by night, they sung glory to God on high, on earth peace  to men of good will, Hominibus bonae Voluntatis as the Vulgar Latin constantly reads it, and diverse of the Latin and Greek Pathers; To these whom the enmity or Law of God the Father, and his grace (John) hath made willing, Christ the holy seed the power of God is promised to breake the Serpents head. Unto such, the true Joshua preaches his Gospell Joshua. 10. Set your feet in the necks of these Kings, [the ruling and reigning sins] &c. Thus when the Disciples, Luke. 10.17. brought our Lord an account of their embassy, that the devills were subject unto them through his name; I beheld Satan, saith he, as lightning fall from heaven, even the spiritual wickedness in heavenly things is subdued to the power, which Christ gives through his Gospel; and he adds, I give you power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Obs. 3. The fallen man is of one mind with the Old Serpent, called the Devill and Satan. The Serpent hath corrupted his mind from that simplicity that is in Christ. 2 Cor. 11.2.3. so that he now walkes according to the Prince of the power of the air, Ephes. 2.2. Obs. 4. The holy seed is not promised in the Gospell as a cover of sin, but as a conquerer of sin, as one who should subdue and breake the power of it. The antient Jewes had a saying; that the Messias should be  a man of propitiation, a man who should make atonement for transgression; which yet may as well
be rendred a man of purging and purifying from sin, Psal. 65.4. As for our transgressions, , thou shalt purge them away; and 79.9.  purge a way our sins for thy names sake. Nor is the Gospell the glad tydings onely of remission and pardon of sin; but of taking a way the sins of the world, Iohn. 1.29. behold the Lambe of God which taketh away the sins of the world. And although they be pronounced blessed whose sins are covered, Psal. 32.2. it is to be understood of them, who have no guile in their Spirits: no subtilty of the Serpent corrupting their minds, but they are upright in heart, vers. 11. otherwise the Prophet denounces a woe to them who cover with a covering that is not of Gods Spirit, Esay. 30.1. 1 Iohn. 1. If we confesse our sins, he is faithfull and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all our unrighteousnes. Obs. 5. Note here how mighty a power is communicated unto the Sons of men, even so great as to overcome and tread under foot the great enemie of mankinde: The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly Rom. 16.20. Obs. 6. Hence it followes, that Non datur summum malum; Although there be a chief good, which is God himself, yet there is not a chiefe evill. For the Lord reserves a power in himself and for his Church, to subdue iniquity, Esay. 27.1. The Lord shall punish Leviathan the piercing Serpent, even Leviathan that crooked Serpent, &c. Though the wicked one be as the raging sea whose waves cast up myre and dirt, Esay. 57. yet the Lord sayth to it, hither shall thou come and no further. Obs. 7. The woman the Church through the enmity against the Serpent, bruiseth, yea, breaketh his head. What else is meant by Jael, Judges 4. But the Woman the Church, the pure and holy Thoughts Ascending from corporal to spiritual things, from earthly to heavenly? whereby Sisera [Visio equi] the brut∣ish reluctancy stirred up by Jabin, the serpentine Wisdom is sub∣dued and brought under: So that we are no more like the Horse and Mule without understanding; but instructed by the Divine Wisdome, and taught in the way wherein we should go, Psal. 32.8.9. The like we may understand by that woman, Judg. 9.53.54. And that wise Woman, even the wisdom it self, 2 Sam. 20.16, &c. which causeth the head of Sheba the son of Bichri to be cut off. What is Bichri, but the first-born, the son of Perdi∣tion, who begets even Sheba the Seven capital sins which cause us to revolt and become rebellious against the true spiritual David? And the like may be meant by Judith who cut of the head of Olofernes, Jud. 13. Obs. 8. This dscovers a grand imposture and deceit of the subtill Serpent, wherewithall he beguiles the Sons of men; That Prince of the power of the air, that Spirit workes and rules in the Sons of disobedience Ephes. 2.2. The hearts of men are in∣flamed
with the burning concupiscence, as the fiery Serpents destroyed the Israelltes, Numb. 21.6. They conceive mischief and bring forth iniquity, they hatch the Cockatrice Eggs and weave the Spiders Web, Esay 59.4, 5. Their poyson is as the poyson of a Serpent, like the deaf Adder that stoppeth her ears, Psal. 58.4, 5. Yea, in a word, they are Serpents and generations of Vi∣pers: ye though the old Serpent, whose brood they are, and who exercises daily his enmity in them, he perswades them and they believe it, That the holy seed of the Woman hath broken the Serpents head in them, yea, that all that victory that Christ hath obtained over Satan, is imputed unto them, and is as really and truly theirs as if they themselves had wrought it in their own per∣sons. If men inquire into a ground of this & would know a proof of it, all that they can say, is, They believe it so to be, that is, they imagine it. And what will not self-love believe? Quae volumus, facile credimus. Thus the man conceives himself to be saved by acts imagined without him, and that the whole work is done to his hand, when yet in truth the man is lost, utterly lost. For meane time the Serpents head is yet unbroken, the sin unmorti∣fied in these men. And Satan wins infinitely more, By this after-game then he lost by the former. Repr. 1. Who pretend infirmity and weaknesse, when yet the power of God, the holy seed, is ready to break the Serpents head in them. Repr. 2. Those who exceedingly magnifie the power of Christ the holy seed, that he breaks the head of the Serpent when it is yet whole in them. Repr. 3. Who damp their own and others endeavours with opinion of impossibility of doing that which is here promised that it shall be done. Exhort. Be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, Ephes. 6. Means. Use that power thou hast. The Lord hath not given that for nothing. By exercising bodily strength, the man growes stronger, much more by exercise of spiritual strength. Pray to the Lord to put the enmity between thee and the Serpents seed. Pray for that innocent harmlesse Abels life, which must live and speak again, Heb. 11.4. He being dead yet speaketh. This enmity must proceed, as also the Law and the grace of God that brings salvation, Tit. 2.11. The grace of God that brings salvation to all men, hath appeared, &c. The holy Apostle observes this method, Rom. 16.19. I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evil: and then follows, and the God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly: And then concludes, by what means this comes to passe in the next words, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Axiom. 4. The Serpent shall bruise his heel. There are who understand this litterally and properly of the Church. But while the Scripture will affoord both a literal and a spiritual meaning, I conceive, it is not safe to appropriate it unto one. Literally then it's true, that the Serpent bruises or wounds the heel, and lies in wait in the way, Gen. 49.17. I believe, the spiri∣tual meaning is principally aimed at. Quaere, What is meant by the Heel? What to bruise the Hell? How the Serpent may be said to bruise the Heel? 1. The word in the Hebrew is  which signifies, that well-known part of the Body. Yet not only that, but also the sole of the foot, and the foot-steps. The iniquity of my heels  which Symmachus turns , Psal. 49.6. that is, the conver∣sation, the life; and Psal. 56.6. They observe  my steps. So we say, Insistere vestigiis to walk in ones footsteps, that is, to fol∣low one. So Rom. 4.12. To walk in the steps of Abrahams faith, 1 Pet. 2.21. Hence by Metaphor, because he Heel and the Foot-sole is the extream or last part of the Body, as the Head is the first, the word is used to signifie the last part of any thing, Psal. 119.33. I will keep it  unto the end; and Verse 112. I inclined my heart to keep thy statutes  unto the end. Hence it signifies the Re∣ward, which is wont to be given at the end of the work, Ps. 19.11. In keeping of them there is . Esay 5.23. Who justifie the wicked for reward . The heel of the womans holy seed, or Christ, may be understood to be either 1. Of his Person, or 2. Of his mystical Body. 1. Of his Person, so the Heel of Christ is his humanity. This holds proportion with what the Apostle saith, that The Head of Christ is God.1 Cor. 11. 2. Of his mystical Body; so we may understand the Heel either of the outward man, as the mea∣nest and weakest part of the body of Christ. Or the inward man, that part of the soul, that cleaves vnto the earth or earthly nature. 2. To bruise the heel. The word  which we turn to bruise, it seems to be therefore here used, that it might fit both parts of the Text, the Head of the Serpent, and he Heel of the Womans holy seed. The like ye may observe, 1 Cor. 3.17. If any man defile Gods Temple, him will God destroy. The word in the Greek is the same, ; thus Coverdale turnes the words, The same shall tread down thine head, and thou shalt tread upon his heel. 3. How may the seed of the Serpent be said to bruise the heel of Christ? 1. The heel of Christ is his Humanity; when therefore the Serpent so far prevailed, that he procured him to be put to death, according to the flesh, he bruised his heel, 1 Pet. 3.18.2. The heel of his mystical body. 1. In regard of the outward man, the meanest and weakest of his fellowers; Deut. 25.18. A∣malek smote the hindmost. 2. In regard of the inward man, the
heel is that part that cleaves unto the earth or earthly nature; and is therefore prone and easie to slide and fall. This heel the Ser∣pent observes and bruises. In the necessities of the body, the soul must needs send forth the natural desires for supply of them. Such are the desires of earing and drinking. These, and such as these, are the heel of the inward man; which the Serpent observes. He observed these in our Lord, Matth. 4.3. He had fasted forty dayes; all that time ye hear not of the Tempter: but when he hungred, Verse 2. then the Tempter came unto him. This the Apostle was aware of, 1 Cor. 7.5. Give your selves to fasting and prayer, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinencie. It is lawful to have a care and to provide for the supply of meat, and drink and raiment, &c. yet this very care endangers us to fall into temp∣tation and a snare, 1 Tim. 6.9. Reason may be, 1. In regard of the Womans godly seed, that it might be continually exercised and be watchful. Virtus languet sine adversario. And therefore your adversary the Devil goes about, &c. 2. In regard of the Ser∣pent, his innate Subtilty and malice. Who, since he is fallen from all lawfull power of commanding and compelling, Esay 14. he now acts by craft and cunning, 2 Cor. 2.11. by devises and wiles, Ephes. 6.11. The wiles of the Devill, 2 Cor. 11.3. And therefore he setts upon the weakest, He beguiled Eve through his subtiltie. This discovers what they are, whose seed and whose children, who reproach the steps, the conversation of Gods Saints. It is the Serpents work, To bruise and tread upon the heel, and his children, Serpents like himselfe, as our Saviour calls them Matth. 23. who reproach the wayes of Christ, and his people, who slander and reproach the foot-steps of Gods annointed, Psal. 89.51. who cast aspersions upon the pure religion and undefiled. I doubt not but there is a religion that is accounted pure, yet is defiled. A generation pure in their own eyes, yet are not cleansed from their dung, Prov. 30.12. Yet there is a religion, that is pure, yet is accounted defiled, by the Serpent and his seed, who casts aspersions upon it without desert, as a man may receive a dash in his journey. Thus the Pharisees of old, whom our Lord calls the Children of the Devill, Ioh. 8. dealt with our Lord, bringing all false testimonies against him. And as they dealt with him, they have dealt and yet deal with his followers, Rom. 3.8. They declare evidently whose seed they are. This discovers the nature of the Serpent, he is a slanderer, he is a deceiver, he is a Supplanter. Debort. Let no man beguile you of your reward,  the end of all your labours, Col. 2.  is properly to defraud and deprive him that runs a race, or strives for Mastery, of that reward
that is due unto him, when he has finished his course. The Serpent In malis separat finem à mediis, in good things separates the end from the meanes: It was his first plot upon our first parents. Whereas the Lord had said, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die; he Subtilly perswades them, that, though they eat of that Tree, yet they should not die, and so separates the end from the meanes. In bonis separat media à fine, in good things he separates the meanes from the end. These meanes which the Lord hath ordained as necessary for the ob∣taining of the everlasting life, the Serpent perswades men that the everlasting life may be obtained without them. Our Lord saith by the Apostle, If we die with him, we believe that we shall live with him, Rom. 6.8. and 2 Tim. 2.11, 12. Nay, saith the Serpent, Only beleive and thou shalt live. He perswades us that we need not die with Christ. By this meanes, He perswades men, that, though they continue in their sinnes, and uncleannesses, yet they shall obtain the everlasting life. Thus by his false Apo∣stles, he had perswaded the Galatians, that they must be circum∣cised and keep the law, and that faith working by love was to no purpose. The holy Apostle, not ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. he tells them, Gal. 5.2.—8. If they be circumcised, Christ shall profit them nothing—that neither circumcision availes any thing nor uncircumcision, but faith that worketh by love, &c. Exhort. Look to our footing. Whereas the Scripture tells us eve∣ry where, that the holy Citie is reserved for those who are holy and righteous, and obey the truth, Esay, 26.12. and that he who Believes not, or obeyes not the Son () shall not see life, Ioh. 3.36. And S. John having described the holy Citie, Revel. 21. ver. 27. he tells us who shall bee excluded from thence, and shall not enter into it. Whereas our Saviour tells us what the things are that defile a man, Math. 15.19.20. Wheras the Scripture tells us all this; and many thereupon have believed and en∣deavoured, through the power of the holy Spirit, to purge them∣selves from all these, 2 Cor. 7.1. The Serpent fearing lest all men should so do, he layes wait at the heel. He perswades too many that this is Supervacaneum opus, a needless business; That Christ has long since wrought the purging of our sins; that its impossible to be purged from them; that there is a Purgatory here∣after that will cleanse us, which indeed must needs follow if their former assertion were true. Meanes. Keep in the way. The Serpent lies in wait by the way side: In the way there is no evil occurrence, Psal. 119.165. Great peace have they who love thy law, and they have no stumbling-block. The danger is not in the way of Gods Commandements; but they have sharpned their tongues like a Serpent. They have pur∣posed
to overthrow my goings, they have spread a Net by the way side. Beloved! I beseech ye let us consider advisedly and timely the great and imminent hazard and danger of our soules, how subtill the Serpent is in striking at the heal, at the end of all. What great folly, what a disparagement and disgrace it will be to be deceived. What an irrecoverable loss, when we have done all, to lose all. Have yee suffered so many things in vaine, if it be yet in vaine? Gal. 3. Take heed of the iniquity of our heels, Psal. 49.6. The Prophet propounds this as a riddle to mankinde, after a long preface in the words before; Why should I feare in the evill day? that is, what then can terrifie me? What then can make me secure, In the great day of recompense both of good and evill? An hard Pro∣blem, and that which concernes us all, and every soul. The Prophet answers it. That which will make me fear, is 1. Not povertie: The Judge is not corrupted with gifts. It is, 2. Not a low condition and state of life. God is no respecter of Per∣sons. It is 3. Not the malice either of Advocates or witnesses. The Judge with whom we have to do, knowes the hearts of all men. It is 4. Not the power of adversaries; The Judge fears no man. What is it? what else but the iniquity of my heeles? the iniquity that continues with me till the end of my dayes. If that continue with me in that day, it will be impossible to escape. On the contrary, what can make us secure and fearless in that day? not riches, not nobility, not diligence of Advocates, not power of friends, what else but faith in Christ, and the obedience of faith? What else but perseverance in holiness? What else but a pure heart whereby we may see God? This comforted Heze∣kiah, 2 King. 20.3. This also will comfort us. By this we shall then break the Serpents Head, when he goes about to bruise our Heel. Genesis 3.22. ANd the Lord God said, Behold the man is become as one of us knowing good and evill.] Most men commonly un∣derstand these words Ironically, The man is become as one of Us: as upbrayding unto man, Satans lying Speech, ver. 5. Ye shall be as Gods knowing good and Evill. So Vatablus, Piscator, Diodate, The Glosse of the French Bible, and others. But whether it be safe to attribute unto the most gratious and mercifull God so tart an ironie, I leave it to the consideration of Godly men. Surely such a kind of Mockery might seem to savour of an , as if the good God rejoyced at the miserable mans calamity; who yet fell thereinto not of himself, not sim∣ply out of pride or reflexion upon himselfe and his own excellen∣cy,
as the Angels are said to have fallen; and therefore God laid not hold on them:Hebr. 2.26. but man fell not without a Tempter but was overreached by the crafty & false perswasion of the Serpent, more subtil then any beast of the field; by which subtilty he beguiled Eve, 2 Cor. 11. And therefore the mercifull God pitied the deceived man: promised him victory over the Tempter, ver. 15. confirmed his blessing to the woman, ver. 20. That she should be the Mother of all those who live the naturall life, and of all those also who live the Spiritual life, yea, the mo∣ther of Christ himselfe; He clothed them with skins of dead beasts figuring mortification and conformity unto Christs death; whose innocent life was slain in Adam;Revel. 13.8. (Then began the Lambe to be slain from the foundation of the world.) This garment they wore;Ephes. 4.22. and thereby devested themselves of the Old man; and put on the new man Christ,Esay 61.10. Rom. 13.13, 14. and the garments of salvation. For Adam was renewed and born again. See Gen. 5.3. Now is it probable, that the good God should sour all this his love and mercy with derision and mockery? How otherwise then shall we understand these words? Thus, The Lord God sayd, Behold the man  fuit, he hath been as one of us knowing good and evill. He hath been as one of us even in the image of God, Gen. 1.26.27. and according to that image, he hath known good, loved it and imbraced it; and he hath known evill, hated it and shunned it. For so God knowes good and evill. Scire bonum non est bonum; A meer abstract knowledge of good, is not good; And 'tis as true, that Scire malum non est malum, neither is the abstract knowledge of evill, evill: But words of knowledge and sense imply sutable affections. Man knew good and evill, as God knowes them; and loved the good and hated the evill; as God and His Christ love Righteousness,Psal. 45.7. and hate iniquity. But hereby the Lord implies a racite disparity to that estate wherein the man now is, knowing the good, but not loving it; knowing the evill, but not hating it; at the best, in that condition which is described by the Poet. —Video meliora probóque Deteriora sequor— Lest therefore the man, in this depraved disposition, should taste and eat of the tree of life; and by a  an ill habit of mind digest it into disobedience, and continue therein, It seemed meet unto Gods fatherly Goodness to send the man out of Paradise,Gen. 3.23. to till the earth; Because he was taken out of it (so  is expressed, which otherwise is left out in our Translation) untill he hath subdued his earth; overcome the evill with good∣ness; and by the sword of the Spirit, which is the living and powerfull word of God,Hebr. 4.12. sharper then any two-edged sword, he hath mortified the deeds of his body, that he may live. And so
the man becomes like unto God, again; as the Lord here saith,  fuit, the man hath been as one of us knowing good and evill. GEN. 4.1. I Have gotten a man from the Lord.] Word for word, I have gotten the man the Lord. Wherein appears the Etymologie of Cains name: She bare  and said, , I have gotten or possessed the Man the Lord; so Martin Luther in his transla∣tion, Ich hab den man den Herrn; I have the Man the Lord. Thus also the Low Dutch translation, which followes that of Luther. And we read a note upon the place in both, which speaks thus: That is, God be praised, I have here the Lord the Man, that seed, which shall break the head of Satan or the Serpent: this shall do it. She flattered her self, as if she had already gotten that , the Messias, that God-man promised, Chap. 3.15. Miles Coverdale also seems to have been of the same judgement with Martin Luther herein, citing Acts 17.31. in the margent of his translation, which is also extant in the Low Dutch. He shall judge the world in Righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained. The Hebrew words  will not bear our English translation, without some force upon them: No, nor Pagnins. For  tis true signifies  cum, with: and so Pagnin turns it here: But it then only is to be rendred with, when it is joyned with a Verb Intransitive, or in Hithpael, according to these examples following, which I desire the Rea∣der to compare, Gen. 5.22. and 34.7. Exod. 1.1. But otherwise when  comes between two Nouns, it joyns them together by apposition: as the Reader may be pleased to compare these examples, Jos. 24.3. Ezech. 4.1. of which sort is that of the Text under our inquiry, Gen. 4.1. as also the second verse.Gen. 4.2. As our Mother Eve was herein deceived; so likewise are and have been many of her children, who conceive, that the spiritual and hea∣venly man is born in them, not considering that, That is not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and afterward that which is Spiritual. The first man is of the earth earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven, 1 Cor. 15.46, 47. This is the condition of thousands in this fantastick age so sub∣ject to imagination. How many think themselves extream hap∣py, when yet, of all other, they are the most miserable? they imagine themselves redeemed from sin, and most free men, when yet they are arrant slaves and vassals unto their sins. They have a name and think themselves alive, when yet they are truly dead. What an high opinion did the Corinthians conceive of themselves,1 Cor. 4.7, 8. that they were free, that they reigned as Kings; as many flatter
themselves at this day; that they are made Kings and Priests un∣to God the Father;Rev. 1.17. and so boast of a false gift. Some compare this Church to that of Laodicea, which is a self-justifying people; who say, they are rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; when yet they are wretched and miserable, and poor, and blinde, and naked. So that the wise man may well cry out, O wicked imagination,Ecclus 37.3. whence camest thou in to cover the earth with deceit? The Apostle,Gal. 4.22. to undeceive us, tells us of two births, which have their proportionable lives. And the first of these, the earthly, in every man must precede the heavenly which is the second; Hagar must conceive before Sarah; Ismael must be born before Isaac; The children of the bond-woman must be brought forth before the children of the free-woman, where these two births are not known, nor the order of them, dangerous mistakes arise from self-love proper to the first birth. And because the Apostle speaking of himself, and others with him who had attained unto the second birth, and lived the spiritual life, We, saith he, as Isaac was, are the children of the promise; we are not children of the bond-woman, but of the free; Hereupon too many, out of an over-weening opinion of themselves, and par∣tial self-love, put themselves into the number, because this and other like Scriptures are fitted not to their conditions, but to their mouthes; whereas indeed it is much to be feared, they are yet children of the bond-woman. As at this day the wilde people who descend from Ismael, call themselves Saracens, as if they were the children of Sarah; whereas indeed they are Is∣maelites and Hagarens, the progeny of Ismael and Hagar. Would God it were not so with many of us! For we have seen, that they of Corinth, of Sardis and Laodicea have been grossely deceived in their own estates; And why may not we fear the like in our selves? It's a dangerous thing to erre in a matter of so great and neer concernment. That we should think our selves born of the free-woman, and consider not, that there is in us, by nature, a kind of wildness and looseness, which we oftentimes mistake for the true freedom. It is no shame to acknowledge this; For Zephar tells Job truly,Job 11.12. that this is the condition of all mankind. Ye have for that purpose in Job the description of the wilde Ass. Such was the estate of the first child born to Abraham of the bond-woman Hagar.and 39.5.—8. As soon as she had conceived, she thought she should bring forth the seed of promise, as Eve also thought. But her son proved  a wilde man,Gen. 16.2. a man like a wilde Ass. This estate pleaseth us well; because it is easily brought off to corrupt nature by the least temptation. And therefore Abra∣ham, in the type,Gen. 17.18. is said to have prayed unto the Lord, that Ismael might live; O that Ismael might live in thy sight! And
this is the desire of many, who know no better. But mark what the answer or God is to this prayer of Abraham; Sarah thy wise shall bear thee a son indeed, and thou shalt call his name Isaac. And when we have such a desire as Abraham bad, let us remember Gods answer unto Abraham; That the free woman [the Beliefs signified by Sarah, shall bring forth; and then we shall be children not of the bond-woman, but of the free. And let us take heed, lest, while we are yet in our fallen estate, we mistake not our selves as our mother did, who thought she had gotten the man the Lord, when indeed she brought forth Cain, who, by corruption, was of the wicked one, 1 Ioh. 3.12. In processe of time,] At the end of dayes.Gen. 4. Ver. 3. So the Translators render it out of the Hebrew in the margent. The words are  A fine dierum, that is, after the end of the year. For so  is taken for a year, and so rendred in our last transla∣tion, 1 Sam. 1.3. This man went up out of his City yearly. The Mar∣gent out of the Hebrew hath from year to year. So Exod. 13.10. where in the Hebrew it is from dayes to dayes, our translation hath it, from year to year. This is clear Levit. 25. when the Lord hath set the time for redemption of an house , which is turn'd a year, ver. 29. then ver. 30. if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, the word is . So in many other places. I contend not for this which is well known. But by this phrase, At the end of the year, Moses points at those Offerings which the two Brethren brought; which though of different kindes, yet both Eucharistical, Oblations of thanksgiving unto God for his bles∣sings all the year past. And this kinde of service they had learn'd no doubt of their Father out of the minde of God, according to Ecclus. 17. For at the same time of the year the Lord appointed afterward the Feast of Ingathering, Exod. 23.16. In the end of the year, when thou hast gathered in thy labours out of the field. The like ye read, Exod. 34.22. in the Moneth Ethanim, which answered in part to our September, when commonly the fruits of the year are gathered in and laid up. About the same time the Heathen themselves observed the like custome of Sacrificing, and upon the like occasion, whether moved thereto by prescript of long tradition, or taught this thank∣fulnesse by their Learned men, who many of them had seen the writings of Moses; or inwardly instructed by the light in them. For since the Apostle reproves the Gentiles for their unthankful∣nesse to God, Rom. 1.20, 21, 22. He supposeth that their know∣ledge of God might be improved to due gratitude unto God. The Philosopher saith as much, , that even nature it self teacheth to offer Sacrifice. Unto which of these causes I may refer it. I know not. But surely the same Philosopher in the Eighth Book of his Ethicks,
Chap. 11. tells us, that ancient Sacrifices and conventions of the people were wont to be , after the gathering in of their fruits. At the same time of year they kept their Feast of Tabernacles, as appears by the two places in Exodus before named. When they rejoyced before the Lord and praised him for his goodness. To the same most ancient custome is to be referred what we often read of the joy in Harvest, Esay 9.3. and like expression, Chap. 16.10. Jer. 25.30. and 48.33. There remains in many parts of this Nation some mimical semblance of that most ancient and pious custome, expressed in rude and disorderly yawling, and hooping, and hallowing, which yet will be a witnesse against us of our great unthankfulnesse.
SERMON II.SERM. II. The Law and the Gospel preached unto Cain. IF thou do well,Gen. 4.7. shalt thou not be accepted? But if thou dost not well, sin lies at the door. And it shall be subject unto thee, and thou shalt rule over it. The 6 and 7 verses are a Sermon of the best Preacher, even the Lord himself unto Cain the worst Auditor. In the words we have an Expostulation or reprehension, Vers. the Sixth. Exhortation. The Exhortation is to do well; which he perswades by First, Propounding the effect of the duty which he exhorts unto, shalt thou not be accepted? Secondly, The effect of the contrary, if thou do not well, sin lies at the door. Thirdly, The limitation of this effect, it shal be subject unto thee. Fourthly, The adjunct dominion, thou shalt rule over it. So that ye perceive, I prefer the Marginal reading before that in the Text. And I shall shew reason for it when I come to handle it; mean time we have in the words these divine truths. 1. The Lord saith unto Cain, if thou do well, shalt thou not be accepted? 2. If thou do not well, sin lieth at the door. 3. The desire of sin shal be subject unto Cain. 4. Cain shall rule over sin. The Lord saith unto Cain, if thou do well, shalt thou not be accepted? Wherein let us inquire Whats here meant, First, by doing well, Secondly, by being accepted. First, The word we render to do well or to do good is  which is of very large signification; for we may do good or do well, as well by passion as action, by suffering according to the will of God, as by doing; as well by omitting what God for-bids, as by doing what he Commands. Thus David concludes Psal. 15. which hath more negatives than affirmatives, he that doth these things, &c. so, Ezech. 18.5.—9. And the Ten Commend∣ments to be done, containe most things to be left undone.
This doing good, or doing well supposeth in Cain a belief in the Gospell preach'd to his parents;Gen. 3.15. Matth. 7.11. 1 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12, 13. whereof, by their innate care and ordinary providence, he could not be ignorant, though they were evill. Which belief and obedience unto the Gospell, and doing well, are all one and the same thing; as S. Peter Summes up the duties of the Gospell. Thus to believe and obey,Gal. 5.6. with 6.15. and 1 Cor. 7.19. Rom. 10.16. Mark 16.16. and their contraries are taken one for the other; as may appear by many Scriptures. And where∣as S. Mark hath these words, He that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned; The antient Church of Christ hath left us the same conditions onely made up into Obedience and disobedience; They that have done good shall go into life everlasting; and they that have done evill, into everlasting fire. This is the Catholike faith, which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved. Thus if Cain out of belief, do well the Lord saith, he shall be accepted. And what is it, Secondly, To be accepted? The word is  which is a con∣cise and short expression comprehending 1. Pardon of sin; and so if thou do well, thou shalt have remission and pardon of thy sin. So Chal. Par. And the word  is so used. 2. It notes elevation or lifting up, viz. of the face, as with boldness and con∣fidence; and so if thou do well, thou shalt lift up thy Countenance with boldness, which was fallen before for shame vers. 5.6. the fruit of sin, What fruit had ye of those things, whereof ye are now ashamed, Rom. 6. Thirdly, It signifies receiving, viz. of what was desired be∣fore; So Hierom renders the word Recipies, thou shalt receive. And so if thou do well, thou shalt be heard of God, Nonne si rectè feceris, litabis? So Castellio renders the word, if thou do well, thou shalt obtain acceptance, of thy sacrifice, and a blessing, as Psal. 24.5. As for  which we render interrogatively, shalt thou not be accepted? It may as well be turned by way of positive assertion as an Adverb of affirming, certè, Surely, or truly thou shalt be accepted. The reason why, if Cain did well, he should be pardoned his sin, and should lift up his face with Confidence, and should be accepted, may be Considered from that naturall Connexion that is between doing good and receiving good. 2. From that tacite Covenant between God and man. 3. The good will of God toward man, even the sinfull man. Iohn 3.16. Even the Heathen have inbred in their hearts, this thought of God, that it is Dei proprium servare et benefacere, that is, it is Gods property to save from evill and do good. Since therefore it is
also the end that God, and also his creatures aime at, to assimilate and render others like unto themselves, this the Lord aimed at to promote in Cain, as indeed in all men an endeavour to do well, and do good, as also to eschew evill. And thus the Lord acted according to his property endeavouring to preserve Cain from doing evill, and to perswade him to do good, and so to be like unto God. Obs. 1. That as sin is a burden and that a great and heavy one, as Cain complaines, vers. 13. So the remission and par∣don of the sin, is the lifting up the burden of our sin, and so easing us of it. As the Apostle Rom. 4.7. Interprets the word, Psal. 32.1. Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, or are lifted up, and removed, and so the sinner eased. For as evill doers are threatned, as an incestuous person, Levit. 20.17.19. He shall bear his iniquitie; So they that do well, the Lord beares their iniquitie, Esay. 53.11. And takes away their sinns from them, Rom. 11.26. Obs. 2. Hence we learne, what procures acceptance even with God himself, what else but doing well? If thou do well shalt thou not be accepted, Psal. 15. Esay. 1.16.—20. Ezech. 18.1.—9. Dan. 4.27. Mich. 6.6.7.8. If this be well considered, it will cause us to set a price and value upon well-doing and upon good works, which of late have been under valued and decryed under the names of Popery, Arminianisme &c. Are they not the end of our creation Ephes. 2.10. are they not the end of our redemption? Tit. 5.14. Obs. 3. It is not faith alone in what Christ hath done, but faith in the power of God, the promised seed Gen. 3.15. and patient continuance in well doing, faith in Christ the power of God, faith working by love, faith, that is, the obedience of faith, that procures acceptance at Gods hands. Obs. 4. What that is which, upon the best grounds, makes a man bold and confident and to lift up his head; what else but doing well, doing what is good in the sight of God and good men? This is also the meaning of the phrase in the Text, lifting up, if thou do well: So Zophar truly tells Job. 11.13.4.5. and the same Counsel is given him by Eliphaz, Job. 22.23.—26. the ground of that boldness in Peter and Iohn, Act. 4.13. Obs. 5. Though Cain were a Murderer a fatricide, one who killed his own, his only Brother, though he were so wicked that he was a leader and way-guide to wickedness, Jud. 11. Yet there was no absolute decree of reprobation, no not against Cain, from eternity; since God himself saith, if thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted as well? Obs. 6. Even Cain wrathfull and discontented Cain yet knew
what was good, and what it was to do good. Mich. 6.8. He hath shewn thee O Adam what is good, &c. This the Lord shews to Adam and his disobedient children. Obs. 7. There is a reward of well doing. Bene erit justo, Esay 3.10. Say to the righteous that it shall be well with him. Obs. 8. Here is a ground of faith in God the Father, viz. Ex∣perience and observation of his providence in the world, in that he doth good unto the good, Acts 14.16. He lest not himself without witnes, , &c. in that he doth good, Heb. 11.6. He that cometh unto God must believe that he is; and that he is a rewarder of them who diligently seek him. Axiom 2. The Lord saith to Cain, If thou do not well, sin lies at the door. What it is, not to do well, is known by the contrary, to do well or do good; as one contrary discovers the other. It remains therefore that we enquire what it meant by Sin. What by Sin lying at the door. 1. The word which we render sin, is  which signifies sometime the sin it self which is the transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. Esay 5.18. Sometime punishment of sin, as Zach. 14.19. Sometime an Oblation for fin. Thus 2 Cor. 5.21. Christ was made sin for us. 2. This sin and punishment of sin is said to be  Cubans ly∣ing down as a Beast doth, Gen. 49.9. Even such a dangerous Beast is sin; whether taken for the transgression of the Law it self, or for the punishment of that transgression: in both senses it is true, that sin lies, 3.  at the door, it is neer at hand, as the phrase is un∣derstock, Mark 13.39. Sin if once committed, it lies at the door of the will, waiting for consent and re-admission. And the pu∣nishment of sin, that lies couchant, and hard at hand after the sin is committed, Deut. 29.20. Object. But does not God justifie the ungodly, Rom. 4.5. How then does he require doing well to procure acceptance, and pu∣nish doing evil? Answ. If we understand Justifying the ungodly in such sense as Prov. 17.15. and 24.24. Esay 5.23. It is a great dishonour to God, to say, He justifies the ungodly. But most true it is, that God justifies the ungodly, that is, he makes an ungodly man just not in Sensu composito, while he is ungodly, but an Sensu diviso, by taking his ungodlinesse from him. Thus he makes a Drunkard, sober, a Lecher, chaste, &c. Thus he justified Abraham, who was before an Idolater, Josh. 4.2. and made him of an Idolater, a worship∣per of the true God. Obs. 1. To omit and not to do what is good, is a sin. There is a sin of omission, or not doing what is good. Our Lord ac∣compts them two evils, Jer. 2.13. to forsake the Fountain of li∣ving
waters, and dig Cisterns, Luke 6.9. Our Lord esteems the omission of curing the impotent man, no lesse a sin than the de∣struction of him. Obs. 2. Hence it follows that sin, that is, the punishment of sin follows the sinner. Sequitur scelestes ultor à tergo Deus. The pu∣nishment of sin enters, where sin goes before, Ezech. 8.5. the Idol of jealousie was in the entry of the North-gate. And Chap. 9.1, 2. At the same Gate the Destroyers enter. Obs. 3. Consider we these two together; The Lord saith, If thou do well, &c. But If thou do not well, &c. Hence it appears, that doing well, or not doing well consists not in offering Sacri∣fice, or not offering Sacrifice. Cain had offered Sacrifice. Obe∣dience is here doing well; and this Obedience is better then Sa∣crifice. And this Obedience is seen in doing well, and ceasing to do evil, 1 Sam. 15.22. And therefore whereas the people had offered many Oblations and performed all kindes of Ceremo∣nial. Services to the Lord, Esay 1. Hee calls them all vain Oblations, &c. Doing well did not consist in these; therefore having rejected all these, He showes wherein consists that doing well that pleaseth him, vers. 16.17. Wash ye, make ye clean, &c. Heb. 10.8.9. And there is the same reason of all our forms of Godliness, preaching, and hearing, and receiving the Sacrament, keeping a Feast or a Fast-day; doing well or not doing well, consists not in these or any of these, but in Obedience to the will of God. Obs. 4. The reason why Cains Sacrifice was not accepted as∣well as Abells, was, that he for matter or manner, or both, had not done well as Abell had done. Axiom. 3. The desire of sin shall be subject unto Cain: word for word  unto thee the desire of it; where a Sup∣plement is necessarily understood which we adde also in the English, unto thee shall be the desire of it, that is, the desire of sin shall be under thee; Vulg. Lat. Sub te erit appetitus ejus, in thy power. The evill concupiscence which allwayes desires to cast thee down, it shall be in thy power, or subject unto thee. We have the like phrase, Gen. 3.16. where the Lord saith to the woman  thy desire shall be to thy Hushand, which the LXX. and Chald. par. render, Thy turning shall be unto thy Husband. And the Vulg. Lat. Sub. viri potestate eris, thou shalt be under the power of thy Husband. So that whatsoever thou shalt desire, it shall be necessary that thou have recourse to him, as the Lord requires in vowes, Numb. 30. So in the Text, unto thee shall be the desire of it, it shall desire thee, and stir thee up to consent unto it; but so, That it shall be turned unto thee, and desire thy consent, So that without thee, it can do nothing. The desire of it shall be subject unto thee. The desire of it shall be subject unto thee, of it; that is; of sin;
whereas our Translatours turn it, unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shallt rule over him. And so they would insinuate un∣to the reader, that the Lord here speakes of Abel, that Abels desire should be unto Cain, and Cain should rule over Abel. But the Lord speakes not one word of Abel; but of sin; For that goes immediately before in the sentence, and to it undoubtedly the word hath reference. So Martein Luther understood the text. So Munster and Castellio, and two or three English translations. Object. Here I know, some will object, that this construction of the Relative, in  and afterward in  is contrary to the Syntax: for  sin is of the Feminine gender, whereas the Relatives are Masculine. To this purpose sounds the Gloss of the French Bible. I answer;  is here of the Masculine gender, not of the Feminine. For whereas words whose gender is doubtfull, are discovered of what gender they are, by the Verb, Adjective, Pronoune, or participle joyned with them, since therefore the Hebrew  is the undoubted Antecedent unto these Relatives, it's evident that here it's Masculine, however elsewhere it may be Feminine: Beside S. Hierom, one of the most learned of all the Fathers, in all the three Originall Tongues, he in his com∣mentary upon the place, affirms, that the word is Masculine. Quest: Heb. in Gen. And S. Austin lib. 15. de Civit. dei. Cap. 7. Shews plainly to what Antcedent the Relative referrs us; Tu dominaberis illius; Num quid fratris? Absit! cujus igitur nisi peccati? Thou shalt rule; Over what? Over thy Brother? O no; over what then, but over Sin? Yea Aben Ezra, in his Com∣mentary on the place judges it absurd to refer the Masculine Relative to any other Antecedent then unto sin. But suppose that the word  were here and elsewhere onely a Feminine, I appeal unto the learned in the Hebrew tongue, whether this kinde of Anomaly of joyning Masculines and Feminines in Grammatical Construction, be not usuall in holy Scripture. But the best proof wherewith to convince the Translatours, or who ever else shall herein defend them, is their own practice, and that in the very words immediatly before; where they make no scruple to joyn  and  sin lieth or lying at the dore. Where if  be Feminine, certainly  is Masculine. And here is the same reason of Syntax in the later Sentence which is in the former. The reason is evident out of the former words: For since the Lord promises reward for well doing; and threatens punishment for evill doing, in all reason and equity there must be a power in man to will the good, and nill the evill. 2. Another reason may be from the great wisdom and goodnes
of God, who albeit he permit sin in the world for exercise and tryall of his own people; as he permitted some of the Canaanites, to remain in the Land, yet he reserves a power, and imparts a power unto man for the subduing of it. Obs. 1. Hence it follows, that there is in man a free principle of well and evill doing, and that even in evill men, as in Cain here. This we finde in Saul making apologie to Samuel for his offering Sacrifice before he came, 1. Sam. 13.11. Obs. 2. This acquaints us with that which we call free will, which is very much mistaken by most men, For true freedom is a power to will and do what is good without any hindrance in him who wills and does it. So that the true liberty imports a releasing from a mans own self-bondage, as his carnall reason; from his false and erroneous principles; from his own lusts where∣unto he was a servant, John. 8. from the law of sin. And being set free from all this bondage, the true libertie is the addicting ones whole selfe, understanding, reason, will, affections, actions, life unto God and his righteousness. This freedom is wrought by the Lord Jesus Christ. Joh. 8.32.36. Rom. 6.17.18. and 8.2. So that Cain according to this Doctrine evident out of Gods word, might do well, or not do well, might do good or evill, yet not have free will, according to the Scriptures. Obs. 3. Hence it appeares that to sin, is a voluntary and free act of man, it is the knowen saying of one of the Antients Pec∣catum si non sit Voluntarium, non est peccatum. Obs. 4. The fallen man is not wholly destitute of all power and all strength, though impotent and weake he be. Surely our Lord knew and knowes best what strength man lost by his fall, and what strength yet temaynes with him, when he describes the man in that parable, Luk. 10.30. fallen amongst theeves who left him  being not quite dead but halfe dead. And therefore our last Translatours much wrong the text and the Christian reader when they turn Rom. 5.6.  when we were yet without strength. For  is not simply without strength; but onely weake, feeble, infirme, or sick as the English Manuscript has it; For he who is said to be weake, is not wholly without strength, Nor can be said to have no strength at all, but only impaired in his strength. For whereas, 1. Cor. 8.7. Their Conscience being  weake is defiled. And Rom. 14.1. , him that is weake in the faith. These words do not imply a total privation of strength in faith and conscience, but only a weaknes of both, and so the Apostle is to be understood when we were weake not wholly without strength. As the V. Lat. turnes it infirme. So Vatablus, so Castellio, so Pagnin, so the French, Spanish, Italian, High and low Dutch Bibles, so Cover∣dale and all our English Translations, except only that of Geneva
and our last Translation. Which for greater conviction of them, ye may take notice, that in most other places they render the same word not without strength, but only weake, as Math. 26.41. The Spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak  1. Cor. 4.10. we are weak , but ye are strong. And 9.22. To the weake I became as weake that I might gain the weake  and elsewhere. But what great injury is done either to the Text or Reader, if we turn the words, when we were without strength? Surely where∣as most men are Proclives à labore ad libidinem, and in the matter of obedience, will rather listen to the ten Spies, who said, we are not able, then to the two, who said, we are well able, Num. 13.30.31. If we render the words we are without strength, who will go about to use that strength which the Scripture, as he reads it, tells him, he has not? Yea hence it comes to pass that he yeilds to all temptations from the world, the flesh and the Devil, and lies down like a great Lubber, and letts all the messengers of Satan buffet him: Why? He has no power to resist them: The Scripture, as he reads it, tels him, he has no strength. Axiom. 4. God saith to Cain, Thou shalt rule over it, That is, over thy sin. Obs. 1. Sin and temptation to sin, is not so unruly, but that Cain if he will do well, may master it. The Lord himself saith, the de∣sire of sin shall be subject unto thee, and thou shalt rule over it. Whence it evidently appears, that there is some power from the Lord even in the fallen man, to subdue his corruptions, and to∣ward the overcoming evil with goodness, Rom. 12. Obs. 2. Learn we hence, that some men are so hardned in their sinful courses, that though God himself preach unto them from Heaven, yet they will not be moved at it, but wilfully and obsti∣nately persist in them. The Lord himself had preached to Cain both the Law and the Gospel, yet he remained in his hardness of heart, and his bloody purpose of killing his Brother; as appears by the sequel of the story. Beloved! I may here take up a sad & serious complaint and la∣mentation over our much preaching and hearing; and our little practice and obedience. They who consider the former, the fre∣quent preaching and much hearing, would judge us of this City, to be the best Christians in the world. They who see the later, the lives and practices, and dealings in the world of many of us may judge rightly that they are the very worst. And this brings a shame upon the profession of Christianity, and causes a neglect in many of resorting to the Congregation, who observe that many place their religion in going to Church and hearing, and especially such or such a precious man. For they ob∣serve also, that he goes to Church an envious person, and returns
from thence an envious person. He who comes into the Assembly a covetous man, he goes out as covetous as he came; he who comes in a Drunkard, goes out a Drunkard. He who resorts to the Assembly a Cain rull of murderous thoughts and purposes, he goes away as arrant a Cain, as resolved a murderer as he came. Hence it is, That as of old, men by reason of abuse, 1 Sam. 2.17. to 45. So many at this day forsake the assembling of them∣selves together. They say of Erasmus, that being here in England, he came to none of our Churches, and being asked his reason, he said, because he observed that men came forth of the Church more proud then they went in. And the truth is, if men be not the better, they are the worse, because they flatter themselves with a form of godlinesse, and with that, which we object to others, the opus operatum; as if the very hearing Gods word made them the better men. Thus ye read of the Whore in the Proverbs, that she strengthens her self in her whoredoms by her form of godliness, Pro. 7.14.15. Reproof. Of those to whom the Lord gives the soveraignty and rule over sin, yet they prostitute themselves, and enslave their soules under the bondage of sin and iniquity. Hence we have a ground of Exhortation to master and rule over our sin. When Abraham had given Hagar into the power of Sarah, Gen. 16.6. she afflicted her and brought her under. And wheras the Lord hath given iniquity into our power, let us subdue it. A Servant will not be corrected with words, Prov. 29.19. And therefore S. Paul, 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my body, saith he, and bring it into subjection, &c. The Romans when they wa∣ged war with their Servants who rebelled against them, their Servants prevailed while their Masters fought with them with their swords: thereby they did ipso facto make the Servants Free∣men. Which their Masters perceiving, brought Whips and Scourges with them into the field, and so subdued them. Words and reasonings are ineffectual to subdue the earthly and sensuall concupiscence, Venter non habet aures. Eve reasoned with the Serpent, and was foiled at that weapon. Deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12. Resist the Devil. Tread him under foot. By Repentance and Faith the world is overcome, 1 John 5.4. And Blessed be God who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
THe Voice of thy brothers blood.]Gen. 4. Ver. 10. The word we turn blood, is plurall  and so rendred in the margent bloods. The holy spirit could as well here have used the singular as elsewhere, but made choise of the plurall: We may conjecture some reason; as because in shedding the bloods of Abel, Cain had shed the bloods of all his posterity, all possibilities of his off-spring, how many soever might have descended from him. Which renders the sin of murder, of all other, the most abominable, as that which, beside many other aggravations, brings with it the greatest horrour of conscience, as may appear in the example of Cain: And therefore David deprecates the guilt of killing not onely Uriah himself,Psal. 51.14. but all Ʋriah's posterity also; deliver me from bloods, O God, the God of my salvation. And because he, who takes away life,Hos. 4.2. he takes away all good which depends upon the life, blood is taken for all sin. Bloods touch bloods; that is, as the Chaldee Paraphrast explaines it, Sins adde above sins. And to make this sin of murder yet the more odious, the Greek hath the word  to kill, taken from the name of Cain the first murderer after his father the devill, Joh. 8.44. 1 Joh. 3.12. And he builded a city.]Gen. 4. Ver. 17. When? not presently; for who should help him build it? who should inhabit it? but long after, when he had now gotten sons and daughters, and sons and daughters had been born to them. This was no sudden work. Nor is it said he builded as our Translators render it, but he was building  fuit aedificans, as Arias Montanus amended Pagnin who turn'd the words aedificavit, whom our Translators follow. The LXX keep the Hebrew expression, . And he was building a city. But what need was there of this curiosity, as some will call it. No doubt but Moses here wittingly laid the foundation of a spiritual understanding; which S. Austin took notice of lib. 15. de civitate. cap. 8. In Ʋniverso genere humano cum primùm istae duae caeperunt nascendo at{que} moriendo procurrere civi∣tates, prior est natus civis hujus saeculi, posterior autem iste peregrinus in saeculo pertinens ad civitatem Dei, &c. When first these two Cities began to run forth in all mankinde, as men are born or die, the former (Cain) is born a Citizen of this world; the later (Abel) is a stranger in the world, who belongs to the City of God. So that, as —Non uno est conditae Roma die, Rome, we say, was not built in one day; nor is the City of Cain built all at once. Nemo repente fit pessimus. A man is not stark naught all at one time. Cain was building a City which all ungodly men in their re∣spective generations,Jude ver. 11. who walk in the way of Cain are yet building. Thus on the contrary,Hebr. 11. The City of God, whose builder and maker God himself is, is not like Jonah's Gourd, or a Mushroom grown up in a night, it's not built in a short time. It's true; dreamed and fansied it may be, but builded it can∣not
suddenly be; as they well know who are  workers together with God. Alas! There's a great deal of rubbish to be removed. The foundation must be deeply layd. And superstructures raised thereupon by degrees.Neh. 4.10. 1 Cor. 3.10. It is no hasty business. As Cain was building and they who walk in his way, are building his City; so they who walk in the way of the Lord, are building his City also. But let every one take heed what, and how, and with whom he builds. For Cain and his builders have as fair pretences as may be. The name of his Son and his City was Enoch, consecrated, dedicated. And ye shall finde among his posterity Mahujael Annuntians Deum a Preacher of God, and Lamech, an humble man. And these pretend to build the City of God,Ezra 4.2. as the adversaries of the Jewes did, and would build with them. And therefore it will neerely concern us to destinguish the two Cities, which, so different, so contrary families are building, the one of the love of God and their neighbour; which is Philadelphia; the City of David which is Love. The other opposit here unto is the City of the devill; which therefore must be Envy, Hatred, Malice and all uncharitableness. This City men begin to build and inhabit, when they depart from the other. As when Cain departed from the presence of God, who is Love, then he was building his City. Thus ye read,1 John 4.8.16. that, when the ten Tribes revolted from the house and City of David, the first royall City wherein their Kings dwelt, was Tirza, And so it is even to this day; When men fall off from the City of David, the City of Gods love,1 Kings 14.17. and the love of their neighbour, they thence forth live in Tirza, that is, according to their own lusts and pleasures in self-love, so Tirza signifies. And thus S. Paul prophesying of the perillous times, which now are if ever, his first character of those, who make the times perillous, is, Men lovers of themselves, of Caines family,2 Tim. 3.1, 2, and his last character of the open sinners, is, They are lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God. All which City of open and manifest sin, is covered with a roof of hypocriticall and false righteousness, having a form of Godlyness, but denying the power of it. These and such as these, are building the City of Cain: which by their own markes, are easily distinguished from Gods builders: And therefore the Apostle presently after their characters, adds, shun these. They may yet be further differenced by the Cities which they build. Gods and Christs workmen are building Bethmaacha, the City of contrite, lowly, and humble men. The Devills and his son Cains builders are raising Ramatha the high, proud, and lofty Ci∣ty, which God and his builders are destroying.Esay 26.5. Gods City is
Bethel, the house of God. The Devils Avith and Bethaven, the house of wickedness and vanity. Gods City is Bethulia, a com∣pany of chaste virgin-soules. The Devils City is Seboim, a licen∣tious, a lascivious, a Goatish generation, which must be set on the left hand in the judgement. Gods City is Bethshemesh, the house and Tabernacle of the Sun,Psal. 19.4. Mal. 4.2. which constantly continues its course of Righteousnesse and goodnesse. The Devils City is Je∣richo or Luneburg,Ecclus. 27.11. Hebr. 7.2. as the Fool changeth like the Moon, saith the Wiseman. Gods City is Sedec, whereof the true Melchisedec is King. The Devils City is Poneropolis the City of wicked men, whereof the Prince of darkness is King and governour. Gods Ci∣ty is Salem and Jerusalem the vision of peace. The Devils City is Rabbath or Riblatha, contention and strife. Let Cain and his builders go on and be building.Mal. 1.4. The Lord hath said, They shall build, but I will throw down: And they shall call them the border of wickednesse, and the people, against whom the Lord hath indignation for ever. As for us, who are Gods workmen and people, let us hear the Exhortation of Cyrus. His name, saith Plutarch, signifies the Sun, and he delivered the people of God out of captivity, and so is a lively type of Christ the sun of Righteousness and our Redeemer. He gives us this exhortation;Ezra 1.3. Who is there among you of all his people? His God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem and build, &c. And that of Joab,1 Chro. 15.13. Be of good courage; and let us behave our selves Valiantly for our people and for the Cities of our God: And let the Lord do that which is good in his sight. He was the father of such as dwell in tents.] By father here is to be understood the Master or Teacher,Gen. 4. Ver. 20. as he who is the inventor or author of any Art or Science. Now although Father may be a proper expression in the Hebrew tongue, yet since  by metophore, will reach also the signification of a Teacher, we may so render the word here; He was the Teacher of such as dwell in Tents, and possess Cattle: For  signifying Cattle and possession, because the first and most antient possession was of Cattle, this translation may comprehend both without a supple∣ment. Unles, with Castellio, we turn the words thus, Qui primus ta∣bernacula habitavit, & pecuariam fecit. Who first dwelt in tents and used grazing or shepherdy.  So Jubal was the Teacher of every one who handles the Harpe and the Organ. It is tru,  signifies to handle: but it signifies also a more gentle kinde of handling, to touch; and so it is a more musical phrase, To touch an instrument, that is to play upon it, as the Chal. Par. turns it here. And Jubal so carries jubilation and joyfull shouting in his name. And, that  is so to be understood, appeares by the next words; She bare Tubal-Cain,  word for word, a whe of all workman∣ship
of Brass and Iron. Which our Translators metaphorically turn an Instructor. We may render the words, Tubal-Cain, who taught all workmanship of Brass and Iron. The poets have deviled a Fable out of this most antient Histo∣ry. Of Tubal-Cain, they have made Vulcan; whom they sain the God of Metalls, and Metall-men, (as by Naamah the Beautiful, they may understand Venus) and, because Metalls cannot be wrought and fashioned without Fire, they say, he first found out Fire, and is the God of Fire; whence in the Greek, he hath his name, , or, by the Dorick Dialect, , that is, , the Father or Inventor of Fire. He is said of his Me∣talls to have made the first Armour and Weapons of war; A Trade very fit for one of Cains posterity. Upon the whole matter, we may note thus much. That the family of Cain, the men of the Old World, were ingenious and witty in finding out the profits and pleasures of the world, and meanes and wayes to defend themselves in the fruition of them, and offend others; and therein they lived voluptuously, eating and drinking, marrying and giving in mariage, untill the day that the floud came and took them all away. And thus the men of the old world prefigured the men of this later world, according to that proverbial speech, What befell the fathers, were types unto their children; Such are the men of this world, who walk in the same way of Cain, Jude, vers. 11. and must expect the like or worse destruction, Matth. 24.38.39. 2 Pet. 3.6.7. He called his name Enos. Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord.] What? But then? Did not Abel, righteous Abel,Gen. 4. Ver. 26. Hebr. 11.4. did not he call upon the Name of the Lord? What? nor Seth, a man of that noted piety, that he was accounted  a God among men, deificatus homo, even a Godded man, saith Theodoret. And did not Seth call upon the name of the Lord? If so, how then is it said, that in the time of Enos, Men began to call upon the name of the Lord? These inconveniencies may render the translation suspe∣cted: and yet the more, because scarce any one translation speaks like another. Drusius in his Fragm. Interpretum Graec: gives this translation of the words, Tunc caeptum est invocari nomen Domini; then the name of the Lord began to be called upon; and then adds, Interpretatio auro contra non cara. The interpretation is not dear at any price. I shall shew what I believe to be the true meaning of the place. What we have now in the Hebrew , Then, the LXX read , and turn'd . Hierom also read  and turns it Iste, this man. So far they agree; but then they part. Hierom goes on; Iste caepit, This man began. He turns  Invocare, to call upon, which the LXX render very often  to preach. I turn the sentence thus; This man began to preach in the name of the Lord:
that is, This man was the first Preacher before the Flood; as S. Peter cals Noe The eighth Preacher of righteousness;2 Pet. 2.5. according to the constant reading of the Greek and Vulg. Lat; which Beza also acknowledgeth. Of which interpretation, I shall give the Reader a further account, when I shall examine that place, if the Lord will. ADam begat a son in his own likeness,Gen. 5. Gen. 3. after his image.] Hierome read  Ad similitudinem, after, or according to his like∣nesse, and the same  repeated, according to his image. So Vulg. Lat. the LXX, Tremellius, and Piscator also read  in both places: but Pagnin, the Tigurin Bible, and the French, Munster, Vatablus, and others read : The difference is not great either in the letters  and , or the sense of the words: Nor do I here blame the Translation; but the interpretation built upon it by many; who aver, that Adam begat Sheth in or according to his sinful and depraved image. Whence they infer, that Sheth also must be depraved, as he who was begotten according to the cor∣rupt similitude and image of his father. Truly it is a great un∣happinesse to any one to have gotten an ill name, especially a∣mong some men; it's a thousand to one, he shall never regain a good report among them. Adam fell, and his fall is so aggra∣vated, as if it were like the fall of a Potters vessel, that could ne∣ver be made whole; or like that of the Devils which can never be repaired. 'Tis true; The fall, depravation, and degeneration of our first Parents is notorious. Notorium facti, the notoriousnesse of the fact, as the Civilians speak, ye read, Gen. 3. But was that Factum permanens & continuum?Jer. 8.4. Must the fall last for ever? Shall they fall and not arise? shall be turn away and not return? Surely the rising again, return, and recovery of our first Parents out of their fall, depravation, and degeneration, is as notable, as their fall was no∣torious. For as the promise of means and helps conducing thereunto, both the Law and Gospel,Gen. 3.15. and 3.22. are clear and evident: so likewise the use of those means, as I have shewn. And the  and effect answerable unto those means used, is as clear and ma∣nifest. For as Moses tels us of the darknesse and the light,and 5.1.2. Gen. 1. and 4.1. 1 John 3.12. so he relates the genealogie of the children of darknesse from Cain downward, who was of the wicked one born of that filthy seed (say the Jews) which the Serpent cast into Eve. He, figuring the propriety in the flesh, slew Abel, that breathing from God and unto God, and vigorously carries on his work of deformation, throughout the fourth Chapter of Genesis.Gen. 4. per. tot. Cap. 5. Moses having related the Genealogy of Cain, and the children of Darkness, he gives us the Genealogy of Sheth and the Children
of Light, and so sets good against evill; life against death;Ecclus. 33.14 the godly against the sinners. And whereas Gen. Chap. 4. he num∣bers up seven generations of Cain; Chap. 5. he reckons up ten generations from Adam to Noe. Whereby he implies, that the Good shall at length overcome the Evill; and that, when the darkness is past and the children of darkness,1 John. 5. the true light shall then shine, and the children of light as lights in the world. Both these so different, so contrary Families have their pro∣portionable originals and fathers of them,1 Sam. 24.13. as saith the proverb of the antients, Wickedness proceedeth from the wicked. And we may say of these trees of opposit genealogies, as our Lord saith,Mat. 7.17, 18. Every good tree bringeth forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree bringeth sorth evill fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evill fruit; neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit, &c. Surely therefore according to our Lords own reasoning, as from fallen, corrupt, degenerate Adam, proceeded a fallen, corrupt and degenerate Cain, according to his image; and from him answerably a sinfull generation; So from a restored, renewed and regenerated Adam, proceeded Sheth, according to his image. And that this image of Adam, was a righteous image, and the image of God, appeares evident∣ly, Vers. 1.2. of this Fifth Chapter; In the image of God, made he him, male and female created he them, and blessed them and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created. Compare now herewith, Gen. 1.26.27.28. and judge impartially, whether this be not the same image, which Adam had before his fall; If so, as it is clear out of that text, then, as sinfull Adam begat Cain according to his sinfull image and similitude, so righteous Adam begat Seth according to his righteous image and similitude, that is, according to his living soul, wherin the first man was made,1 Cor. 15. and whereunto he was now renewed. And wherein God bles∣sed them, that is, He made them fruitful, gave them power to procreate, beget, and bring forth children like themselves. Ge∣nuit ad imaginem & similitudinem suam, i. e. rationalem, & ad simili∣tudinem Dei, hoc est, praeditos animâ rationali: Ad similitudinem enim Dei creatus suit Adam: Igitur ipse Adam genuit filios ad similitudi∣nem Dei, hoc est, praeditos animâ rationali. Adam begat a son af∣ter his own image and similitude, that is, reasonable, and after the similitude of God, that is, endued with a reasonable soul. For Adam was created after the image of God: therefore Adam himself begat children after the image of God, that is, endued with a reasonable soul. So Vatablus reasons enforced from the context. By which reasonable soul, he understood, no doubt, the living soul, as the first man was made, saith the Apostle. And according to this image, S. Luke saith, Adam was the son of God. And according to this image of God,Luke 3.38. S. Paul tells the Athenians —, for we are his off-spring.
It's part of a verse taken out of Aratus; who having begun his Phaenomena with, —after a few words interposed, he saith,—, for we are his off-spring; That which the Poet wrote, and the Apostle cited, is, we are Jovis genus, that is, Jovae, (as Castellio constantly turns ) so learned Mr. Selden. For indeed the Poets Jupiter and  was no other then what the Greeks understood by their , saith Irenaeus; which in their tongue they could not otherwise ex∣press. Now I beseech the Godly-learned Reader impartially to con∣sider, in what image Adam was when he begat Sheth; and accor∣ding to what image he is said to be the son of God; and accor∣ding to what image we are all said to be the off-spring of God. All which, if we shall seriously look into, we shall finde, that, when we sin, we are not to blame Adam or his fall, or the Devill, or any Antecedent predetermining destiny, but to set it upon our own account. Enoch walked with God,Gen. 5. Ver. 22. and was not.] In what word here, you'l say, do I blame the Translators? I answer, They have not here∣in gone , nor fully expressed Enochs walking with God. For I could have wished that somewhat had been added, if not in the Text, at least in the Margent, which might have ex∣plained the fulnesse of signification, which is in this word  and especially in this Conjugation, here turned only to walk, which comprehends much more. It meets us first in this place. It's used most-what in this Conjugation in a borrowed sense, and signifies constancy and continuance in the good way of life, which cannot but be well-pleasing unto God. — What ever is good, is lovely. Yea, so well-pleasing, that so to walk and please God, are one and the same thing. Thus here where Enoch is said to have walked with God, the LXX turn it , he pleased God.Hebr. 11.5. And the Apostle, Hebr. 11.5. E∣noch before his translation, had this testimony , that he pleased God.Gen. 6.9. So Noah  he walked with God, the LXX turn it, , he pleased God. Thus where we have in our translation,Psal. 116.9. I will walk before God, , the LXX have , I will walk pleasingly before the Lord in the land of the living.Gen. 17.1. and 24.40. and 48.15. The like we have in divers other places. The issue of all which is, that to walk on constantly in the way of Gods Commandments, and to please him, are all one. And yet there is somewhat more implyed in this kinde of walking. Where ever the word is taken in this sense, 'tis in the reciprocal form, and includes a reflex act: yea, and this word, of many in this form, is frequentative. Which, because walk∣ing is a progressive motion, imports our continual walking in ho∣liness
and righteousness, and so pleasing God, and our reflex and reciprocall delight, contentment, complacency and pleasing of our selves in this continuall walking and pleasing God. Now that such a full signification as this, might have been expected of our Translators,Heb. 11.5. the Apostle in the place named warrants, as also in diverse other places in the New Testament. I shall name one or two more. S. Paul prayes for the Colossi∣ans,Col. 1. that they may walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing. And he exhorts the Thessalonians by the Lord Jesus,1 Thes. 4.1. that as they had received of him how they ought to walk and to please God, so they would abound more and more. Where he tells us the manner  how we ought to walk and please God; how is that? , that ye abound, saith he, more and more in so doing. This exact walking is here recorded of Enoch and again pre∣sently after. Rare and singular piety!Gen 5.2. But was this properly Enoch's walk, or was it common unto more? We read, that Noah also walked with God.And 6. Ver. 9. Yea surely this duty of walking and pleasing God and abounding in so doing, although applyed to one or other eminent man in an age, and Enoch was the first that we read so to have done, yet Quantum generis est in specie, this duty is common unto all believers. And all Enoch's forefathers, even from Adam renewed, downward to himself, had walked in the same way of life and holyness, though Enoch were the first who was honoured with this renouned testimony, because he walked with God  more notably, more eminently, more exactly than other men of his generation, yea than other holy and devout men of that age did. He was one of the Eight Preachers of Righteousness, before the flood. Yet is the same walking and pleasing God and abounding in so doing, required of all and every one of us in our generation: We have the very same God;Psal. 110.3. His will the same; His power enabling us, the same, or a greater measure of it put forth in this day of his power; His way the same, which is therefore called  That good way among the old pathes.Jer. 6.16. And therefore the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, Colossions and Thessalonians to walk in the same way.Ephes. 5.15. Col. 4.5. 1 Thes. 4.1. Gen. 12.5. 1 Pet. 3.6. Yea Abraham the Father of the faithfull and Sarah the Mother of all the faithfull and obedient, they both themselves walked in the same way of the Lord, and taught others also. That's meant by their getting of Souls in Haram, that is, they made them subject to the law, saith the Chalde Paraphrast. These are they whom Abraham trained up and taught to walk in this way of the Lord;Gen. 14.14. and therefore they are called  (whence Enoch has his name) his instructed, disciplined, initiated, consecrated or dedicated ones. And the Lord knew, that Abraham would com∣mand his children and his houshold after him, and they should Keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgement.Gen. 18.19.
O that there were such an heart in every one of us, and who∣soever shall read this testimony given to this old way, and the manner of walking in it, that we also would wholy dedicate our selves unto the Lord, to walk in the same old way, wherein Enoch and all the holy Fathers walked! O that we would train up our children and teach them to walk in the same old way! O that this we would do really and sincerely, not in pretence onely! as even Cain could call his first born son Enoch, and we can give our children good and well-boding names.Gen. 46.9. Numb. 26.5. But as Reuben called his Eldest Son Enoch, (the same name, though our Translators were pleased to call him Hanoh,) and of him came a whose family who walked in the same way, and are so called Enochites: It is the wise mans counsel, that we would do the like;  initiat & train up a child in his way;Prov. 22.6. and when he is old, he will not depart from it. It is true, he who walks in this way, must resolve to be of none account in the evil world; as when Enoch walked with God and pleased him  he was not; as the people of God are his hidden ones.Gen. 5.24. Psal. 83.3. Col. 3.3. Heb. 11.3. And their life is hid with Christ in God. The Apo∣stle tels us,  he was not found. It seems, he was sought for; For there is great search made after Enoch, after the Enochites. As when the Scripture tels us of such men as walk and please God, continue and persevere so walking, and delight them∣selves and finde a complacency in that walking with God, and that these are such as the Sccripture calls Perfect men, exact walkers with God; commonly the next question is, Where are there such men to be found? Truly if I knew any such men, I would not tell such curious Questionists, who often are of the Canish gene∣ration. Ye know, that not only the Wisemen, but also Herod sought after Christ,Mat. 28.16. and said, he would come and worship him; but ye finde the true reason why he sought him, to worship him with a mischief. Nor do I doubt but, should the Lord Jesus Christ appear a∣gain in the flesh, as he did to the Jews, many there are who professe him, that would deal as hardly with him, as the Jews did, and Herod intended to have done. But as the Canish generation sought Enoch, and found him not; so neither could Herod the Saducee. Nor shall the Pharisees finde him or his Enochites; who seek them among the Sects, (which are works of the flesh) as the living among the dead;Gal. 5.19. as if Enoch were of this Sect or that. Truly the Enochites, the exact walkers with God, they are above all Sects, they are true Christians. Some will say, these things are above the Moon, above the Clouds. Thus I know, many have, and will also deride this truth. Yet they speak more truly then they are aware. For the Woman the Church is clothed with the Sun [even the Sun of Righ∣teousnesse] and has the Moon [even the Mans reason; which rules
him, in his night of ignorance touching spiritual things and things of the Day,] under her feet. There are some Mountains so high, that from the tops of them, ye may see the Clouds rack below. And from the Mountain of the Lords house, that's situated on the top of the Mountains,Esay 2.1. they who are true Enochites may discern the Clouds without water,Prov. 25.14. which promise much piety and holinesse, but perform nothing: even Clouds without water carried about with every winde of doctrine. Alas!Ephes. 4.14. These are yet in their very rudiments under the Law; and there∣in continue, yet think to finde Enoch and his Enochites. But what our Lord saith to the Jewes, belongs to these, Ye shall seek me,John 8.21. and shall die in your sins. Nor indeed can they hope better of their own estate, who account contemptuously and basely of Enoch and his Enochites, the exact walkers with God. For in such base esteem are these with the evil world, which think and speak slightly of them, as the Sodomites of Lot, this fellow, &c. The Apostate Israelites of Mo∣ses,Gen. 19.9. Exod. 32.1. Hebr. 7.28. This Moses; and the Jewes of Christ the true Enoch, , consecrated, that is, an Enochite; This fellow:John 9.29. Acts 24.5. And we found this fellow perverting the nation. And of S. Paul a true Eno∣chite, We have found this man a pestilent fellow, &c. And what good man, who endeavours to walk with God and please him, can hope to please the Cainish generation, or expect any better opinion of himself from them? They walk two contrary wayes. Now men measure out their esteem of others according to their love and the way wherein they walk; and so desire to be like to them and imitate them. Similitudo est causa amoris. Now Enoch and his followers walk in a lone way, a narrow path, which few men finde,Mat. 7.13, 14. and much fewer walk in; and therein they please God. And who will love or esteem such a man? Who will think him happy? Who will desire to be like unto him? As for those who walk in the way of Cain,Jude v. 11. they love those who walk in the same way with them; have such in high estimation and honor. They call and think the proud happy.Mal. 3.15. Psal. 10.3. They speak good of the covetous, whom God abhorreth. So that their minds, thoughts, wills, affections, and wayes are not only contrary one to other, but . My thoughts, saith the Lord,Esay 55.7, 8, 9. are not as your thoughts, nor my wayes, as your wayes, &c. And there∣fore as it followes well, Enoch walked and pleased God, and there∣fore was esteem'd and honour'd of God: So it follows as well, according to mans corrupt reasoning and estimation, Enoch and his followers walk and please God; and therefore they displease, and are in no esteem among men.  they are not. Yet that which is very strange and rare; Contempt and Envy meet both together in a true Enochite, in every one that walks
and pleaseth God. Nemo curiosiùs calcat quod contemnit; no man will trouble himself to kick what he contemnes, saith Seneca: Yet the Enochite, Who walks and pleaseth God, is not onely so de∣spised and vilified, but envied also, and that even to death. For according to an higher degree of walking and pleasing God, there a∣riseth an higher antipathy and more intense disaffection and displeasure of men against them who so walk and abound in plea∣sing God, and pleasing themselves in so walking. In so much as, did any man walke as Christ walked, which is the duty of all men, who are in Christ;1 John 2.6. For he who saith, he abideth in him, ought himself to walk as he walked; such an one would be hated as Christ was hated,John 15. and persecuted as he was persecuted, which evidently appears from hence, that, if any man endeavour in good earnest to follow his stepps, he drawes after him from the world, envy, hatred, malice, all uncharitableness; yea, murdering, bur∣ning, massacring, persecution for righteousness sake, and that among such as are pretenders unto righteousness. Cain, religious Cain murdered his own brother;1 Iohn 3.12. wherefore, but because, Abel offered a more excellent sacrifice than he, and so pleased God? Wherefore slew he him? Saith S. John, but because his own workes were evill and his brothers righteous?1 Sam. 20.32, 33. And when Jonathan asked Saul, why David should be slain; and what evill had he done; That was evill enough; Saul cast a javelin at him to kill him, for asking that question. Thus when our Saviour appealed to the Jewes, which of you convinceth me of sin?Iohn 8.46.7.8 That very question was conceived to be a very great sin, and occasioned another; Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan and hast a Devill.Mat. 27.23. Nay, their malice ended not in reproachfull words: For when Pilate asked them, what evill hath be done? Twas evill enough to have done no evill; The text saith, they cryed out so much the more, let him be crucified. It was sin enough in Paul so to have walked and pleased God, that he could truely say, I have lived in all good conscience before God untill this day. Then Ananias commanded those who stood by, to smite him on the mouth.Acts 23.2. And it was well he scaped so. Nor is this observable onely in the visible Church; but in every Nation who so ever fears God and works righteousness, and so walkes and pleaseth God initially,Acts 10. as Cornelius did, even for that very reason, he is not accepted of men. That Hermodorus was bannished from Ephesus, Aristides, Themistocles, Alcibiades and others from Athens by Ostracisme, no other reason can be given, but onely that they were excellent men, and abounded more than others in doing good. They walk'd up to that light they had. Nor is there any other cause alleaged by Lampridius why Heliogabalus was dis∣pleased with Alexander his adopted son, but onely because he was unlike unto his father, a continent, chast and temperate man. Nor why the same Emperour put Ulpian the great Lawyer out of
his place, but onely because he was an upright and honest man in it. Indeed other reasons are alledged commonly, as against Socrates and others; but the onely true one was that which the Ephesians, as Strabo reports, used when they bannished Hermodorus; : We will not that any of our Citizens be too good and profitable unto others. And that country man had not yet learn'd the art of Seeming, when coming to Athens, he met Aristides called the Just, going out of the City, and gave him an account why he came to Athens to bannish him; why, saith Aristides, What evill have I done, that you intend this evill against me? The Country man answered him bluntly, Mihi non placet istud nomen Justi. I like not, saith he, this name Just. But why stand we on particulars?Wisd. 2.12. Salomon long since disco∣vered the general designe of ungodly men, against those who en∣deavour to walk and please God, and exceed others in so doing; it fits them of this generation extream well: Let us lie in wait for the righteous, because he is not for our turn, and he is clean contrary to our doings, He upbraideth us with our offending the Law, and objecteth to our infamy, the transgressions of our education: He professeth to have the knowledge of God, and he lleth himself the childe of the Lord: He was made to reprove our thoughts: He is grievous unto us even to be∣hold: for his life is not like other mens: His wayes are of another fashion, we are esteemed of him as counterfeits: He abstaineth from our wayes as from filthinesse: He pronounceth the end of the righteous to be blessed, and maketh his boast that God is his Father. After this long enume∣ration of his crimes alleaged against him, they proced to sentence. Let us see if his words be true, and let us prove what will happen in the end of him. For if the just man be the Son of God, he will help him and deliver him from the hand of his enemies. Let us examine him with despitefulnesse and torture, that we may know his meekness, and prove his patience. Let us condemn him to a shameful death. But this is the great consolation to Enoch and his Enochites, which over-poiseth all the contempt and hatred of the evil world. To them Enoch  Enoch is no body, despicable and hateful: But God receives him: Enoch pleased the Lord (saith the Wise-man) and was translated, and was an example of repentance to all generations.Ecclus. 44.16, 17. Noah (who walked with God also) was found perfect and righteous in the time of wrath: He was taken in ex∣change for the World: therefore was he left as a remnant unto the Earth when the flood came. Yea, though Enoch and his Eno∣chites be given for lost men;Esa. 62.12. Psal. 83.3. yet the time will come when that of the Prophet shall be fulfilled, They shall be sought out. Though pursued and persecuted, yet the Lord hides them; and then they are safe. Nor man, nor other Creature can hide it self from God: nor can man or any other Creature finde those out whom God hides. Yea, though the Devil himself by subtilty
and violence attempt their destruction, yet the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against Gods hidden Ones. What though the evil one walk about seeking whom he may devour? What though he cast his fiery darts at us?Gen. 15.1. and 17.1. What saith God to Abrabam the Enochite and every one of his children, Walk before me and be perfect; I am thy shield, that will quench the fiery darts of the evil one. Yea, the Lord is a buckler unto them that walk uprightly.Prov. 2.7. Such protection holy David promised himself, and all the true Enochites who walk and please God;Psal. 27.5. and 31.20. Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy Tabernacle. Temples are alwayes held inviolable: So that they whom the Lord hides in his Tabernacle and Temple, and the secret of it, that is,1 Cor. 3. in himself must needs be safe. For as his Enochites are his Tabernacle and Temple,Rev. 21.22. Exod. 33.21. so is he theirs. He hides them , in the Rock, that is, in Christ, where Moses was hid when he saw God. And now they are  beyond al the power that the enemy has to hurt them. Thou shalt keep them secretly from the prides of men, in the time of wrath thou shalt hide them from the men of the army. When is there greater trouble or danger than in the time of war, and wrath, when the Lord opens Din? Then thou shalt hide them from the sword-men, Ab ore gladii from the power of the sword, and à gladio oris, from the strife of tongues. All this imports preservation from evill. And the good, is as great, whereunto he preserves them. For How great is the Goodness that thou hast laid up for them that fear thee, which thou hast wrought for them who hope in thee,  Ex diametro, , maugre all the opposition of the sonnes of men. Lastly, what is that greatest good, which the eye of the naturall man hath not seen, nor his ear heard, nor has it entred into his heart to conceive? That good the great God hath promised to Abraham and his sonnes the true Enochites, who walke before him and are perfect:Gen. 17.1. To them he himself is a shield and an exceeding great Reward, even the eternal life it self. He is thy life and the length of thy dayes,Deut. 30.20. saith Moses, which recompensed Enoch's short life. Of all the Patriarchs before the flood, Enoch lived the shortest time, onely 365 years; So many years as there are dayes in one year: Yet was Enoch the father of Methusala, who, of all the fathers before the flood, lived the longest life. A short life well lived in the acceptable year of the Lord, begets the longest life, even the everlasting life. This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toyl of our hands.]Gen. 5. Ver. 29. The word  signifies, he shall give us comfort, refreshment or case: and so it will suit with the words following, : He shall give us case, rest or refreshment from our work and toyl of our hands. Lamech in these words intends to give the reason of his son Noah's name; which is not from  to comfort, but from  to rest: and so the Etymology was ,
he shall give us rest. I may, if the Lord will, give a more generall reason for this, as also for other proper names in Scripture, whose notations may seem to differ from them, as this doth. And thus the LXX understood and expressed the words, : This man shall give us rest, or quiet us from our works. Thus the V. Lat. Ab operibus nostris, from our works. So Vatablus, Ab opere nostro, from our work. Thus also the Tigurin Bible, Munster, and Castellio, and one ancient Dutch Translation. The Particle  sometimes may signifie de, as Tre∣mellius and the French, Italian, and Spanish Translations render that Particle: as also our English which followes Tremellius here∣in. But to comfort that Age concerning their work and toil, and the curse of the Earth, it is a large expression, and not so fit for this place; if we shall consider how Noah made good what his Father Lamech boded of him; Namely, that he gave ease and rest to his Father and his generation, by removing the curse from the Earth; which we read not so much as promised from the first time it was imposed on it, until Noahs dayes. And therefore the Jewes say, that the Lord would not accept an Offering from Cain, of the fruits of the Earth, because it was accursed. But when Noah was born, and became a just man, walked with God and was perfect in his generation, and so found grace with the Lord, then the Lord promised, he would no more curse the Earth. Omnia retroacta opera, scilict peccata quieverunt per Noe, qui ea sepelivit diluvio. All former works, namely, their sins ceased by Noah's means, who buried them in the sin-flood, (as the Dutch call Noahs flood) so S. Hierom. And the cause of all their incessant labour and toil being removed, the effect also was removed with it. And this Noah did by finding out meanes to facilitate mens necessary paines, and to asswage their griefes. 1. The former by inventing the Plough with other Instruments of Husbandry, and applying Oxen thereunto, and teaching the way to till the ground, being himself taught by the great Husband∣man.John 15.1. This the Poets attribute to Saturn, Janus or Ogyges; who indeed, according to the best Mythologists, were no other than Noah. 2. He asswaged their griefes by planting the Vine, and teaching the use of Wine: which comforts and makes glad the heart of man, whence Anacreon calls Wine , and,Psal. 104.15. in the Epigram, Bacchus is called . Both which Horace expresseth, Solicitis animis onus eximit—Wine takes off the burden from pensive mindes. Hence the old Poets say, that Janus (who was Noah) had his name from  Wine; who taught the Italians and other Na∣tions the planting of Vineyards and use of Wine. And adde, that, after he had himself miscarried by it onely once, he forewarned all men for ever after to use Wine moderately;
Which yet, I fear, very few have learned of him, but rather his excesse; and by his nakednesse endeavour to cover their own; and excuse their habitual intemperancy by pretence of infirmity. And because Noah saw the former and later world, they say Janus had two Faces. And they who feign him to be Saturn, say, that in his time was the Golden Age, when Men —So the old Poet. But Oh the unthankfulnesse of Man to his Creator! The me∣diate Authors of any particular good unto mankinde, are Dei∣fied; God himself the Author of all good both for necessity and delight,Hos. 2. is not owned. He who teacheth to plant and sow, &c. is accounted a God. He who gives his rain from Heaven and fruit∣ful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness, He in whom we live, and move, and have our being, without whom he that planteth,1 Cor. 3. Esay 28.26. is not any thing, nor he that watreth any thing, he is not acknowledged. He who taught men Husbandry, and some∣what cased them of their labours and griefes, is accounted a God. He who taught him who first instructed men in hus∣bandry, who owns him? O the wonderfull grace of God! O the ingratitude and great unthankfulness of men! Doubtless historical Noah though deified by the Heathen Poets under diverse names, as he who gave the world comfort and rest from their labours, and the curse of the earth, yet he was onely a figure of him, who removes the labour and curse and restores the blessing,Gen. 8.21. as I shall shew more in due place. I Will destroy man,Gen. 6. Ver. 7. which I have created.] The word  sig∣nifies properly to blot out. And so it is rendred in this place by the LXX ; and elsewhere upon the same argument;Gen. 7.4.23. and why we should use a metaphore here taken from building, or demolishing what is built, when the wisdom of God makes choice of one borrowed from Gra∣ving, Writing, or Painting, or defacing what is painted, or writ∣ten, or graven, I know not. The Metaphore here taken from Graving, Writing, or Painting may have reference to the image of God pourtrayed in Man whom God made after his own image,2 Esdr. 8.44. Wisd. 2.23. yea an image of himself; which because the Man had, by his wicked imaginations, thoughts, desires, and purposes, de∣praved and marred, and in stead of that  that good image and similitude wherein he was created, had now drawn upon his soul  the evil image or similitude (for so  may signifie,)Gen. 6.5. the Lord here threatens, that he will blot out man, that image which he had made. This image of God consists in knowledge,Col. 3.10. Ephes. 4.24. in righteousness and holiness of truth. Which Divine Plvto hath almost word for
word in his The. , The likeness of God is, to be righteous and holy with wisdom or prudence. And as Christ is  the figure of his fathers hypostasie or substance; so the true Christians are made according to Christ,Iohn 1.16. of whose fulnesse they receive  even grace for grace, every grace in us answering to the counterpart of it self in Christ, as every impression and print in the Wax, answers to every print and impression in the Seal. This image of God is in the soul, yet so that Per modum redun∣dantiae by way of redundancy, it overflowes also upon the body. For as by an Image or Picture, we understand not onely the lineaments and portraiture of him that's drawen, but also con∣cretely the table wherein it is drawen. And as we conceive the Kings Image in his Coin not onely formally, abstractly, and a∣part, the resemblance and figure of the King, but also concretely and joyntly the money, the Silver or Gold, wherein it is imprin∣ted. Even so the image of God howsoever it be primarily in the soule, yet it may be said also to be in the body, the seat of the soul; whose rectitude and straitness proper to that alone of all the living creatures, represents that inward rectitude and up∣rightness, wherein the man is made, and an argument of Majesty and Soveraignty over all the Creatures; the strength, propor∣tion, beauty, feature and comliness are answerable in some sort to the like vertues in the image of God. According to which S. Paul saith, that the earthy man,Rom. 5.14. the first Adam was a type or figure of the second, or him that was to come, as the first and rude draught of him. As also because the soul works by the body conformably to the image of God; whence it is,Rom. 6.13. that the members of the body are instruments of righteousness unto God. And hence it is, that S. Paul saith,1 Cor. 6.20. that our bodies and Spirits are Gods. Yea, the image of God extends it self so far, that all the outward creatures belonging unto man, may be said in some sort to appertain unto the image of God in man; not onely be∣cause Dei Vestigium est in creaturis, saith the School, the footstep and similitude of God is in the creatures; but also because God hath given unto man the outward creatures not as any part of his image, but to adorn his image in him. As Painters and Carvers set out their Images and Statues, by Pictures of diverse creatures, which are not any parts, but ornaments of the Statues and Images, which they principally intend to make. Thus every creature hath Gods mark upon it, aut imaginem aut vestigium, either Gods expresse image upon it, as the reasonable creature, or some other impression or similitude of the Deity; which remembers us, and sends us to the Author of it: As when we see among the Crea∣tures any thing that's beautiful and fair, or strong, or any other
way good, it minds us and causes our thoughts and meditations to ascend unto that Essential beauty, strength, or whatsoever other Excellency is to be found in God. In a word; Gods mark and footstep in the Creature is in order unto Gods Image in man. Gods image in man is in order unto Gods image which is Christ. Gods image, which is Christ,1 Cor. 3.22, 23. is in order unto God. This gradual order is excellently observed and set down by S. Paul; All things are yours, and ye are Christs; and Christ is Gods. When now the man had defaced that glorious image of his God, in himself, and disturbed that excellent order of himself and all the Creatures unto God, The Lord sent  a flood to con∣found all order (as that word signifies) a sin-flood to blot out his image and footstep out of his creatures as we read;Gen. 6. The Lord saw, that the iniquity of man was great in the earth, and all the image, form, or shape of the thoughts of his heart, was onely evill all the day. And it repented the Lord, that he had made man on the earth, and he mourned at his heart; and the Lord said, I will blot out man whom I have created, from upon the face of the earth, from man even unto beast, and unto the creeping thing, and to the foul of the heavens; because it repenteth me that I have made them. I desire the Reader to consider, upon what ground and Motive, the Lord here resolves to blot out man and beast from the earth. It will make much for the understanding of Gen. 8.21. ANd the Lord smelled a sweet savour, and the Lord said in his heart,Gen. 8. Ver. 21. I will not again curse the ground any more for mans sake; for the imagination of mans heart is evil from his youth; neither will I again smite any more every living thing, as I have done.] If thus we read these words, very ill use may be made of them, as for an en∣couragement unto sin; because the grace of God so much aboun∣deth. For according to this Translation, the Lord here seems to promise; that he will not again deal so severely with mankind, because the imagination of mans heart is evil from his youth; and therefore so to curse the ground for mans sake; so to smite every living thing, would be to no purpose: Why? because mankinde is incorrigible; the imagination of his heart is evil from his youth; and therefore to go about to mend the matter by blotting out the living creature, as if thereby the sins of men could be blotted out, it would be as available, as if a man should endeavour to draw water with a Net. So one of the Fathers reasons from hence, whose name I spare. Another of them argues thus down-right: The Lord saith, I will not any more curse the Earth for the works of men, because the minde of man
is set upon mischief from his youth; therefore I will not any more smite every living soul, as I have done. And lest we should think, that the Ancients onely were of this minde; most of the later Expositors are of the same judgement. The Glosse of the French Bible speaks their opinion. For it sets a Star in the Text, directing us to somewhat more remarkable in the Margent; which is this: He shews, what men must be until the end of the world, wherein all mankinde is condemned as wholly wicked and depraved. How then ought these words to be rendred? That we may understand this, we must look back at the former words. For if we consider the former words, they will give light to these, Verse 20. Noah builded an altar unto the Lord, and took of every clean beast, and of every clean foul, and offered burnt offerings upon the altar. And the Lord smelled a savour of rest (so the Marg. according to the Hebrew) And the Lord said in his heart, I will not &c. These words present us with Noah's acts, and the effect of them. Noah's acts are building an Altar, and offering Sacrifice upon it. The effect, Gods acceptance intimated in the Savour of rest: and his promise thereupon. Surely our God is not taken with outward Offerings or Sa∣crifices. These were onely figurative of Christs acceptable Sa∣crifice. Noah was a manifest type of Christ, whom he pre∣figured in his name, and in his works. 1. Hierom renders Noahs name (as from , not from ) by two words, Cessatio and Requies, Cessation and Rest. 1. Cessation implies leaving off former labour. 2. Rest, acquiescence and complacency in good. Both which are answerable to the two parts of universall Righ∣teousness, and the whole will of God; ceasing from evill, and doing good; whereof we have frequent mention,Esay 1.16, 17 1 Pet. 3. cease to do evill, learn to do well, Eschew evill, and do good. In both respects,Psal. 40.8. Noah was a type of the Lord Jesus, who was content to do Gods will. Yea, who was figured by David, that man who was to do all Gods wills,Acts 13.22. (the word is plurall) which wills are our sanctification and separation from all evill labour, and the curse, and enstating and quieting our soules in the Bles∣sing. According to that gratious invitation, Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden and I will give you Rest.Matth. 11.28, 29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly of heart; and ye shall finde rest unto your souls. Thus the true spiritual Noah gave to Lamech, and yet gives to Lamech, that is, to the poor, contrite, and humbled soul, rest from all the labour and toyl in sin; which the historical Noah his type could not effect; much lesse could he give to that generation Rest from the curse.Levit. 10.17. Esay 53.10. Mat. 20.28. That's the proper work of the spiritual Noah the Lord Jesus who redeems us from the curse, and gives us the
blessing.Dan. 9.24. Gal. 3.13. He is the true  the , the Ransom for many; yea, the Ransom for all in all Ages, who ever are of Lamechs family, lowly and poor in spirit, contrite and humble. The promise of redeptmion is made unto all such.1 Tim. 2.6. . Who gave himself a Ransom for all, a testimony for proper or several times or seasons; that is, according as every age, and every person in every age, is fit to receive it, and is capable of it. Such a capablenesse and fitnesse to receive the Ransom, is necessary. Yea, and Christ himself giving himself for us, requires 1. An imitation of his death in our selves, and 2. A like minde to∣wards others. First, he requires an imitation of his death in our selves;1 Pet. 4.1, 2. so the Apostle: For as much as Christ hath suffered in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same minde: For he who hath suffered in the flesh, hath ceased from sin, that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God, &c. Therefore Noahs Ark had the exact proportion of a Coffin fitted to a dead mans body, signifying and requiring our death and burial with Christ, that we may arise with him, and walk in newnesse of life;1 Pet. 3.21. which therefore the same Apostle compares to Baptism. 2. He requires of us a like minde also in regard of others.Epoes. 5.1, 2. For so an other Apostle, Be ye followers of God, saith he, as dear children, and walk in love; how? even as Christ loved us and hath given himself for us, an Offering and a Sacri∣fice to God, for a sweet smelling favour; which was figured by Noah,Gen. 8.21. who offered up a sacrifice  of a sweet smelling favour, or savour of rest: it has Noahs name in it. And he commands us, that we even so love our Brethren; &, because Manifestatio dilectio∣nis est exhibitio operis, as one of the Ancients speaks, He requires, that we manifest our love,Mat. 5.48. 1. In doing good one to another, that every one be Homo homini Deus, that one man be even as a God unto another; 2. and in suffering evil one for another: yea, even for sinners: according to that of Philo Judaeus, ;Rom. 5.8. a good man is a kinde of Ransom for an evil man, yea according to Christs suffering; how much more for good men? So Christ loved us and gave himself for us. Let the same mind be in us,Phil. 2.5.—8. which was also in him. Wherein? He hum∣bled himself and became obedient unto the death &c. Will we read this more expressely?1 John 3.16. It is the speech of the Beloved Disci∣ple; Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laied down his life for us; and we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren. Thus the Lord Jesus the true Noah removes the curse, being made a curse for us. He procures also the Blessing; which also was figured by Noah. He procures the Blessing by two acts. 1. Preparatory which is Removens prohibens; 2. Direct; first, Pre∣paratory,Acts 3.26. whereby he prevents every believer; For God having
raised up his Son Jesus hath sent him to bless us and to turn every one of us away from our iniquities. This preparatory act is as it were a fitting and seasoning of our vessells; which done,Gal. 3.13, 14. Tit. 3.6. then followes his direct act, the filling of our vessells being so fitted and prepared, with the Spirit of grace; which God sheds on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour. And so blesseth us with every spiritual blessing in heavenly things. Hitherto we have considered Noah's Name, and found how short he came of the full performance of what his father Lamech had boded of him; which yet was fully accomplished by the true Spiritual Noah, whose type he bare. Come we now to consider the acts of Noah, which also were more completely done by the Spiritual Noah. 2. As for Noah's acts, they were two. 1. Building an altar, and 2. Offering Burnt Offerings upon that Altar. The Altar prefigured Christ and his patience; who is that true Altar,Mat. 23.19. which Sanctifies all our gifts. And by whom we offer up unto God the Sacrifice of Praise. The Apostle applies this unto Christ;Heb. 13.10. and especially to his propitiatorie Sacrifice. We have an Altar, saith he, whereof they have no right to eat, who serve the Ta∣bernacle: For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the Sanctuary, by the High Priest, for sin, are burnt without the Camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the Gate. 2. The Sacrifice, which Noah offered, yielded a sweet Savour unto the Lord; so that he smelt a savour of rest, wherein Noah's name is contained, as I shewed before. But can we think that God is delighted with the smell of burnt beasts,Psal. 50. as Lucian saith his hea∣then gods were? Doubtless this Sacrifice of Noah signified the expiatory Sacrifice of Christ, who gave up himself an Oblation for us, and a Sacrifice to God for a smell of a sweet Savour.Ephes. 5.2. And this is that Savour of rest, which the Lord here smelt. And by this Sacrifice,Gal. 3, 13. the true Spiritual Noah takes away the curse, Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law being made a curse for us; and gives the blessing, as hath been shewn. All this premised, let us consider the following words here in question, whereunto I have hitherto made a long but a necessary preamble. The Lord smelt a sweet savour of rest. Whereupon the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more; Or, word for word, The Lord said un∣to his heart, or in his heart, or to his heart, that is, to the heart of Noah, to comfort him; for so to speak to ones heart, is to comfort, as the Prophet varies the phrase, Esay 40.1, 2.Hos. 2.14. And thus the Ancients understand the Lord to direct his speech to Noah. I will not adde to curse the Earth any more for man, be∣cause
the thought, frame, form, or shape of the heart of man was evil from his youth: and I will not adde any more to smite all living, as I have done. By all this, it appeareth; that those words, [because the thought of the heart of man was evil from his youth] are brought by the Lord, as a reason why he had cursed the earth and smitten all living. Nor is this any wresting of the words at all; but the clear context. I put was instead of is. There is no Verb at all in the Hebrew, but one must be necessarily supplied; and such as ra∣ther refers to the time past then either to the present or future. Because the words contain the Lords reason, why he dealt so se∣verely with the old World? And lest this seem gratis dictum, and onely any private opinion, it's clear, that upon this very reason,Gen. 6. the Lord resolved to punish the old World with the flood; The Lord saw, that the wickednesse of man was great in the earth, and every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, was onely evil every day, &c. And the Lord said, I will blot out man whom I have created, from the face of the earth. And the same reason the Lord brings here, why he had blotted out the old World: And thus Tremellius understood the words, as appears by his pointing of them: & thus Pagnin also and Castellio who puts the words in a Parenthesis, and expresly refers them to the former as the reason why the Lord had so severely punished the old World. Yea, the Lord elsewhere so reasons in Esay.Esay 54.7.10 Let us now see what will follow if those words be understood as a reason why the Lord will not any more punish the old World as he had done. They, who make those words [the imagination of mans heart is evil from his youth] a reason why the Lord will no more curse the ground for mans sake, nor smite any more every living thing as he had done; they who so reason, and understand the Lord here so to reason, they make the case of mankinde desperate; and God leaving man in that case, without remedie of his misery, and without hope of reformation by any punishment. Yea, here∣by they obliquely deny the general judgement;2 Pet 3.7. when without doubt there shall be an universal perdition of all ungodly men; whereas here they seem to understand God to say, —Quod multis peccatur,Gen. 6.5. inultum est. Yea, they make that to be here an argument of Gods mercy, which before was the main motive of his wrath. So that strange collections are made from hence. One of great fame and regard, a German Author whom I will not name, con∣cludes hence; our nature is Gantz und gar altogether uncapable of any good, and inclined to all evil. So that little notice is taken, That these words have reference unto the former, and are a mo∣tive unto Gods former severity. Nor do men regard the atone∣ment here made by Christ figured in Noahs Sacrifice. Nor how the Lord does restituere in integrum?Gen. 8.22. begin the world again with
mankinde, promising, that, while the Earth endureth, the sea∣sons of the year shall not be interrupted by an universal judge∣ment,Jer. 33.20.21. Gen. 9.1.—17 as they had been, whereby also the Lord confirmes his promise of grace by Christ. Nor is there any due respect had to the blessing of God upon Noah and his family, nor to that domi∣nion which God gives them over the Beasts, figuring more sa∣vage Beasts in us; nor to those seven Precepts given to the sons of Noah, whereof the seventh is here first given, viz. prohi∣bition of eating flesh with the life and blood: and the other six supposed to be given before: which all Nations who had com∣munion and fellowship with the Jewes, must observe. Nor have they regard to Gods covenant with Noah and his house and every living soul for ever, and that ratified by Gods oath;Esay 54.9, 10 and a visible signe. All which, if duly considered, will appear to be as great grace as was vouchsafed to man, if not greater than that given him be∣fore the fall, which was divine blessing,Gen. 1.26, 27. the image of God in righteousness and holiness; and the soveraignty over the crea∣tures. Yea,Gen. 9.6. Gen. 5.1, 2. as great or greater than was vouchsafed unto man in his renovation. And therefore such grace and favour laid a proportionable Obligation upon Noah and all mankinde of their obedience. Now I beseech the Christian Reader well to heed and consider, of what consequence it is, whether we refer those words to the former as a reason why the Lord brought in the floud upon the world of the ungodly, and so read them thus. I will not again curse the ground any more for mans sake, because the imagination of mans heart was evill from his youth, &c. Or whether we understand those words as an inference from the for∣mer, thus, I will not again curse the ground any more for mans sake; for the imagination of mans heart is evill from his youth, &c. If we read them the former way and consider the atone∣ment made, and the Promises of God, they bring with them an argument of good hope, and erect the soul and raise it up unto an obedient walking with God. If we read them the later way, they imply, that God, not with standing all meanes used, had no hope of bringing mankinde to any good; and consequently the man must remit and leave off all endeavour of doing well, and suffer his soul to languish and sinck into an utter despondency and desperation. For how can man have any hope of good, when God himself despaires? The Lord give us grace to discern of things that differ!
SERMON III. Noah's Legacy to his Sonnes. Gen. 9.26, 27. Noah said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant. God shall inlarge Japhet, and be shall dwell in the Tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant. WHat the Lord saith by the Prophet Esay,Esay 45.18. That He created not the earth in vain (or to be empty) He formed it to be inhabited; as it is true of the holy Land, and of the new Earth; that the Lord made it not to be empty,  but to be inhabited with Righteousness, and righteous men: So it is also true of the outward Earth, the Lord made it not to be empty and void, He made it to be inhabited. And therefore having over-whelmed the old world with the Flood, he reserved inhabitants for the Earth, Noah and his sons by whom the whole Earth was to be overspred.Jer. 31.27, 28. Even so as after the overflowing scourge, the Lord promiseth to sow the earth again, with the seed of Man and the seed of Beast. And as the Lord watched over the old world to pluck up and to throw down; so after the Flood, he watched over the new world to build and to plant. To this end Noah was , he till'd the Earth and planted a Vineyard. He drank of the Wine, and was drunken, and was uncovered within his Tent. All which was a secret intimation of a better,Ephes. 18. a Spiritual Noah not drunk with wine wherein is excess, but filled with the spirit of love toward his children,  he took up his Tent and Tabernacle in us, discovered the truth in it's nakedness,John 1. 2 Cor. 11. even the simplicity which is in Christ, which Ham (the Zelot, the father of Canaan the crooked soul inclined to the Earth and earthly things,) perceiving declared in the streets (so  signifies and Pagnin renders in platea in the street,) and this he does not without derision and scoffing. Naked truth is a thing too poor and despicable for a Hot-headed Zelot. Shem and Japhet the genuine children of the spiritual Noah, they cover their Fathers nakednesse. The effect of which is my Text;
which contains the Blessing of Shem and Japhet. Curse of Ham and Canaan. In both which we have these particular divine truths. 1. The Lord is the God of Shem. 2. Noah said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem. 3. Canaan shall be their Servant. 4. The Lord will enlarge or perswade Japhet. 5. Japhet shall dwell in the Tents of Shem. 6. Canaan shall be their Servant. I. The Lord is the God of Shem. Herein let us inquire 1. Who Shem is. 2. What's here meant by Jehovah or Lord. Elohim or God. 3. What is it to be a God of one, as here Jehovah is said to be the God of Shem. 1. Who Shem was. The son of Noah; but whether the eldest, the second, or the third son, it's questioned by some: because when ever the three brothers are named, Shem hath precedency and is named alwayes first; but that's no good reason why he should be the eldest, as I shall shew anon. It is doubtful indeed in the Hebrew Text; But if we compare the age of Shem, Gen. 11.10. with the age of Noah when he began to beget his chil∣dren, Gen. 5.32. and Gen. 7.6. it will seem probable, that Japhet was elder than Shem. But the Greek Text, Gen. 10.21. puts it out of all question, , Shem the brother of Japhet the elder, Japhet was the Elder brother of Shem. Some there are both Antient and Modern who affirm, that Shem was Melchisedec, and probable reasons are brought for it. I shall inquire into the truth of that anon. Meane-time come we to inquire, what we must here understand by Lord . This great, glorious and proper name of God may be two wayes considered 1. in it self, 2. as it hath respect to the creatures. In it self it raiseth up the understanding unto the most sublime and transcendent Metaphysical notion [, Ens, Be∣ing] than which no thought can reach higher. Yet does not that express it fully, because  and Ens hath reference to the pre∣sent; whereas this glorious name comprehends all circumstances of time. It is a most artificial compound of all parts of time, and Being in them;  fuit he hath bn,  erit, he will be-, Ens, being, he is, John the Divine expresseth it according∣ly;Revel. 14.: and that he might open it the more fully, he waived the propriety of the Greek tongue,
, &c. Peace be to you from him who is, and was, and is to come; all which is . This name God im∣posed upon himself.Exod. 3.14. They will say unto me, what is thy name, saith Moses; The Lord said unto him , I am that I am, or rather, I will be what I will be; or as the LXX render it, , I am the Being. And the Lord adds, so shalt thou say to the children of Israel , He who is, the Being, or who will be, hath sent me unto you. And the Lord said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, Jehovah  the Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob hath sent me unto you; This is my name forever, and my memoriall from generation to generation. Wherein two things are very observable, 1. That the Lord God fits his eternal name unto those three Patriarchs, the figures of the holy and blessed Trinity;Ecclus. 44.19. Abraham representing the father, as the wisman gives the etymology of his name, Abram was an high or great father , Jsaac a type of the son. Jacob a figure of the spirit. All which have reference to the three King∣doms, or rather parts or degrees of Gods kingdom, Psal. 97.1.  The Lord hath reigned, Psal. 10.16.  The Lord is King, Psal. 146.10.  The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. 2. Now although this glorious name comprehend all cir∣cumstances of time; and import the eternity of the great God, yet it more principally points at these present and last dayes, wherein the fulness of the Deity is poured, and to be pour'd out upon the Saints; according to what the Apostle prayes in behalf of the Ephesians,Ephes. 3.19. that they might be filled with all the fulness of God. For this reason, the Jewes of old had this, of all the names of God, in greatest reverence, expressing it by these and such like phrases, the name of four Letters, , The name, the great name, the glorious name; And therefore lest by use of it, it might be dishonoured, they pronounced, in stead of it  the Lord. Nor was that name heard more than once in a whole year, and that pronounced by the High Priest, and that only on the Expiation day, and that only in the Sanctum Sanctorum. But this critical discourse had not been so fit for a popular audi∣tory, but that it's very necessary for the opening of this point, as the Learned know. 2. Ye have heard the meaning of this glorious name in it self considered. Let us now look at it with reference unto the Crea∣tures. And so it signifies the Author of all created being, past, present and to come. It's a name God imposed upon himself by himself, who alone knows his own Essence and Being; and such as in some measure may signifie his nature; at least so far as the
utmost and highest speculation of the most transcendent under∣standing can reach unto; yet such is his condescent, that we may see it revealed in the subsistence and Being of every Creature; whereof it is , the Fountain of all Idea's, the Being of Beings; in whom we live, who have life; all Creatures move who have motion; and all have their Being which are.1 Sam. 17.12. This was figured by Jesse, that is, He that is, and he who long hath been, The Antient of dayes, even from the dayes of eternity. This Jesse, this Antient of dayes is the Father of the true David. This is the true Nun. What's that? the Eternal, as the French call God, of whom Nun was a type, the father of Joshua, that is, Jesus Christ. The word  here and elsewhere is used in the form plurall, though joyn'd to the proper name of God, which is al∣wayes singular: And the reason is; God is one and his name is  one; Yet is there a three-fold exertion,Deut. 6.4. 1 John 5.7. gradual manifesta∣tion, degree or maner of Being in the Deity. And this name of God is common to them all: to the Father Hebr. 1.1. to the Son vers. 8. Acts 20.28. Rom. 9.5. and to the holy Spirit, Acts. 5.3, 4. As for the signification of the word, the name Jehovah imports the Eternity and immutability of Gods Being, and all the Divine Attributes, as also his giving a Being unto all the Creatures: Elohim signifies God the Judge, as also God the Almighty he is Shems God. 3. Hitherto we have iniquired into the great Name Jehovah the Lord God. Let us now consider what it is to be a God of one, and how the Lord may be said to be the God of Shem; it may generally imply his right of creation and preservation, but more specially it imports a covenant made between the Lord God and Shem as in this Chapter, so elswhere; and such a cove∣nant consists of four acts, whereof two on Gods part;Gen. 9.9, 10, 11. & 17.7. His Stipulation requiring somewhat to be done: Promise, upon performance of that Stipulation, to be our God. One Mans part Repromission or answering by promise to Gods stipulation.Exo. 19.5.—8 & 20 19. Restipulation (because the parties covenan∣ting are so unequal) by way of humble petition and prayer unto God. We have examples of these in many Scriptures.2 Cor. 6.17, 18. with 7.1. The Stipulation, and that which God requires of man, is mans whole duty, Exodus 20.1-17. abridg'd into fewer words, but vertually containing what ever was elswhere required at large, Deut. 10.12. and yet more contracted, Mich. 6.8. and yet more briefly, Matth. 22.37. Though this be Shems prerogative to be the first in all the Scripture, whose God the Lord is expressely said to be,Gen. 6.9. Mat. 23.35. as his father Noah is the first in the Old Testament, who is said to be
a just man, though Abel also be called so afterward by our Saviour: Yet neither the one nor the other had that peculiar unto himself; For both before and after Abel and Noah, there were and are righteous men; and the Lord was the God of Adam, Abel, Seth, Enoch, and all the eight preachers of Righteousness; and especially styled the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all in covenant with him. And therefore we are here to under∣stand under the name of Shem,Rom. 4.12. all the Shemites, all of Shems faith and obedience. The Text is here so to be understood, that under Shem, yea, under Japhet the posterity of both are here meant. So where our Translators render the word, Canaan shall be his Ser∣vant, the words are  a servant unto them. If we now inquire into the reason why the Lord is the God of Shem, and his Shemites, even all the children of Heber, even of all in covenant with him, many reasons might be alleaged. But since there is no disposition at all in the Creature unto good, but it pro∣ceeds from the  the good will of the Lord unto his Crea∣ture,1 Sam. 12.22. unto this we must originally refer it, as Samuel does, It pleased the Lord to make you his people. If yet we inquire further for a reason in God, he becomes the God of Shem and his peoples God through Christ. This is my well beloved .Ephes. 1.6. So saith the Apostle, he hath made us accepted in the Beloved. He is the Mediator of the new covenant, and as a Mediator, he plies it on both sides. 1. On Gods part, he stipu∣lates, and requires. He is that one Law-giver. He promises: All the promises of God in him are yea, and in him are Amen. 2.Esay 65.16. Esay 42.6. & 49.8. On mans part he promises. Heb. 2.12. Luke 12.8. He resti∣pulates by prayer in his own name. In these regards he is cal∣led the very covenant it self, whence we may note. 1. The eminency and excellency of that God with whom we are in covenant. 2. The happyness of that people who are in covenant with this God.Psa. 144.15. So the Psalmist, Blessed are that people whose God is the Lord. 3. What the Lord is to all his people, he is to every one of them. But we must remember that Momento, Respice titulum. My scope has long been to inquire out Christ yester-day, Christ hid∣den under types and figures. Among them as we have found Adam, Abel, Seth, Enoch, with all the other Preachers; So we shall finde Shem also to be one. Of him I have spoken in the history. Let us now consider him in his mystery. Herein I shall inquire what Shem was. what he did. what befell him. In all which we shall finde Analogies and resemblances be∣tween
Shem and the Lord Jesus, and that Christ himself is the true Shem. The derivation and descent of the word Shem is not known unto men. Its commonly derived from,  to name, which rather ought to be derived from . Nor is the descent of the Lord Jesus knowen unto the world. So they confess,John 7.27. we know not whence he is. Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self. The word  signifies a name.Esay 45.15. And names are either Verbalia Verbal, or Realta real names. Christ is that Shem real, that  that  that great, that honorable name, as the Cabalists call him; that glorious and fearfull name .Deut. 28 58. This is understood by the word  so often in the Chaldee Paraphrast, where Christ the true Shem is understood. Thus Esay 1.13. my soule hateth; , my word. So Jer. 1.8. I am with thee, , my word, my name, Immanuel,Esay 45 17. the true Shem is with thee, Psal. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, Chald. Par.  unto his word:Mat. 22.44. which is that Scripture wherewith the Lord proved his Deity, and put the Pharisees to silence. So that it was no new expression,Iohn 1.1. but well known un∣to the Jewes, when S. John calls Christ  the word; which is indeed , that  that real, substantial and essential Name of God. It's usual for the word [Name] to signifie a person,Acts 1.15. Rev. 3.4. & 11.13. as the number of names, that is, persons; and a few names a few per∣sons. As for that dispute whether Shem were Melchisedec or not, S. Hierom received it for a truth by tradition from the Jewes; and others have followed him in that opinion, However, spiritually and mystically most certain it is that the true Shem is the right Melchisedec, .Gen. 14. He is Shem the great saith the Thargum of Jerusalem. And how shall that be made good, that Shem and Sheth were glorious among men,Ecclus. 49.16. whereof yet so little is recorded either in the word of God or humane writers, unless we understand there especially the true Shem and Sheth? What therefore is disputable in the letter, is reconciled in the spiritual meaning. Mel∣chisedec, For the true Shem is the true the King of righteousness. So the Prophet Esay,Esay 32.1. & ver. 17. Hebr. 7.1, 2. A King shall reign in righteousness and afterward King of Salem, that is King of peace, as the Apostle speakes. So we have done with the first quaere, who Shem was. 2. Come we now to the second, what he did; and herein we shall finde him a type of the true Shem; whether we consider his acts Natural as a Father begetting his children, naming them, if that may be called natural. Moral, 1. Shem is said to be the Father of all the children of Heber, Gen. 10.21. And was not Shem also the father of Elam and Assur and Lud and Aram, &c. And so the father of all the
children of Elam and Assur &c? Surely if we look no further then the letter, it's as true of these as those; as true that he was the Father of all the children of Elam, Assur, &c. As that he was the father of all the children of Heber. If therefore we shall enquire, who are the true children of Heber and the true Hebrews, we shall finde, that no other then the true Shem was their father. For who are the true  who are the true Hebrews? who else, but such as are Irati, such as are angry with themselves, that they have continued so long in their sins? who else, but such as are therefore angry with them∣selves, that they may not sin? So diverse of the Antients, as also Calvin understood, Psal. 4.4. Ephes. 4.26. Be angry and sin not, To lay down all our anger one towards another. It was the speach of the Deacon to the Communicants as mine now to you. ; Let no man have a quarel against any man. A fit qualification for us all who come unto the Lords Table whose profession is to shew forth the Lords death untill he manifest his life in us, by dying daily unto sin, truly and earnestly to repent us of our sins; to be angry with our selves, that have so long lived in sin, from which we resolve now to dye; to be angry with our selves when any thought or evill motion ariseth in our hearts that we give not our consent there∣unto and so sin. These are the first children of Heber. 2. Other children of Heber there are who are transeuntes; So  signifies, such as are in their passage from sin to righteousness, from death to life, such as are about to keep the Passover with our Lord, such was Abraham the son of Heber and great grand∣child of Shem, whom the Scripture calls  Gen. 14.18. LXX , one that passeth over, whom Philo Judeus understands to be one who passeth out of the state of sin and corruption into the divine nature, 2. Pet. 1.4. Out of Vr of the Chaldes the light of Devills toward the holy Land. Which is the dutie of us all, O ye children of Abraham, who profess our selves believers, the duty of us all who pretend, now to keep the Spiritual Pass∣over, 1 Cor. 5.8. 3. There are yet a third sort of Hebers children, who are praegnantes, such as have conceived Christ in their hearts, and such as are, as it were, with child by the holy spirit, Gal. 4.19. of whom I travail in birth again, saith S. Paul, till Christ be formed in yo; These spiritual Hebrews are of the circumcision who put away the sin of the flesh, and worship God in the spirit.Col. 2. Phil. 3.3. 2. Act. His naming of his children. As the true Shem begets, and is the father of all the children of Heber, so he gives names unto them, Rev. 3.12. So Ab. Joachim, Cant. 1.3. Esay 62.2. Thy name is an ointment powred out. Even
that unction from the holy One, 1 John 2.20.29. truly Christ himself according to the Spirit. 2. As for the moral or spiritual acts of the true Shem, they are two especially. 1. That notable act of Shem which hath made him glorious among men, Ecclus. 49. he covered his fathers na∣kedness; and may not the true Shem be said to do the like? doth not the Lord Jesus Christ cover the nakednesse of that soul where he is begotten? He is the  1 John 2.1, 2. He covers with the covering of his Spirit, Esay 30.1. Rom. 8.13. by which we mortifie the deeds of the body and live. 2. Since the true Shem is the right Melchisedec, what is more proper to our purpose in hand then what ye read, Gen. 14.18. That Melchisedec brought forth bread, and wine, &c. this was when he came from the slaughter of the Kings, as Hebr. 7.1. not before. Believers are the children of Abraham, and tread in the steps of Abraham, and do the works of Abraham, John 8.39. And these have Kings to slay, kill, mor∣tifie, and crucifie; It is the profession of us all who come to the Lords Table, that we shew forth the Lords death, that we daily hear about in out body the dying of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.10.1, 2. The Kings are those many Lords that have ruled over us, Esay 26.13. Amraphel King of Shinar: the great talk of fallen man concern∣ing religion, and this Amraphel was King of Shinar where Babel was built, Gen. 11.2. This is a powerful King that bears rule at this day: The Church is in Babel or Babylon much more now then it was in S. Peters dayes, 1 Pet. 5.13. Arioch King of Ellasar. Arioch, Ebrietas tua, thy drunkennesse, saith Hierom; whether with wine, or not with wine: for there is a drunkennesse which is not with wine, Esay 29.9. a drunken∣nesse with opinion and imagination; Esay complain'd of it in his time, and Jeremy in his, Chap. 51.7, 8. How much more may we now? There are but a few sober men in the world; and the rest think them the onely drunkards. He is King of Ellasar (that is) the multitude of rebellious and disobedient men, such as depart from God; that's Ellasar. Chedarlaomer, as a generation of servitude, who perswades his people to the service of sin; or the Globe or Ball of Hay, Zach. 12.6. What we turn in a Sheaf, is in the vulgar Latin in Funo, in Hay, Matth. 6.30. Syr. The Grass of the field, the generation of grass, such a people are but as the grass, Esay 40.7. This Che∣dorlaomer was King of Elam, that is, the world, the present evil world; or according to the Arabick, knowledge saith Drusius, or hidden wickednesse and deeds of darknesse. Tidal, gnarus as∣censionis vel elevationis. Skilful or knowing how to ascend, that's the effect of the false knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.12. Knowledge puffs up. And this King hath the largest and most ample dominion of all the rest, He is King of Nations. He is the true Antichrist
that rules in the hearts of all men, of all Nations until the Lord Jesus Christ the true Shem, the true Melchisedec, who is the true King of Nations, Jer. 10.7. until he dispossess him, and consume him with the spirit of his mouth.2 Thess. 2. Most true it is, that he vaunts him∣self to be the King of Nations, and dares say so much unto the true King of Nations himself, Luke 4.5, 6. until he cast him forth, John 12.31. Other Kings there are Jos. 10.1.—24. led by Adonizedec the false righteousnesse; but the followers of Josua set their feet in their neck and tread down their pride. Amalekites, Exod. 17.16. Populum lambentes, vel declinantes; such as lick up the people, and turn them from their God, 1 Sam. 15.32, 33. Agag the co∣ver of all sin, as the last enemies of the Church Gog and Magog, Ezech. 38. which are the forms of godlinesse that cover all iniquity, 2 Tim. 3. , Luke 19.33. the owners of the Asse said unto them, &c. many owners of the silly Asse, the mis-guided simple, credulous man. When we have slain these Kings, then comes Melchisedec and brings forth bread and wine. 3. What befell Shem, we read little in the Scripture that be∣fell Shem, onely Ecclus. 49.16. Shem and Seth obtained great glory among men, which is to be understood among those who are truly men, who fear God and keep his commandements, Eccles. 12. Among those the true Shem the Lord Jesus is the most honorable. Yea Jesus Christ the true Shem is that very honour that comes of God onely, Joh. 5.44. and so where we read to you he is pretious, , 1 Pet. 2.7. it is in the margent more truly turn'd, Honour. This is that plant  Ezech. 34.29. of renown. This is he who hath obtained that excellent name among men, that at his name every knee must bow of things in heaven and earth and under the earth, Phil. 2.9.10. Obs. This opens unto us the meaning of that phrase which meets us often in Scripture, which without this understanding, is very harsh to our eares and apprehensions. As when the name of God is said to be this or that, to do this or that. The word which we render name, is  Shem: so when Gods name is said to be excellent in all the world, Psal. 8.1. what understand we but the true Shem, the Christ of God, the name that's great in Israel, Psal. 76.1? what else meane we but the true Shem when we say, His name is like a pretious oyntment? Cant. 1.3. This is the name that is said to be neer, Psal. 75.1. what neerer to us then what is with us? Immanuel, Christ in us. This name of the Lord is a strong Tower &c. Prov. 18.10. This is the name for which God hath pity upon men, Jer. 14.7. Ezech. 36.21. what other name can defend us? Psal. 20.1. This defended Christ and his, and offended all who came to apprehend him. , I am, wher∣upon
they fell to the ground. This is the name by which we are sa∣ved, Psal. 54.1. fave me O Lord by thy Name, by thy true Shem, which is Christ himself. This is the Name by which we tread down our enemies, Psal. 44.5. Through thee, through thy Name we will tread them under that rise up against us. This is that Name wherein we walls, Mic. 4.5. which is expresly the Lord Jesus Christ, Col. 2.6. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him, &c. This reproves those who dishonour that great and worthy Name, by which we are called, who reproach the great Shem, who deserves all honour among men, James 2.7. It was the glo∣ry of Enoch, Noah, and Shem to have maintained the true and sin∣cere worship of God against all incroachments of Idolatry and Superstition; whence it came to passe that they were opposed by all the world beside. Plutarch in his Isis tells us (what I have shewen elsewhere) that by Typhon they understood , which names, saith he, signifie , violent inhibiting, hindring; contrariety, opposition. Plutarch there plainly ex∣presseth the name of Seth; as for Bebon, by that name the Ara∣bians understand the Devil; and  Sym is a manifest inver∣sion of Shem: now because Seth and Shem in their several ages op∣posed the wicked world; hence it is that the ungodly of the world opposed, traduced, reproached, and blasphemed them, as the troublers of the world. As I shewed of Noah out of Josephus, The like of Seth and Shem, Plutarch, : Quicquid noxium in na∣tura damnosum, Typhon est. And is not this evident in the true Shem in all ages even from the beginning of the world? Luk. 23.2. Act. 17.6. and 28.22. Say we not well that thou art a Sama∣ritan and hast a Devill? Joh. 8.48. but the truth of this I shewed on Gen. 5.22. Now when Abraham came from the slaughter of the Kings, Melchisedec the true Shem brought forth bread and wine. Beloved! It is the profession of us all to mortifie, kill, and cruoifie these Kings, these raigning, these ruling lusts, Rom. 6.12. Let us no longer be professors, but practicers of what we profess. This is great Consolation to the true Shemites to the true children of Abraham, who follow their father Abraham in the slaughter of the Kings. Amalec cannot be subdued by those who follow not the true David, 1. Sam. 30. Yet there is comfort for the weak ones, who can follow no further then Besar, vers. 10.24. while men know Christ onely according to the flesh, that's  Besor; they are weake; yet because willing and ready and armed with good purpose and sincerity, they have their share of the spoils. Though thou overcome not the Kings while thou art yet in thy non-age, David will overcome them for thee.
What Jether the childe could not do, (as the child is, so is his strength) that Gideon himself performs, even he who breakes and cuts off iniquity that's Gideon.Iudg. 8.20, 21 Though thou be not cleansed ac∣cording to the purification of the Sanctuary. 2. Chro. 30.18. Hebr. 10.19. For thy names sake, though our iniquities testifie against us, do thou it for thy names sake, Jer. 14.7, 8, 9. Put on the whole armor of God and so fight valiantly under the banner of Christ, which is his love, Cant. 2.4. Exhort. If the Lord be the God of Shem, and our God and in Covenant with us, Let us then own him and acknowledge him to be our God by keeping covenant with him. First,Num. 23.19. Esay 40.8. Deut. 28.3.15. He 1. is true and faithfull unto us in his promises. 2. True in his threatnings, he that goes from one part of heaven, goes toward another; Non toto coelo egredimur. He that flies from his mercy, falls into his severity. 3. He has right unto us even without a covenant, yet condescends to enter covenant with us. Secondly,Rom. 12.1. 1 Sam. 11.1.2 In regard of the covenant it self, consider 1. The equity of it; its , a reasonable service. How un∣reasonable is the covenant with Satan? How unreasonable is it, that our God should be bound unto us, to be our God, yet we in our covenant with him should be loose and dissolute? 2. The excellency of the thing covenanted for,2 Pet. 1.4. participation of the Di∣vine Nature. Thirdly, In regard of us. 1. What is more dishonourable then to be reputed a faithlesse man? , a double minded man. 2. How honourable unto Shem to keep covenant with his God, see what an honourable testimony is recorded of Josiah. 3.2 King. 23.25. And what is that for which thou breakest covenant with thy God?Ier 2.13. They forsake the Fountain of living waters, and they dig to themselves Cisterns or pits which will hold no water. Whether do we own the Lord for our God? Most true it is, Deus suus cui{que} plurimi fit, every one accompts most highly of his God, whether we understand it of him who is the false God or the true; For that which appeares to be good unto us, though it be evill, hath yet the same force with us, while it appears so to us, as if it were a true good.Psal. 1. & 40.8. & 42.1, 2. Job saith of the true God, if he kill me yet I will trust in him. David meditates on Gods Law day and night, he delights to do his Gods will, Davids soul is athirst for God, Solomon preferrs divine Wisdom, that is Christ, before Gold and Rubies and all desirable things. Our Lord teaches us to pray thy will be done. Now, can we be content to part with our own will, what ever it is, that Gods will may be done in us, by us, upon us, what ever that is? Now the like affection evill men have unto their false Gods.2 Tim. 3.1.2. There is one God which is called Selfe, that all the Dii minorum gentium serve;  self-lovers are in that list
of false worshippers. Why is Coveteousness called Idolatry, but in order unto self? Ahab, without Naboths vinyard, was a poor discontented man. Thus ambition and desire of honour,Col. 3.4. another kinde of Idolatry, proceedes from a high esteem, a man has of himself. Haman, while he wanted but Mordecai's knee,Eccl. 6.7. he had nothing. Luxury, Gluttony, and drunkeness are nothing but the worship of the belly, and that in order unto Self.Phil. 3.19. Nor will a true servant of his belly spare either money or credit or paines, so he may worship his belly. In a word, what doest thou prefer before all other things in the world? if thou say the true God, tell me truly; canst thou say, thou esteemest him, whom thou oppressest as a Cart laden with Sheaves;Amos 2.13. Rev. 3.20. canst thou say thou lovest him whom thou shuttest out of dores? prae amore ex cludis foras? Does he not knock at the dore of thy heart? does he not com∣plain, my locks are wet with the dropps of the night?Cant. 5.2. Doest thou prise him highly whom thou blasphemest and reproachest? whose name thou takest in vain? wert thou a true son of the covenant, thou wouldst not endure so to abuse thy father, nor suffer him to be evill spoken of, much less to be crucified and slain: This indignity made the dumb child of Craesus to speake. Ah , kill not Craesus: Did we indeedown our God and his Christ, we would have commerce with him;Iohn 5.40. But ye will not come unto me, saith he that ye might have life.Col. 3.4. Thou wilt hardly come unto him, to lose thy sinfull life which the Lord requires, if thou refuse to come unto him to gain eternal life. Surely did we own, prize and esteem the true God as we ought, and were deprived of him, we could not but conceive our selves lost, utterly lost men, who had nothing at all left us.Iudg. 18.24. Ye have taken away my Gods, and what have I more? To be beloved of the true God it's simply the greatest consolation of the soul, as on the contrary to be hated. 2. Axiom. Noah said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem. The words are, according to the idiom and propertie of the Hebrew tongue, a metalepsis; whereby we understand the Antecedent out of the consequent, the blessing of Shem out of the blessing of God. For we are so to understand them, as if Noah should in more words have said, The Lord God so heap blessings temporal and spiri∣tual, outward and inward upon Shem, that both he and who∣soever shall see it, may say, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, who by his blessings to him, hath declared himself the God of Shem in covenant with him and his; So that here is a twofold blessing 1 Gods blessing of Shem and the Shemites. 2 Shems blessing of God. 1. Blessed is Shem of the Lord his God; which may be consi∣dered
Literally, according to the Person of Shem. Spiritually, according to the Off-spring of Shem. As for the first, let us enquire; 1. What is it properly to bless, and to be blessed? 2. How was Shem blessed of the Lord his God? 1. Blessing properly signifies increase,Gen. 1.21. and 9.1. whether in temporall things; God blessed them, saying, increase and multiply. And where we read, God blessed Noah and his sones, Castellio turns the word, Foecunditatem dedit, He gave them fruitfullness, saying, increase and multiply, &c. So in spiritual things also, God hath blessed us with every spirituall blessing in heavenly things in Christ. 2.Ephes. 1.3. Shem was blessed with temporall and spirituall blessings, and famous for them, especially, for his piety and reverence towards his Father; and that the Lord prevented him with his grace that he would not see,Acts 3.26. much lesse, deride and scoff at his Fathers nakedness. It is no small blessing to be turned from iniquity, as Shem was. Why did Noah bless Shem from the Lord his God?Psal. 144.15. Heb. 11.16. The rea∣son seems to be taken from the covenant. They desire a better Country, that is an heavenly; wherefore God is not, ashamd to be called their God. More especially the blessing is here given to Shem for his honouring of his Father, according to that of the Wise∣man;Ecclus. 3.8. Honour thy Father and Mother both in word and deed, that a blessing may come upon thee. But why is Shem blessed before Japhet the elder Brother, the more especiall reason is thought to be, his greater forwardness to cover his fathers nakedness, So that here he seems for that cause to have precedency in the blessing. I shall adde another reason in the proper place. Obs. 1. It is not Gods method in blessing, to follow the order of nature. Abraham is preferred before Haran his elder Brother. Ismael was the first born;Gen. 11.26. and 48.20. yet Isaac obtained the blessing. So did Iacob though Esau were the elder Brother. And Ephraim though the yonger is preferred by Iacob and blessed before Manasses. God sees not as man sees;2 Chro. 21.3. nor are his wayes as mans waies. The elder Brother among men is most esteemed by his parents, according to which rule,1 Sam. 16.6.—10: Jehoshaphat proceeded, when he preferred Jehoram. Accordingly Eliab, Abinadab, &c. are better esteemed and pro∣moted by Jesse and Samuel. But some yonger one proves often times the better man, who is least thought of, as Abraham, as Shem, as Joseph, and David. If we enquire into a more hidden reason of this, we may as well finde it in our selves as without us in the world: that which is born of God in us and which he most prizes is the second birth; the first man is of the earth, earthy; the second is the Lord from heaven.1 Cor. 15.47. Here the proverb is true, , that the seconds are the better.
Obs. 2. It is no small blessing to be preserved and kept from doing evill.1 Sam. 25 32 Marth. 1.21. 2 Cor. 13.7. 2 Tim. 4.18 Jam. 1 17. Eph. 1.3. But the Lord God of Shem is also the Author and Donour of every good and perfect gift , and especially those spirituall blessings, which none but God can give, none are fit to receive but the true Shemites. Obs. 3. Observe the goodness of God toward children obedi∣ent to their parents. All we certeinly know, that Shem did,Gen. 9.22, 23 is honouring of his father; Yet he is for that, blessed of God, and so blessed, that of his line descended Heber, Abraham, Isaac and Iacob. And for this, the wise man tells us, he is parallel'd with Sheth, who in his time, saith Theodoret, was called a God upon earth, Deificatus homo, as the Antients speak,Ecclus. 49.16 and 3. per tot. Ier. 35. Ephes. 6.2. and obtained great honour, among men. The same Wiseman records many blessings unto them who honour their parents. What's the reason that Philo reckons the fift Commandement in the first Table? It is a great Commandement, and the first with promise. A notable Encouragement unto children to honour their parents. Obs. 4. When the Patriarch went about to bless his son Shem, he breaks out into the blessing of the Lord God of Shem: was this to blesse Shem? Truly then was Shem most blessed, when God was blessed and owned and acknowledged as the only Au∣thor of all his blessing.Gen. 28.14, 15, 16. 1 Sam. 25.32, 39. 1 King. 8.14, 15. Gal. 1.24. 1 Cor. 15.10. We shall finde this to be the practise of Gods Saints. After all the blessings which the Lord had hea∣ped on Jacob, Jacob looks not on the blessings, much lesse upon himself, he looks upon the Lord the Author of them all. So did David. So Solomon is said to have blessed the Congregation when he blessed God. They glorified, not me, saith S. Paul, but God in me; and I laboured, &c. yet not I, but the grace of God with me. And truly what good soever befals the Saints of God, they im∣pute it not to any worth in themselves, but unto God, or some gift of God imparted unto them. The faithful servant saith not,Luke 19.16. as we are wont to do, I have gained, but thy pound hath gained ten pounds; and the other, thy pound hath gained five pounds.Ephes. 2.8. He saith not, I have done this or that. It was his obedience of faith that gained it, and that is the gift of God.1 Iohn 5.4. So thy faith hath made thee whole. And when ever we have gained any conquest over any lust, it is not any power of nature; but we must say,1 Cor. 15.57. Blessed be God that gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. When Zachariah, the father of John had been now long dumb, he broke silence, not with exultation or expression of joy for the great blessing of God upon himself, or upon Israel.Luke 1.68. His first words are the praise of God: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; after that large blessing of God powred upon the Church,Esay 44.4.5 I will powre my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine off-spring, &c. How great are those who shall be thought worthy of the blessed
Spirit? it followes, one shall say, I am the Lords, &c. The Church appropriates nothing to it self, but gives all the glory unto God. There is no loss in this faithful and just dealing with God, Euge bone serve, Thou hast been faithful in a little, be thou ruler over ten Cities. O that we all understood this aright, and accordingly practi∣sed it, to own the Lord in his gifts unto men! there would not be such robbing God of his honour, such assuming that glory to our selves,John 5.44. Acts 8.9, 10. Mat. 9.8. which is proper unto God, there would not be such receiving of praise one of another, there would not be such idolizing of men as the Samaritans did to their Simon Magus. Quantò rectius hi? O how much better did they, who glorified God, who had given such power unto men? Obs. 5. Observe the power of faith; out of it Noah gives inheri∣tances to his children;Gen. 27.28, 29, 37. out of it, Isaac blesses his sons, and of Ja∣cob he saith,Gen. 48.22. with 33.18. And he shall be blessed, and as if it were done already, I have satisfied him with corn and wine. So Jacob blessed his sons, Joseph especially. I have given to thee one portion, which cannot be understood of that field which he bought: Therefore his faith is praised,Hebr. 11.21. I took it saith he, by my Sword and bow; that is, by prayer and supplication saith the Chal. Par. Here we must note a difference of Blessing; When the Lord God blesseth Shem and the Shemites, he bestowes good things upon them.Deut. 28.2. &c. Dei benedicere est benefacere; when Shem blesseth God, he returnes humble thanks and prayses,Mat. 26.26, 27. with Luke 22.19: Psal. 68, 19. Ephes. 1.3. Psal. 63.4: 1 Pet. 2.9. for Gods blessings received. As blessing signifies thanksgiving, so likewise praysing. Howbeit this blessing, praysing and thanksgiving is not a bare outward expression of thankfulness in words, but a manifestation of it in the life. A declaration of the divine vertues in those who so blesse him. This is comfort to the people of God, the true Shemites, the ge∣neration of the true Shem, in these and all perillous times; The Lord God is their God, and he in covenant with them and blesses them; and they have alwayes that for which they may blesse their God, as Job on the Dunghill, the Lord not onely hath given, but hath taken what he hath given, Blessed be the name of Shem, the true Shem, the name of the Lord, what's the reason? The Lord God of Shem, yea the true Shem, is with them, bearing the evill with them,Gen. 31.3. with 32.10. Psal. 50.15. and doing them good. A true Immanuel. Yea, they have God so neer them, that they may at all times resort unto him, especially in times of straits. Exhort. 1. To enter and keep covenant with the Lord God of Shem, to become true Shemites, that the God of Shem may be our God.Exod. 20.24. Iohn 1.14. Where ever Shem is, there followes a blessing. Where ever he puts his name, in the Tabernacle ; He walks in us his Temple wherein he dwells; His city Jerusalem, where he
puts his blessing. His Ark was in Obed Edoms house, and there the Lord blessed that house. Wherever Obed Edom entertaines the Ark of God, there followes the blessing.2 Cor. 6.26. 1 Kings 8 29. & 14.21. 1 Cor. 3.17. Psal. 132.13, 14, 15. 2 Sam. 6.12. Exod. 20.6. Dan. 9.4. Ps. 133.1, 2, 3. Esay 61.9. Gen. 32.26. The Ark is another shadow of Christ the true Shem. Therefore he must needs bring a blessing unto Obed Edom, that is, the serviceable humanitie, or the obedient man, who serves and ministers unto God; especially who ever serves him out of love, not out of fear, nor hope of reward, with these the Lord keepes covenant and mercy. There he promises the blessing. If we have him with us, let us keep him with us and resolve with Jacob, I will not let thee go unless thou bless me. Exhort. 2. Let us receive the blessing which the Lord God of our father Shem gives unto us. O ye Shemites, ye children of Heber, ye children of Abrahem! Vnto you is this blessing sent;1 Pet. 3.9. Hebr. 11.16. Ios. 18.3. ye are called to inherit a blessing, to inherit the holy Land. The holy Land is our heavenly countrey, which we obtain of our God. O why are we slack to possess the Land, which the Lord hath given us for an inheritance? Would we be so slow ere we took possession of an earthly inheritance? Axiom 3. Canaan shall be the servant of Shem. Herein let us inquire. 1. What is a servant; and 2. How Canaan was a servant unto Shem. 1. To be a servant hath reference unto the will and com∣mand of another. He that is obedient unto the command of another, is so far-forth his servant, whether that , that right of living as a man will, be taken from him forcibly, as in war; or that he willingly yields himself to the will and service of another; His servants ye are whom ye obey.Rom. 6.6. The word which we turn a servant is  from , which the LXX turn , to work, to do, to serve; and so Servus is à servando, saith Jsidore, either passively, quòd hi qui jure belli possent occidi, à victoribus conserva∣bantur; or actively à Servando; because a servant is custos rerum herilium so  to keep is turned by the LXX , to keep, hear, obey and do; which are words proper unto servants. Canaan is called here by the LXX.  Servus domesticus. 2. Canaan shall be the servant of Shem and his Shemites for the word  is to them. Shem and Canaan may be considered in their History, and so in their Persons. Posterity. Or in their Mystery. 1. In their persons; and so it is hard to shew when and where∣in Canaan was a servant unto Shem, or the Shemites. 2. In their posterity; So Canaan may be said to be a servant unto Shem, that
is, the Canaanites unto the posteritie of Shem and Japhet; when we shall consider, that the Egyptians were servants unto all Nations, and the Canaanites made servants unto Josuah and the Jsraelites which were the seed of Shem. Canaan hath his name from  which signifies to bow and to be bowed down,Lev. 26.31. & 11.33. Iudg. 4.23. & 8.28. Esay 45.16. Ezech. 16.27. to be humbled and abased, to be made crooked; and according to the use in the Chaldee, to be made ashamed, we have examples of them both, They shall be ashamed, &c. the Egyptians and Ethiopians of Chams and Canaans race. The daughters of the Philistins are ashamed of thy Lewd way. This name therefore of Canaan fits a servant well according to Josephs Dreame,Gen. 37.7.—10 & 42.6. & 43.28. Your Sheaves stood about and made obeisance to my sheaf. And his brethren said, shalt thou indeed reign over us? Or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? which yet was afterward fulfilled when they bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth. This Canaan was the yonger son of Ham, to whom, with his father Ham and his Brethren Cush, Mizraim and Put, Noah gave Africa, as to Japhet, Europe, and Asia to Shem. But Canaan invaded Phoenicia, part of Shems portion; whence Phoenicia is called after the name of Canaan, the Land of Canaan. And Shaul the son  according to the LXX,Exod. 6.15. with Gen. 46.10. Mat. 15.22. with Mark 7.26. of a Phoenician, is said to be the son  of a Canaanitish woman. And that woman, whom S. Matthew calls a Canaanitish woman, the same in S. Mark is called a Syrophenician. And among the antient names of Phaenice, Stephanus in his Book Devrbibus tells us, , a contract of Canaan is one; and the inhabitants , for .  What kinde of servant Canaan was, appears where he is called a Servant of servants, even the basest of servants. And the Reason is from the breach of Gods law imprinted in the minde, that honour is due unto our parents; as therefore there is a reward promised unto those who honour their parents, it being the first Commandement with promise, it followes, that the transgression of that great Comandement must draw after it a curse as a due recompence of reward. 2. This punishment seemes equall, according to the law of man, which condemnes those to vassalage and slavery, who are ungratefull to their Patrons, and Founders, Libertus ingratus patrono redit in pristinam servitutem. 1. Doubt. But why did Ham offend, and Canaan suffer punish∣ment? It's said that Ham saw his Fathers nakedness. It's an∣swered by some, that Canaan first saw the nakedness of his Grand-Father Noah, and told his Father of it. Others satisfie the doubt by saying, that Canaan is here put for his father Ham; and so Vatablus with other learned men understood here Ham not Canaan, and so the Arabick Version. How ever, Ham was not Exempted from the curse, though not named but understood
to be accursed in the curse of his son; as Jacob is said to blesse Jeseph, when he blessed his sonns. And the reason seemes to be,Gen. 48.6. Hebr. 11.21. Deut. 28.4.28 because the father and the son is taken as one person, so that as the blessing of the obedient Father extends unto the children, so the curse likewise to the diisobedent. Hence it is that we shall finde Ham as well as Canaan partaker of this curse; And therefore Egypt is called the house of servants. For whereas Egypt is by the Psalmist called the land of Ham;Psal. 105.25.27. and Plutarch among the names of Egypt, reckons , Hams land, whom the inhabitants worshipped afterward under the name of Jupiter Hammon; Hams posterity in Egypt, as well as Canaans in the land of Canaan, were under the curse of bondage. For, beside the brand of blackness upon their skin (as Servants were wont to be branded by their Masters) whence Egypt hath its name, so Aeguptium is rendred , that is, black in the old Glossary, the Egyptians, according to the curse, have been of old noted as servants and Vassalls unto other Nations. Hence it is that in Aristophanes, the Egyptian is called  a Tile or Brick bearer. Where the Scholiast saith , the Egyptians are noted in Comedies as Brick or Tile-bearers. And again, , It's the property of the Egyptians, to bear burdens. Aristophanes scoffing at the Verses of Euripodes (a far honester man than him∣self,) saith, , his Tragical Verses being made of Spondees, and so running some what heavily, An hundred Egyptians, saith be, are not able to carry his Verses. But not onely. —miserum fortuna Sinonem Finxit, vanum etiam mendacem{que}— The Egyptians were not miserable onely by their service unto men, but by that also which alone renders men truly miserable and base, their Vassalage and bondage unto sin. The Egyptians of old were infamous, as notorious Thieves according to the proverbial speech, Quot servi, tot fures. , saith the Scholiast on Aristophanes, and  is , to deal knavishly and thievishly. Suid. 2. Doubt. Is it simply a blessing to be aloft and to rule as Shem did? or is it a curse to be below, and a Servant as Canaan was? The Scripture seems plainly to speak as much.Deut. 2.1.13 But let us inquire, what is the true libertie, the true freedom of all the children of Shem. Not a power to will, or not to will this or that, not a power to do, or not to do this or that; as to sin, or not to sin, which they call, Libertas contradictionis, liberty of contradiction; No, nor is it a power to will or do this, or the contrary, which they call, Libertas contrarietatis, liberty of con∣trariety, as a power to love or hate, to do good or evill, to save life or to kill. If either of these were the true freedom, then were
he truly free, who hath a power to will or do what is good, or not to will or do it. He that hath a power to will or do what is good, or to will or do the contrary what is evill. As when Laban said,Gen 31.29. Iohn 19.10. It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt. And what Pilat said, Knowest thou not, that I have power to crucifie thee, and have power to release thee. If either of these were free, then were they, with whom they had to do, not truly free, or not so truly free, as they; then was Laban a more free-man then Jacob. Yea Pilat should be a more true free-man then Christ himself. For Laban could have done Jacob hurt or not, &c. And Pilat could have crucified Christ or released him. Yea if this were to be free, then could not God himself be said to be free, who yet is Liberrimum Agens, the most free Agent. For God being , he cannot but will Good, nor can he will or do that which is truly evill,Mark 3.4. He cannot sin, He cannot lie. If this were true free∣dom, then should not Christ be free. Nor should the confirm'd Angels or souls made perfect be so free as those in via; These can do good or evill, save alive or kill. Christ could not do both, nor the confirmed Angels nor the souls made perfect. Our Lord asks the question; Is it lawfull to do good on the Sabbath Day, or to do evill, to save life, or to kill. He imphes he could do but one of them. So that the true liberty imports a releasing from a mans own self-bondage, the bondage of his own carnal reason which had enslaved him; from the bondage of his own false and erroneous principles, whereon his heart was bound; The bondage of his own lusts whereunto he was a servant;Iohn 8.32, 33, 34, 35, 36. The bondage of sin and the law of sin, which had enthralled him. And being set free from all this bondage, the true free-dom is the addicting ones whole self,Rom. 6.7.18. and 8.2. understanding, reason, will, affections, actions, life; unto God and his righteousness. This freedom is wrought by the Lord Jesus Christ, his word, and Spirit, and Truth. So that True freedom is a power to will and do what is good without any hindrance, without any resistance in him who wills or does it. And thus God is most free.2 Iohn 3.9. and 5.18. Thus he is free who is fully born of God. Nor can he sin because he is born of God. Thus Laban had no power or Just freedom to hurt Jacob; if he had hurt him, it had been from a false freedom, from licence not from true libertie. The Magistrate hath no power to hurt an innocent man; if he hurt him, it is not according to his office, nor according to the rule of true freedom given him of God and Christ.2 Cor. 13.8.10. We can do nothing against the truth but for the truth. Pauls power was to edification and not to destruction. This is a free-dom, according to which the most free-men are servants,Acts 13.36. and 10.36. as David. And Jesus Christ, who is Lord of all; and so most free, He took upon him the form of a servant. Yea, this is a free-dom, according to which the meanest servant may yet be free;
So S. Chrysost. For a man may be a servant, yet not servile; he may be a free man, yet a servant, Joseph was a servant, yet not yielding to his own lusts, or his Ladies, he was a free-man. His Mistris a free-woman yet , a servant of servants, a slave to her own servant, because a vassal to hir own lusts. For the will of the fallen man being more prone to evill than good, is much better, and more free unto good being under the command and direction of another, especially if it be justa servitus a just or moderate servitude, than if it were wholly left unto it self. In which case that of Job. is true,Job 11.12. Man is born like a wild asses colt. Art thou called a servant; care not for it, , V. Lat. Sed etsi, but although thou mayest be made free,1 Cor. 7.21, 22 use it, that is, thy just service rather; and the reason proves it in the following words. For he that is called, &c. , saith Nestor; it is better to obey. These are the true  the Freemen, the Princes, the Noble∣men, the Gentlemen: A man may, according to this freedom, be a good servant to an evill Master, Obadiah was over Ahabs house, 1. King. 18.3. Joseph the servant of Potiphar, Jacob to Labam; Naaman now a Proselyte, yet servant unto the King of Syria, Daniel and the other Captives to Nabucadnezzar, Nehemiah to Artaxerxes; Saints in Cesars houshold, Phil. 4.22. Ephes. 6.5.6.7. 3. Doubt. If Canaan in person were not the servant of Shem then must he be in his posterity. But where shall we find, that Canaans posterity or the Canaanites were servants unto Shem or the Shemites? Surely we read of Canaans posteritie how ingenious in all or most Liberal Arts some of them were, in the time of peace, and how securely they lived; how powerfull and terrible to their enimies some of them were in their warrs, which seems not to agree with the Condition of servants. How securely they lived in peace and how ingenious they were in most Liberal and Mechanicall Arts, 'tis evident, in that Arithmetick with Astronomie came from the Zidonians (who were from Zidon Canaans first born) unto the Grecians. But their cheif excellency was in regard of Mechanick Arts; mixture of purple is ascribed to the Tyrians, Making of Glasse and weaving of Silk, to the Zidonianes. They were excellent Carpenters. 1. King 5.6. Therefore Homer calls them ; what ever witty invention in Garments, or Vessells, and what ever, it was wont to be attributed unto the industry of the Zidonians. By those Arts, they grew extream Rich and secure, Judg. 18.7. The Hittites were formidable and terrible in their wars, as appears 2. Kings 7.6. The Jebusites were not inferior unto the Hittites, who kept Jerusalem and Mount Zion, maugre all the power of Jsrael, till Davids time; And when he went to beseige
them, in contempt of him, they set no other guard to keep the gates then the Blind and the Lame.2 Sam. 5.8. The Amorites are reported to be as tall as Cedars, and as strong as Oaks, their Land a Land of Gyants, Deut. 2.20. Zamzmmim, the bedsted of Og one of them, is described, Deut. 3.11. much might be said of the other sonns of Canaan; All which seems not to suit with servitude, unto which Ham and Canaan were accursed by Noah. For answer here unto, I have shewen how, according to the history, the curse of Noah laid hold on Ham and the Egyptians. As for the Canaanites, 'tis true, they were very ingenious and witty in finding out of Trades, and herein more industrious then either Shem or Japhet. But this hindred not, but that they might yet well be of a base and servile disposition; as Cain and his posterity before the flood were exceeding cunning, and were the first inventors of founding metalls, and working in Iron, making of tents, building Cities, inventing instruments of Musick. All which although they be necessary for mans life, and though they may be, and doubtless are well used by the seed of Sheth and Enoch, and Noah and Shem; Yet the holy Ghost shewing that the seed of Cain before the flood were inventors of these things, as also the seed of Canaan after the flood; it's an evident argument that these things were the  the main business wherein the Cainites and the Canaanites imployed themselves. While mean time Sheth, Enoch, Noah, Shem and their seed busied them∣selves in Divine matters. In a word the Cainites and Canaanites busied themselves wholly about things belonging onely unto this life; The Shethites and Shemites were and are taken up wholly or principally with matters of the life to come. Let us now reflect upon our selves; if our whole mind thoughts and desires, be taken up about the things of this life, earthly things, &c. What are we better then they? we are even as they were, Cainites and Canaanites. For according to a mans thoughts, will, affections and actions, he is to be esteemed; Yea and ac∣cording to them, his reward shall be. Matth. 22.5.6. not onely they who reproached and slew the servants sent to invite them, are held unworthy to tast of the Marriage Supper, but they who were imployed about their lawfull callings. For it is not said, that he who went to his Farm, entred upon other mens Lands, or went to plough iniquity. Nor that he who went to his Merchandi∣zes robed other men of their Estates, or handled the ballance of deceit, Hos. 12.7. but that both made their outward and tem∣poral callings their  their whole business; their hearts delights were wholly taken up with those things. They were so given to the world, and the things of the world, that they had no mind towards God and the things of God.
But we are imployed about divine matters every Sabbath Day; Yea, and many a Lecture we hear and repeat. And did not Cain sacrifice? And had not the Canaanites their worship of God? The fear, faith, hope, love of God, if we be true Shemites, must inform our whole life; all our outward callings must receive their tincture from them. But was the martiall valour of the Hittites, Jebusites, and Amorites, any badge of their servitude? or could it consist with slavery? They who made others their Servants and Vassals as the Amorites did, Num. 21.27. could they themselves be such? To be formidable, terrible and cruel is no argument of true liberty, as I in part shall shew more anon. Obs. 1. We learn hence how to Judge of Scripture, seeming some time to speake of indviduals or singular persons; which indeed is to be understood of Nations and peoples descending from them; and mystically of certain spirituall conditions and estates. Thus of Hagar the Scripture saith, Gen. 16.1. that she was an hand-maid an Egyptian, the servant of Sarai, a bond-maid of Egypt, of Hams posterity as Canaan was; but she was a figure of the Law, that gendreth unto bondage. Also it's said vers. 12. that Jsmael was a man like a wild Asse: this was fulfilled in part in himself, Gen. 21.22. but much more in his posteritie, who were afterward called Ismaelites and Saracens, as they named themselves for their greater credit, as if they came of Sarai. And spiritually under the name of Ismael, the Apostle under∣stands the wild and savage nature of man brought forth by the first Covenant, Job 11.12. which becomes so much the more fierce when the Law goes about to tame it, Rom. 7.9.13. And therefore Jeremy compares the rebellious Israelites to a wilde Asse, Jer. 2.24. which cannot be tamed, Job 39.Gal. 4.30, 31. And therefore must be cast out. Thus what was foretold of Esau and Jacob, the elder shall serve the yonger, Gen. 25.22, 23. was not fulfilled in the persons of Esau and Jacob, but rather the contrary, as appears by their whole story, wherein Jacob submitts almost in all things to Esau. But this was fullfilled in their posterities, 2. Sam. 8.14. And this was expressly fortold by the Holy Ghost, Gen. 25.23. and accordingly understood and interpreted by the prophet, Malach. 1.2.3.4. Thus spiritually Esau and Jacob figured the former and the latter world, 2. Esdr. 6.8, 9. Yea, the earthly and the heavenly man, 1. Cor. 15.47. Thus what is written of Ephraim and Manasses, that Ephraim the younger should be the greater, we read not to have been fullfilled in their persons, but in their posterities, that Ephraims Tribe exceeded his brothers in number, Num. 1.32, 33, 35. And in place and dignity, Num. 2.18, 20. The like we must here understand of Shem and Canaan.
Obs. 2. Let children then learn from hence to honour and reverence their parents. Obs. 3. This layes an Obligation upon parents to preserve their gravity. Obs. 4. See their great infelicity who have evill parents and teachers. Accursed Ham and Canaan are punished in their posterity. Plato blessed himselfe that he was born a man of Greek parents, an Athenian, and that in the time of Socrates, by whom he was brought up. Obs. 5. All this misery proceeded from the sin of drunkenness, and that not affected by him, whom we read first to have been drunk. He knew not the strength and power of wine, but was meerly surprized and overtaken, Manebat ante vini inventionem omnibus inconcussa libertas. Nemosciebat à consorte naturae suae obse∣quia servitutis exigere: Non esset hodiè servitus, si ebrietas non fuisset. Servitude came from drunkenness: had there bin no drunkenness, there had been no slavery, saith S. Ambrose. Obs. 6. Hence parents have to note the Characters and marks of their own sinns in the punishments of their children. Obs. 7. Here it is worth the observing, how the Gentiles of Old, knowing these things, hid them in their fables. For so by Saturn they understood Noah, by Ham they understood the son of Saturn whom they called Jupiter Hammon. This Jupiter Hammon they say made an Eunuch of his Father. They read the word  Gen. 9.22. he cut for  he told or revealed his fathers nakedness unto his two brethren. 1. This Jupiter Hammon had a younger son Mercurius, that is, Canaan, the yonger son of Ham. 2. That Mercurius had his name à mercibus from Merchandize, and was their God of gain; as Canaan signifies a Merchant. 3. This Mercury they make a servant, as he complaines in Lucian, that he was distracted with so many services, that he must do nothing but run up and down of errands, ; whence the Phoenicians called Mercury  that is a servant, what so plainely expresses Canaan the servant of servants? 4. That Mercury they made the guide of their wayes; because the Canaanites first dared to go by Sea, and have of all other Nations the most convenient passages into all parts of the world. 5. They make their Mercury thievish, As ——the Phoenician or Canaanite will gain by every man. 6. They make their Mercury the god of Eloquence, signifying the fair and smooth tongue of trades-men in putting off their wares. 7. They say, Mercury was his fathers Pararius as Ham with Canaan beheld Noahs nakedness. These things as they are most usefull for the learned, so they make much for the strengthening of belief and assurance of all touching the truth of these most antient Scriptures. And that
the heathens gods were most-what counterfeited out of the histories in Gods word. Reproof. Those who give their children lewd example of swear∣ing, and cursing, of cheating, and cozening, and lying, of intempe∣rancy & drunkenness; and so discover their nakedness unto their children worse then Noah did. He knew not the strength of wine till then: but these often and often by their own experience; and by their lewd example teach their children, and propagate by them, their swearing, cursing, cheating, cousening, lying, intemperancie, and drunkenness from generation to generation, even to the worlds end, as much as lies in them. Exhort. 1. To Parents to be pious and holy Me videns . There is inbred in all Parents a care of their posterity according to 2. Sam. 7.19. If men have memory after death,2 Sam. 14 7. Gen. 44.30. it is busied about their posteritie, could the Philosopher say; They are a part of our selves. Exhort. 2. To children, to honour their Parents, and prevent their curse, and obtain their blessing. Mysticè. There is a Canaan and a seed of Canaan, that's neerer to us, and yet much more neerly concerns us. In Scripture they are said to be born of him, whose manners and life they follow, whether in good or evill; The sons of Abraham do the works of Abraham, John 8. who walk in the steps of Abrahams faith. Such are the Sonns of Shem the father of all the children of Heber. 2. In evill, ye are of your father the Devill, Joh. 8. for the lusts &c. Thus they are the seed of Canaan who do his works, Thou seed of Canaan and not of Juda saith Daniel to the unchaste Elder. Susan. vers. 56. Ezech. 16. The proper work of Canaan is that which he carryes in his name, pressing down, humbling, abasing, troubling, as Hierom deduces the word from  and , The body of sin and corruption that presseth down the soul, Wisd. 9.15. That servile nature that must be cast out and not abide in the kingdom, Joh. 8.34, 35. Gal. 4.30, 31. In a word, sin and iniquitie in generall (So Philo Judeus,) is that servil and base nature of Ham and Canaan, which is here mystically to be understood. And over that, the Lord hath given superiority and dominion unto the true Shem and all the Shemites of all the children of Heber, yea, unto Cain himself and the Cainites if they do well, as I shewed in Gen. 4.7. Note here the progeny of Ham. 1. Ham is the father of Canaan, burning hot zeal (that's  is the cause of commotion and fracti∣on, trouble, baseness, &c. The truth of this is evident by too ma∣ny examples of these few last yeares. Zelotical hot-headed men are presently moved, and then they are troubled and trouble all, saith S. Ambrose. 2. Canaan is made a servant though Ham sinned, Philo Judaeus gives the reason; the act is punished, not the habit.
1. This Canaan hath a numerous seed. As Christ hath his fishers of men and hunters,Gen. 10.15. so Satan hath his Zidonians his hunters and fishers of men also, Evill hunts the Violent man, Psal. 10.11. 2. Hittites, the fearfull ones, there is a fear or fainting, which is opposite unto faith and confidence, Gen. 45.26. These discourage the people of Shem from entring the holy Land, Num. 13.30; 31. Hebr. 3. vlt. They could not enter in because of un∣belief, Their harts fainted in them. And when they became fool∣hardy, who were they that discomfited them, but the Ama∣lekites and Canaanites? Num. 14.43. And these Hittites are they who are the first excluded out of the holy Citie, Rev. 21.8. The fearfull have the first part in the lake. 3.Mat. 7.6. Jebusites, people who tread under foot the pretious Truths. So Swine tread Pearles under feet. So do Apostates tread un∣der foot the Son of God which is the life of God in them, Hebr. 10.29. 4. Amorites, a bitter people, great talkers; the bitterness of Envy,Deut. 7.2. Jam. 3.14. Unto these are added Canaanites, such as are bowed down, Incurvati in semetipsos, selfe-lovers, proprietaries. It's the ordinary name of Merchants. Pherezites people that are careless and neglegent, who dwell secure without any fence, like those, Judg. 18.7. whom Dan, the Judgement surprizes. 5. Gergashites, Socii peregrinationis, who enstrange themselves from their God, and are inhabitants of the earth, the earthly mindedness, the thoughts dwelling on the earth and earthly things, Phil. 3.19. earthly, wisdom, Jam. 3.15. This is one of Canaans race, that presseth down the mind, and hinders it from busying it self on heavenly things, Col. 3.1, 2. 6. The Hivites people of a wicked life, whereby the ungodly life is sigured, which is propagated by talking. 7. The Arkites, persecutors, so  signifies. He that is born, and that, in us, after the flesh, persecuteth that which is born after the spirit, Gal. 4.29. 8. The Sinites, emnity stirred up by the law in them who are under the Law, and so are against the Law. 9. The Arvadites, the abundance of the curse or the ruling sins, the sins which reign in the mortall body. 10. The Zemarites, who come in Sheepes-clothing, the counterfeit simplicitie and self-holiness. 11. The Hamathites, the children of wrath. We read of Jabin King of Canaan, Judg. 4. who is the false knowledge. All these Moses writes of; and prepares a way for the expedi∣tion of Jsrael under Josuah, into their land, the land of Canaan. Omnia in figura. All things befell that people in figure, and were written for our admonition on whom the ends of the world are come.
Are there none of all these in thy Land? Examine thy self well. No Amorites? If thou hast subdued these they are servants to the true Shem, who subdues them and treades them under his feet; and the Canaanites especially the seven Nations, Deut. 7.1. the seven evill Spirits saith Rupertus. It is the Lords will, that thou destroy of the Canaanits every thing that breathes.Deut. 20.16. with Jos. 11.11. So Moses law commands; and Joshaa must fulfill the righteous∣ness of the law in us. Rom. 8.4. Now Judge of thy selfe from hence what freedom thou hast, if these servants of servants, these Canaanites rule in the. Lord∣ship and Dominion is the effect of righteousness, servitude is the effect of sin. Righteousness largly taken raised the house of Shem, the people of Jsrael above all Nations, Deat. 28. and 4.6. The Nations shall say surely this great nation is a wise and under∣standing people. This raised the Lacedemonians, and that long lasting Empire of the Romans. Which is Point-blank contrary to the opinion of men who conceive that there is no attaining unto honour and high place, but by lying, flattery and bribery, &c. And what is this else but to make the devill the author of honour, and all the glory of Kingdomes; as he saith, he is, Luke. 4.6. Sin brings the reproach upon Nations. All the Chanaanites were abased for the sin of Canaan. And whence is it,Prov. 14.34. that the Tria cappa  the Cappadocians, Cilicians, Carians are so infa∣mous, (unless the Cretians were one of the three. ) but from the abundance of their iniquity? I do not here menti∣on our neighbour Nations who have their brands upon them, nor our own Nation which doubtless hath the sins of the Canaanites in it, which abases it even unto Hell. Consol. 1. Alas the Canaanites prevail over me. When I would do good, evil is present with me. Hast thou not chosen rather to serve the Egyptians, and Canaanites, then to serve the Lord? 2 Chron. 12.7, 8, 9. Though they dwell with thee, yet thou needest not be familiar with them, or have any fellowship with them. Thou canst dwell next neighbour to one, with whom perhaps thou never exchangest one word scarce in a year. I have heard it is very usual in this City. Hath not Noah fore∣told it, that Canaan should be a servant unto the Shemites, accor∣ding to the LXX , an houshold servant? Most true it is, they dwell in me and nothing else. In me dwells no good thing. This proves not his right, but his usurpation. It is no new thing for servants to usurpe authority over their Masters. The sons of Zerviah were too strong for David. You tell me, I am Lord of Canaan; Canaan is rather Lord over me. 'Tis true, the time is when the childe differs little from a servant, although he be Lord of all, Gal. 4. The good that I would do I do not, and the evil which I hate, that I do. The Canaanites will dwell in the
Land; but the servant abides not in the house alwayes, John. 8.34. Yet trouble not thy self overmuch; what thou yet doest it is not thou, but sin that dwels in thee: I say while thou art yet a childe this comes to passe, and God is merciful, 1 John 2.12. Thy sins are forgiven thee for Shems sake, that is, for his Names sake. But thou must not be alwayes a childe. They are too strong for us. True, while only Moses is our Captain, Deut. 7.1. But when Joshuah the Lord Jesus leads us, in him we overcome them. Then the Gibeonites are made hewers of wood, and drawers of water. When Soomon the true Shemite and type of Christ the true Shem, and the true Solomon the Prince of peace overcomes the world, John 16.33. and bids thee , Considere, Be of good courage. The God of peace treads Satan under the Saints feet, Rom. 16.20. The Canaanites 1. are first made tributaries, when the Spirit lusts against the Flesh, Gal. 5.17. They are 2. made servants and bondmen, when the Flesh becomes obedient unto the Spirit. 3. They are lastly driven out and destroyed, when they that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts; as crucifixion was wont to be the death of servants. But alas! The Canaanites have Chariots of Iron, Jos. 17. They have so? What are the Chariots spiritually? Eliah and Elisha were called The Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. The true Prophets of the Lord are such; they are Chariots of fire, whose motion is upward, Heavenward, Godward, carrying our thoughts and affections to heavenly things, and things above. These are the Chariots of Amminadab, Cant. 6.12. the people of good will. The Chariots of the Canaanites they are earthly of Iron, heavie, tending downward toward earthly things, and car∣rying mens thoughts and affections downward toward things be∣low. He that is of the earth, speaks of the earth. And therefore the sons of Joseph, Jes. 17.17. Manasseh and Ephraim, they have a pro∣mise from the true Josuah to overcome the Canaanites, Phil. 3.13, 14. Manasseh, that is forgetfulnesse, forgets that which is behinde; and Ephraim fruitfulnesse and increase, endeavours after what is be∣fore, and presses hard after the mark, &c. The true Joshua, he saith it, Thou shalt cast out the Canaanites, though they have Chariots of Iron, and though they be strong. This promise is to be performed in these last dayes:Zach. 14.21. In that day there shall be no more a Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts. O but I have been a Canaanite by sinful life and evill manners. Even such have the best of us been, as the Lord tells those who were of Shems race and progeny, Ezech. 16.3. thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan, thy Father was an Amorite and thy Mother an Hittit, So was that woman, Math. 15.21. and her daughter; Acknowledge thine own vileness as she did, a Dog: And then shalt thou hear that even the Doggs, eat of the crums, &c. In a cursed condition. But the
Lord by a divine art proper to himself, can bring light out of darkness, good out of evill, blessing out of cursing, He turned the curse into a blessing, Nehem. 13.2. The Temple was built on the Threshing-floor of Arauna the Jebusite, 2. Chro. 3.1. where the Jebusites dwelt, there the Temple must be built. Christ who is the true Temple, Revel. 21.22. must be there builded, and reared up, where he was trodden down before. Arauna the Jebusite as a King gave to David that area, that ground whereon the Altar, and afterward the Temple was built;2 Sam. 24.18.23. and David com∣manded to gather the strangers of Jsrael, &c. 1 Chro. 22.2.3. whose number is reckoned 2. Chron. 2.17. who were these? A poor contemptible people of the Canaanites implyed in the building of Gods Temple: and these must be the men, and no other. In every Nation he that feares God, &c. Even the Tria  have yet had notable men among them. S. Paul was a Cilician by birth; and one of the Gregories was a Cappadocian, as Julian brands him. Our Lord Magnifies the faith of the Canaanitish woman, Matth. 15. Vriah the Hittite is famous for his faithfulness to David. Though these were all servants, yet Esay 10.27. The yoke is taken away because of the Anointing, even the unction of the Spirit, Luk. 4.18. For where the spirit of the Lord is, there is libertie; The true Shem gives this liberty. He takes from off us the yoke of servitude under Sin and Satan,Matth. 11.28, 29. under which we laboured and were heavy laden; and we taking his yoke of patience upon us, and learning of him lowlyness and meekness, we finde rest for our souls. Exhort. 1. To the true Shemites to exercise their power and authority over their servants. They have rebelled and usurped power. The Lord hath promised unto Abraham and his seed the Land of Canaan; Canaan is now Malae fidei possessor, he de∣taines from us the holy Land, the Land of holiness, Jos. 5.15. It is a good Land. All the spies say so, Num. 13.14. Even the Prophets who have search'd diligently, 1. Pet. 1.10. The Lord hath delivered them to utter destruction, Deut. 7.1. and 20.16, 17. If we drive them not out they will be pricks in our eyes, &c. Num. 33.55. Despair not, they are all conquerable. 1. The Zidonian, by Gods Fishermen, the Preachers of his Word. 2. The Hittite is cast out by love; perfect love casts out fear. 3. Christ gives power to tread down the Jebusite, all the power of the enemy. 4. The Amorite, bitter words, bitter envy is subdued by meekness of wisdom, Jam. 3.13, 14.5. Minding things above, subdues the Gergashites earthly mindedness, Col. 3.1.6. The Hivite by Christ who is our life, Col. 3.7. The Arkite, persecution by him who is born after the Spirit. He cast out the bond-woman and her son. 8. The Sinite or legal righteousness by the righteousness of Christ. 9. The Arvadite,
the ruling sin, by the reign of Christs righteousness. 10. The Zemarite, Sheeps clothing by sincerity. 11. The Hamathite by the grace that brings salvation, 1 Thess. 5.9. Jabin false knowledge king of Canaan is subdued by Deborah and Barak, that is, the Word and Spirit, which is as lightning, Judg. 4. So Anti-Christ is slain by the brightness of Christs coming. 2 Thess. 2. And thus there shall be no more a Canaanite, in the house of the Lord of hosts. Meanes. Believe Josuah, even Jesus who promiseth, Jos. 17.17.2. Pet. 1. adde in your faith virtue. Hence will proceed obedience of faith, Rom. 1. See what promise the Lord made even to Cain, Gen. 4.7. The Weapons of our warfare (the whole armour of God, Ephes. 6.) these are not carnal, but mighty through God, for the subduing the Zamzummims, even every evill thought to the obedience of Christ, Deut. 2.20. 2 Cor. 10.5.
SERMON IV. God shall enlarge Japhet. Axiom 4. THe words contain the blessing of Japhet, and that amplified by the opposite curse of Ham and Canaan. The blessing of Japhet containes his Inlargement by the authority of it. Degree of inlargement: He shall dwell in the tents of Shem. The divine truths contained in the words, are these. 1. God shall enlarge Japhet. 2. Japhet shall dwell in the Tents of Shem. 3. God shall so enlarge Japhet, that he shall dwell, &c. 4. Canaan shall be his servant. In the first of these let us enquire who Japhet was. what it is to enlarge Japhet. Who was Japhet. And first let us consider him in his History, and secondly in his Mystery. In his History; and so according to his Person. Posterity. According to his person: and so when I spake of Shem, I have shewed, that Japhet was the eldest son of Noah, though common∣ly when the three brothers are recited together, Japhet is put in the last place. But however Japhet were the elder brother, and before Shem, yet was Japhet after Shem in grace and favour, and accordingly he obtained the blessing after him, and in vertue of Shems bles∣sing, in whose seed all nations should be blessed; Yet of all the three brothers, Japhet was the most famous in all the Heathen Writers. The Greeks acknowledge him their Founder, and first Father; so that they own no man before him either in age or dignity; whence is that Proverb,  Japheto antiquior, more antient or more honourable then Japhet. That word which we turn inlarge is  which is diversly ren∣dred by Interpreters, by the Chaldee as we in our English, by the LXX , which accordingly the Latin hath Dilatet, Let God enlarge Japhet. So the Spanish, Italian, High and Low
Dutch. Howbeit, according to another signification of the word , the French, Genevah, and our old English Translation turns it to perswade; and Munster howsoever he be sway'd by the authority of the Rabbins, and so turns it inlarge, yet he confesses, that the word is used in the Proverbs often to perswade: accor∣dingly Tremellius turns the word Alliciet, God shall intice, and Osi∣ander Persuadeat, Let God perswade. And though we put inlarge in the Text, as Diodati also doth, we have perswade in the Mar∣gent. Besides these two significations, there is also a third, and that is Condecoret, Let God beautifie Japhet. This translation hath authority from Jonathans paraphrase who understood the Hebr.  to come not as most do from , but from  to be beau∣tiful and comely; and therefore he renders the words, Let God beautifie the borders of Japhet. Here are three interpretations of the word, and every one hath reason to speak for it self; and the Translators are Stiff and resolute each for his own. And why may not the words, ac∣cording to the fullness of the Spirit, bear all three significations, and all of them consonant unto the truth and the Analogie of faith? Words have their bounds. The Spirit hath one. And therefore since, according to Divine artifice and skill, the Spirit of God hath couch'd so many significations under one word in the Text, I dare not so make choice of one that I should wholly reject the other two; and therefore as Esay 65.8. The new wine is found in the cluster, and one saith, destroy it not; for a blessing is in it; So I may say of these significations, reject neither one nor other, for a blessing is in it, part of Japhets blessing is con∣tained in it as we might finde in them all, but I shall speak of the two former onely as most consonant to my scope; and first of that which our translators have made choise of, and put in the Text; God shall Inlarge Japhet, or as the words are  God shall inlarge unto Japhet, vizt. his habitation or dwelling, unto which the following words have reference. When God is said to in large Japhet we must understand this either according to extension, outwardly and literally, or accor∣ding to intension, inwardly and spiritually. 1. According to extension and outwardly, God may be said to inlarge Japhet, when having increased his posterity, he makes room for them in the world, as he did when he gave them all the Islands and Peninsula's, as Britany, Jreland, Thule, Creta Sicilie, &c. the Peninsula's as Spain, Italy, Greece, &c. In a word, all Europe; which became the most populous of all the three parts of the world, the seat of the Greek and Roman Empire, and added also the lesser Asia, and Media, and part of Armenia, Jberia, Albania, and those vast regious towards the North heretofore
inhabited by the Scythians, now by the Tartars, Officinas Gentium & velut vaginas nationum, as Jornandes calls them. Because those parts are extream fruitful, I speak not of the earth, but of men, which in all ages they have power'd forth into other parts of the world, and enlarged their dwellings. And thus God inlarg'd Japhet. Obs. 1. Hence we may observe another example of piety to∣wards Parents, and the reward of it from God. Obs. 2. Though God blessed and inlarged Japhet for ho∣nouring his father in covering his nakedness, and cursed Canaan for dishonouring him and deriding the nakedness of Noah, yet this is no warrant for the unwary and unseemly carriage of Noah or any parent. True it is, the good man was excusable who till then knew not the strength of wine; Nor did the Patri∣arks for 1600 yeares; they lived without wine all their life, without which some of us cannot live one day. Obs. 3. How powerfull is the blessing of a father, Eccl. 3.9. It stablisheth, yea, it inlargeth the house of the children. Obs. 4. Nor can we well omit here what the Jewes take spe∣ciall notice of, that when Noah blesseth Japhet, he useth onely the name of  God, as a name known among all Nations. No Nation so barbarous but it acknowledg'd a God; but when Noah blessed Shem, he addes to  to the Name of God, the great name Tetragrammaton Jehova, whereby they understand a great prerogative of Shem and his Sonns the Jsraelites and Jewes, that the proper name of God should be known onely unto them. But alas! what benefit is it unto them, or us, to know God when we worship him not as God? What profit is it for them or us to boast of God, that we know his will, when yet we do it not? Yea, what a shame and disorder is it to know so much, and do so little? —Pudet haec opprobria nobis & dici potuisse, & non potuisse refelli. Yea what a terror it is? And how ought it to trouble us, since he that knowes his Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes? Obs. 5. To have an inheritance in the earth, or a portion of the earth for an inheritance, is a blessing of God, Math. 5.5. Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the earth, 1. Chron. 4.10. Jabez said, O that thou wouldst bless me indeed and enlarge my coast. Obs. 6. God is the author of this blessing. It is God that in∣largeth Japhet. And it is the God of Jsrael that Jabez prayed unto to inlarge his coast, 1. Chron. 4.10. He gives inheritances in the land of Canaan. Yea, among those who are strangers and enemies unto his people. Deut. 2.5.9.19. Obs. 7. The Lord sets bounds unto inheritances in the earth, Act. 17.26. He gives a smaller portion to some, a greater to others, as here he inlargeth Japhat.
Mysticè. As I shewed what Mysteryes the heathen hid under Shem and Canaan, so let us inquire what Mysteries they understood in the name of Japhet. That portion which Noah allotted unto his son Japhet was the sea and the Islands and Peninsula's in the sea, &c. Gen. 10.5. wherefore by Japhet they understood Neptune, whom they made God of the sea. Neptuno maritima omnia cum insulis obvenerunt, saith Lactantius. Japhet hath his name from  to inlarge as Noah implies in his blessing, and Neptune is from the same root passive  that is inlarged. As in Greek they call Neptune  from  which is to extend and inlarge from the large and wide sea, Job 11.9. Psal. 104.25. given him to his portion, whence the Egyptians, saith Plutarch in his Isis . Now because he lived holily in the world, the same befell him from the world, that befell his father and Brother Shem, and all that lived Godlily in the world. Therefore they used his name in contempt when they spake of doting old men, calling them Japhets, as our English Old Crone, in the same sense is an imitation of , that is, Saturne, by whom they under∣stood Noah, as I shewed before. Hesychius, , Japhetus is by way of derision an old doting Fool. Suidas , Aristoph. Nubibus. , not to answer your father saucily, nor to upbraid him with his old age, by calling him Japhet. Hence we may learn not to be too hasty in crediting evil re∣ports of men who are long since past, or to esteem the the worse, because they have gotten an ill name in the evil world. Does not our Saviour imply that the best of men should be so used? Matth. 5.10, 11. Yea, do we not finde, that many who professe religion, defame, slander, reproach and speak evill of things that they know not, and of men much better then themselves, only because they are not on their side? Seth and Shem though in great ho∣nour among good men, Eccl. 49.16. were traduced of old by name, by the wicked world, as I shewed out of Plutarch; and Japhet fared no better, as I have now shown. So they dealt with Christ and his Apostles. The Serpent in all ages hath persecuted the womn, a especially in these latter times, and cast out of his mouth water as a flood, &c. Revel. 12.15. that is, reproaches, slanders, and defamations. Behold, that great and precious promise made here to Japhet, and the sons of Japhet, and renewed under manifold several names and expressions, Peace, Esay 32. Rest, Psal. 95. Refreshing, Acts 3. A wealthy place, Psal. 66.12. , the Latin Refrigerium.
Surely they read  which is respiratio, and the Chaldee turns it  a breathing, a Spirit, even the Spirit of God it self, which is the Spirit of promise, the great and pretious promise of God made unto all the sons of Japhet. So the word  which we turn to refresh, whence  the Spirit, it signifies to enlarge as in the text, 1 Sam. 16.23. Dilatabatar Saul,  2 Cor. 6.13.  be ye inlarged, or inlarge your love, Matth. 11.28. I will give you rest, Arab. I will inlarge you. As by Shem the Jewes Church is understood, so by Japhet is commonly understood the Gentiles. So Gen. 10.5. And as there is an inlarging, as also contracting, according to extension natural and outward, so like wise is there an inlarging according to inten∣sion spiritual and inward. And that either that which God gives and leads into, or that which the evil Spirit and our own evil heart is misled into. 1. That which God gives, &c. That we may understand this aright, we must know that as bodies are said sometimes to be in strait and narrow places, sometimes to be in a more large room; so likewise by metaphor the souls and spirits of men are sometimes in anguish and straits, sometimes in latitude, freedom and inlargement, Psal. 4. And as cold con∣tracts and makes condensation and thickens bodies, and contracts them into a narrow space; and heat resolves them and sets them in a large room. Even so there are certain streightning affecti∣ons and passions and compositions of them, as self-love, fear, grief, sadness, envie, suspition, these contract and straighten the heart. And there are affections which widen and inlarge it, as the love of God and our neighbour, mercy, hope, joy, cheerful∣nesse, delight, these enlarge the heart. Accordingly in Scrip∣ture we read  and  opposed one to other, that is, straits, and inlargement. So  and , 2 Cor. 6.11, 12, 13. This largness is of the understanding, will and affections, which how so ever they differ much one from the other, yet are they all signified by the heart; As when God is said to have given to Solomon largness of heart, 1. King. 4.29. Also the largness of will and affection, Psal. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, Os cordis ad desiderandum & petendum vtilia, & implebo illud, the mouth of thy heart, thy will and affections. Saith Ludolphus. Why is God said to inlarge the heart of Japhet and the sonns of Japhet? Because he alone knowes all the hearts of the children of men, and alone can work upon them, widen and inlarge them. He alone hath wherewithall to fill them, as wisdom, under∣standing, fullness of joy, yea, God Himself, the Objectum beaticum & Author actus fruitivi, 1. King. 4.29. Yea, whereas the Lord hath made the man for his Temple and dwelling place, and himself is immense and beyond all bounds, Job. 11.7, 8, 9. it's necessary, that he inlarge the strait heart of man, and make him
in some proportion capable of himself; whence is that prayer of the Apostle, Ephes. 3.14.—21. that They may be filled with all the fulness of God. Reproof. 1. Those who walk at large in a latitude according to their own corrupt hearts even as the evill spirit drives them; who deny themselves in nothing that their own flesh, or the Devil, and the lusts of men Suggest unto them. These are the beasts that walk in actu not in via, in the broad way where the beasts go, not in the path and the narrow way wherein the men of God walk: God doth not inlarge these. Reproof. 2. The sonns of Japhet who walk in a strictness of their own chosen holiness, and that without any warrant out of the word of God; they have chosen this to themselves, not the narrow way that leades unto the broad, but a narrow path taken out of the broad way. Who required these things at your hands? Consol. For the sonns of Japhet. True it is the Lord invites to enter into the straite gate, Math. 7.13, 14. but they shall not alwaies be in straits, there shall come a time of inlargment. Nor doth the Lord cast his Japhets into straits, that they should continue in them; much less perish in them. The Gold is not cast into the furnace to be consumed in it, but to be purged and purified by it, Zach. 13.9. Our God is a consuming fire, Hebr. 12. and who shall dwell with everlasting burnings, Esay. 33. 15, 16. The Apostle declares for himself and his fellow Apostles and all the Ministers of God, how their way lyes throw straits, 2. Cor. 6.4. but does it end in straits also? vers. 11. Our heart is inlarged. The Psalmist declares as much in regard of the whole Church, Psal. 66.10, 11, 12. We went through fire and water, but thou broughtest us to a wealthy or a large place; as I shewed before. Exhort. To the sonns of Japhet to be inlarged. The Apostle makes this exhortation to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.13. be ye  be genuine children of Japhet, be ye also inlarged. It was a noble desire of the sons of Joseph which we read, Ios. 17.14. Means. We must pass thorow the narrow, before we can come unto the broad 2 Esdr. 7.1-14. Ye remember a great part of Ja∣phets portion was the sea and the Islands in the sea; Viam qui quaerit ad mare, illum oportet omnem quaerere comitem sibi, saith the Co∣median. Gen. 26.19.—22. Esec, Sitnah, Rehoboth. 1. Esec, con∣tention between the flesh and spirit. 2. Sitnah, opposition of Satan. 3. Through these we come to Rehoboth, inlargment. Our Lord requires us to go thorow the narrow passages before we can come unto the broad; and this cannot be without contention and strife, Math. 7. Open thy mouth wide, pray largely, and he will fill it. O that all our contentions, hart-burnings, bitter invectives,
detractions, slanders, oppositions one against another. O that all were laid down! O that every one of us would mind his own dutie, Prose quis{que} which the Lord requires of him, to enter into the narrow way, that the Lord might inlarge us! The Lord perswade our hearts hereunto! God shall perswade Japhet. This is the first and proper signifi∣cation of the word, to entice or perswade; which our transla∣tors have in the margent; which yet might have been put in the Text if it had pleased them. But because this word perswade hath a two fold signification. 1. To sollicite, allure and intice; which is an endeavor to bring one off to some-what, we desire. 2. So to sollicite and intice that we prevail, which is properly to perswade. The word may be understood in both senses here. For the better understanding of this point, we must inquire. 1. What it is to perswade. 2. Whereunto God may be said to perswade; And 3. How. The word is , of a middle nature, and used in Malum. Bonum. 1. What it is to perswade; it signifies to induce, lead, or draw one by arguments and reasons to think, believe, and do some thing; yet so, that there is a power left to dessent. Thus when we commend something as honest, honourable or profita∣ble, and exhort to the doing of it, by motives, reasons, and ar∣guments, we may be said to perswade. And this I much suspect was the reason why the major part of our Translators cast the word perswade into the margent; because they conceived, that God acts upon the minde and will, not by motives and reasons inducing it to believe, and so leaves it free; but by a super pon∣dium overpoysing it, and determining the act of it, and so here not perswading, but inforcing Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem. The event of perswasion is either belief of what is perswaded unto, or unbelief. Now because that whereunto God perswades, cannot but be good, what is that good whereunto God may be said here to perswade Japhet. If we here understand the person of Japhet, we may conceive, that the object of Gods perswasion is love, brotherly love, and that he should not envie his yonger brother Shem his precedencie and preeminency of blessing. Thus the Lord perswaded Cain, Gen. 4.7. But the blessing being propheticall as the former, it concern'd not onely Japhet himselfe in his person, but also in his posteritie, even all the Gentiles Church, even all the Islands of the Gentiles, Gen. 10.5. whereof we are a part, God shall perswade Japhets Sons: But whereunto? whereunto else but unto himself? to believe in God the Father, and to believe in Jesus Christ the Son of God who should break the Serpeents head, so
God the Father first perswades Japhet and his sons to believe in himself, Hebr. 11.6. 2. God perswades Japhet and his sons to believe in Christ, and so to dwell in the Tents of Shem, Joh. 14.1. This is the main aim; but non pervenitur ad finem nisi per media. 3. How does God perswade Japhet and his sons to believe? Mediately and outwardly by the Ministers of his Word. Imme∣diately and inwardly by the operation of his Spirit. 1. Medi∣ately and outwardly; and so God perswades by the Word. Miracles. 1. By the Word it self read and meditated on; or by the same Word preached and heard; for so, Faith comes by hearing, Rom. 10. Thus God makes his Ministers his , 1 Cor. 3.9. Workers to∣gether with God. Such as plant and water his husbandry, which is the Church. Such as build and rear up the Tabernacle of God which is fal∣len down, which is his Church: ye are Gods building. Such are Gods Oratours and Ambassadours, to whom he gives commission; and he sends them forth to invite his rebellious subjects, and to perswade them to come in, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. Another Meanes are miracles and wonders, whereby God perswades men to be∣lieve, and accordingly they are called  from  the word in the Text, to perswade, Deut. 13.2. 2. God perswades Japhet and his sons immediately and in∣wardly by his Spirit; this is that Tractus Dei, the drawing of the Father. Where ever there is this drawing, it is from something unto something. From something, and so God the Father by his Spirit, disswades Adam from his vain thoughts, Psal. 94.11. corrects and chastens the man. God the Father draws and perswades him un∣to something. He hath shewen thee O man what is good, Mich. 6.8. and so the Father instructs him out of his Law, Psal. 94.12. These are Funiculi Adam, the cords of a man, whereby he is naturally in∣clined to be moved, Hos. 11.4. and because both proceed from love, he addes, with bonds of love. All these made up into life and example, most forcibly perswade; as 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. Reason in regard of 1. God himself who perswades. 2. Japhet to be perswaded. 3. That whereunto God perswades. 4. The end of Gods perswasion. 1. God alone knowes himself perfectly and knowes the Son, and all meanes necessary for perswasion, what hinders, what helps. And he alone knowes the hearts of all the children of men and what expedient will best move them. He is most loving unto Japhet; Charior est superis homo quàm sibi. He is most faith∣full and true in all his testimonies. He is most able to effect what ever he promises or threatens. 2. In regard of Japhet and his sons, none of them all can come unto the true Shem, except
God perswade him thereunto, Joh. 6.44. 3. Reason in regard of that whereunto God perswades the sons of Japhet; which, unless God, by his spirit, reveale, it's altogether hidden from the sons of Japhet, 1. Cor. 2.9, 10, 11. 4. The end of this manner of perswading, is the glory of God, 1. Cor. 2.5. and mans salvation; And therefore the Lord used plain men and men illiterate, Act. 4.13. Obs. 1. It is God alone, who can perswade the heart unto himself. And therefore the Poets ascribed perswasion unto their Goddess , whom they made their Goddess of eloquence, whom the Latins call Suada and Suadela. But who is indeed the true , Suada or Suadela, who but the wisdom? Who but the onely wise God? Who teaches like him? Never man spake as this man, &c. He is that which they ascribe to their Suadela; He is Flexanimus, he that bowes the soul, , who leades and drawes the soul. He it is who gives faith, Ephes. 2.8. He it is who increases it, Luk. 17.5. It's a business worthy of God himself to perswade the heart. And though it seem good unto God to use men whereby to per∣swade men, that so it may seem possible, as also for the honour of his Minister. Yet where any are said to believe, the Minister is not said to cause that belief, though he propound the object of faith, though he instruct, though he exhort men to belive, and use motives and inducements of all kindes, and meanes and helps. All which are such as are sufficient for the producing of belief, Act. 14.1. But that they may be effectuall and thorowly perswasive, and work that belief, it is Gods guift. For who is Paul, who is Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believed, instruments by whom God works? He himself is the principall Agent, and men so far-forth believe as it is given them of God, 1. Cor. 3.4, 5. Act. 14.1. They so spake, that a great multitude of the Jewes and also of the Greeks believed. Obs. 2. The meanes of bringing men unto God, is perswasion and allureing of them, Hos. 2.14. I will allure her and bring her into the wilderness, and speak unto her heart. Obs. 3. This shewes what manner of men the Ministers of God ought to be, and how they ought to behave themselves and deal with the sons of Japhet in perswading them. As they per∣swad for God, so to be men of God; Not to use their own words, as Orators are wont to do, words of man's wisdom; but to use the words of God, which he teacheth and useth in perswa∣ding the hearts of men. 1. Cor. 2.4. Obs. 4. The spirit of God abhors not allusions and paranomasias, they are very frequent and ordinary in the Scripture, whose elegancie we loose by translations, a thing that cannot possibly be helpd. Water looses the sweetness in the stream, which it
hath in the Fountain: ; the name of Judah , of Nabal his name , Gaza  Zeph. 2.4. What seest thou Jeremy? , thou hast seen well; for , Jer. 1.11, 12. In the story of Susanna, Daniel saith to one Elder saying, he saw them  under a Lentisk tree, Angelus Dei, ; to the other , saying, under an Holm tree, Angelus Dei, . Hos. 5.1. , judgement toward you, because ye have been a snare , Amos 8.2.  summer fruit,  the end, Mich. 1.10. in the house of Aphrah roul thy self  v. 14. the houses of Achzib, , Esay 5.7. he looked for , judgement; and behold , oppression; & for  righte∣ousness, and behold , a cry. And 24.17, 18. , fear, and the pit, and the snare, and very many the like. Reproof. The boldnesse and presumption of those who in∣vade Gods soveraignty, intrude and usurpe dominion over the hearts of men, which God alone can know, and move, and judge. Reproof. Those who refuse to be perswaded by God and his Ministers, yet yield to the perswasions and enticements of the Canaanitish woman, the Harlot iniquity, inwardly and outward∣ly alluring, Jam. 1.14. Prov. 7.12. the lusts of the eyes, of the flesh, and pride of life. When God perswades to the honour, that comes of God onely, the pride of life stirs them up to seek honour one of another. When he perswades to the beauty of holinesse, and the plea∣sures at his right hand, the lusts of the flesh prevail with them to follow a skin-deep beauty. When God perswades the heart that Godliness is the great gain, yet Mammon prevails with them; Si spes refulserit lucri, &c. Look almost every where, and see whether gain, where ever it is, oversway not all the Rhetorick of the Spirit. That Trade, and the mysteries of it by which men live, and those men on whom they depend for their livelyhood, those are more powerful in their perswasions, then all the Apostles, were they alive again. Demetrius had a gainful Trade, and how did he prevail with his fellow-craftsmen? Acts 19.24 — 34. Those on whom men depend for their bread, be they what they will be otherwise, so they be rich, they are more powerful in the hearts of those who depend upon them, then all the Sermons in the world, all the eloquence of the best Orators; yea, they have greater power to perswade then the manifest truth of God. would God this were not too true every where, especially in this City!—Bene numatum decorat suadela Venus{que} An Asse laden with gold will obtain entrance into the strongest Fort. But alas! we have not sufficiency of meanes, that we may be perswaded. We read of some thousands converted at one and other of S. Peters Sermons, Act. 2. But how few are there at
this day, that are so converted? The fail therefore seems to be in the insufficiency of the meanes. 'Tis possible there may be a fail in regard of the meanes. But I beseech yee, who of us layes the blame where it ought principally to be layed? even upon our selves. We read and heare what yet we practice not. Whats the reason; we are not perswaded of the truth that is delivered. The Scripture saith, Walk in love, as Christ loved us, Ephes. 5.1, 2. Who is there that will lay down his old hatred, his deadly fuid against his neighbour, and so walk in love? He believes not that he ought to walk in love, or if he do believe that he ought to walke in love, yet it is onely to those that love him, it is not so as Christ loved us: How was that? when we were ene∣mies, Rom. 5.10. he believes not that, and therefore loves them not, Ephes. 5.18. Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excesse, &c. Would a man be drunk every other day (as many are, to say no oftner,) would they if they believed this, and that God per∣swades them? But we want means; John 6. No man can come unto me, except the Father draw him. How doth the Father draw men? How otherwise then with the cords of man, whereby it is fit a man should be drawen? Thou pretendest, thou hast not grace; and if it pleased God to give thee grace, thou wouldest do thus, and so: Thou Hypocrite! Thou drawest iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as with Cart-ropes, and expectest, that God should force thee against nature, and against grace. Is this to draw with the cords of a Man, or with the cords of a Beast? yea, the Beast it self is not so drawen. I have shewen, I am perswaded undeniably, that its a rare thing, that any believer should want power to do what he be∣lieves, Ephes. 1.18, 19. Thou art even like the brethren of the rich man in Hell; they had the means of grace, &c. but that would not serve their turn: the rich man tels Abraham, that if one came from the dead, then they would believe. They were a knot of good fellowes, like their brother, and they were so accusto∣med to fare deliciously every day,Luke 16.27.31. they were so serviceable one to others humour, that they durst not displease one another. What saith Father Abraham to that motion? They have Moses and the Prophets. If they hear not them, neither will they be perswaded though one rose from the dead. Exhort. Not to yield to the perswasion of the Canaanites, Deut. 11.16. There is a secret enticing and drawing of the heart, Job 31.27. Some men lye in wait to deceive others, Ephes. 4. But though they did not, our own lusts are deceitful. But there is no such danger of being deceived, as under shewes of piety. The evill spirit could not suggest a more ready way of deceiving then by being a lying Spirit in the mouth of Ahabs prophets, 1 King. 22. They are foolish perswasions, so , if we forsake
those foolish perswasions, and those who use them, and are per∣swaded by them, we shall have the life, Prov. 9.6. Forsake the foolish and live. Exhort. 2. If God perswade Japhet, then must Japhet be per∣swasible. So much is implyed in the words. God shall perswade the perswasible. There must be a complying and yeilding on Japhets part, on our part, we must not Ponere obicem, oppose brutish reluctancy; Psal. 32.8. I will instruct thee and teach thee, saith the Lord, in the way that thou shalt go, &c. But be not thou as the Horse and Mule. The third significacion of these words, vizt. God shall Beautify Japhet; I omit, as for brevity sake, so as not so proper to my present business. Axiom. 5. He shall Dwell in the Tents of Shem. 1. What are here Tents. 2. Tents of Shem. 3. Who shall dwell in the Tents of Shem. 1. A Tent is a Tabernacle è velis tensis factum & mutabile, quod ut libet moveri potest, Es. 38.12. it is tabernaculum ambulatorium, domus vaga, a portable house. The fashion of it was this: They set up four stakes or pillars of wood; and over and about these they hung Curtaines, Esay. 54.2. And strengthened it with cords. 2. Tents of Shem are by the LXX rendred the houses of Shem, and may be so litterally understood, Zach. 12.7. Malachy 2.12. Revel. 20.9. The author and inventer of Tents was Jabel, Gen. 4.20. and the like Oracle we read, Num. 24.24. So we read a literal meaning of the point. Spiritually; and so either Japhet shall dwell with Shem in his Tents; or when Shems posterity should be cut off, Japhet and his sons the Church of the Gentiles should be then Surrogatus Israel as the Apostle proves largely, Rom. 11.11.—17. 3. Who is said to dwell in the Tents of Shem? this is diversly understood. Some conceive out of the words next before, that the Name of God is here to be repeated and understood, God shall enlarge and perswade Japhet and He, that is, the same God shall dwell in the tents of Shem. As if these words were thus to be knit unto the former. God shall in∣large Japhet and give him a larger portion of the earth; But God himself will dwell in the tents of Shem, and in Shems posterity; which are the Jews, he will choose his Church, wherein he will dwell for ever. Which are almost the very words of David the Shemite, Psal. 132.13, 14. And this was fulfilled when Christ took flesh of the Jews, and was born of the seed of David the Shemite ac∣cording to the flesh, Rom. 1.3. And therefore S. John speakes of Christ, John 1.14. The word was made flesh, ; V. Lat. Habitavit in nobis. This is true of the whole Church: but in a peculiar and proper respect to be understood of Christ, Col. 2.9. In whom () dwells all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily. And therefore the Lord called his Body his Temple, Joh. 2. He spake of the temple of his body. This doubtlesse is a Doctrine pi∣ous and unquestionable; but that which may be proved rather from other places then this. For this verse seems to be under∣stood of Japhet, and his seed only, as the former only of Shem and his. And if this should also belong to Shem, then the later part should be referred to Shem also, which would be a superfluous repetition. It belongs then to Japhet, he shall dwell in the tents of Shem. And how is that to be understood? To dwell in the Tents of Shem, is 1. Either to dwell with Shem in his Tents. For so they render  adhabitavit & cohabitavit, to dwell together with; as if the phrase so sound, as that Ephes. 3.6. That the Gentiles should be fellow∣heires, &c. and 2.14, 19. Or 2. that the sons of Japhet should dispossess the sons of Shem of their Tents. And to that purpose, 1. Chro. 5.10. Reason. 1. In regard of God, he is the God of Japhet by co∣venant, as well as the God of Shem, Rom. 3.19. He is rich unto all that call upon him. 2. In regard of Shem. His Tents are large, Locus est & pluribus umbris viz. under the Gospel, Esay 54.1.—4. Their former straitness made onely for the Jewes is forgotten, Esay 65.16. Lam. 2.6. 3. In regard of Japhet and his sons, their docibleness and readiness to believe the Gospell, Rom. 10.19, 20. This is the elder son to whom his father said, Go and labour in the vineyard, and he said I will not, but afterwards repented and went, Math. 21.28. The prodigal son that returns to his father, Luk. 15. Obs. 1. The Church is here compared to Tents and Taberna∣cles; No certain fixt dwelling houses; and so we understand, Hebr. 11.9, 10. Num. 24.5. Zach. 12.7. Mal. 2.12. 2 Cor. 5.1. So S. Peter speaks of his own body, 2 Pet. 1.13. . Such are the people of God, a kinde of Scenitae & Nomades, as Pliny and others tell us, and as the Tartars at this day, living in Tents and Tabernacles. We have here no abiding City, but we seek one to come, Hebr. 13.14. Obs. 2. The Church is here compared in special to the Tents of Shem. For as Seth and his house before the flood, were the Church of God. So Shem and his houses, his Tents are the Church of God after the flood. After Shems Tents were the Tents of Abraham and Sarah whence came the Jewes, Joh. 1.14. For of Shem came the Jewes and Christ himself the true Shem, according to the flesh. And so Salvation is of the Jewes, Joh. 4. Obs. 3. Japhet and his sons, all the Gentiles are by corrupt nature strangers to the Tents and houses of Shem. Of old they dwelt not in Shems Tents; they belonged not unto the Church of God; They had no portion in Jacob, Ephes. 2.12.
Obs. 4. Here is an expresse, cleer, and manifest promise made touching the calling of the Gentiles to Christ. I say, to us this is clear and manifest, which before-time was hidden, and there∣fore called a Mysterie, Ephes. 3.3. Col. 1.26, 27. Obs. 5. We see the truth of Gods promise made unto the Gen∣tiles, Japhet and his sons to dwell in the Tents of Shem, that they make the principall part of the Church. For allthough so rich is our God towards all that call upon him that he excludes not any, no not the posterity of Ham, out of Shems house, where there is neither Greek nor Jew, &c. Col. 3.11. Yet certain it is, that the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ hath even from the Apostles times downward most florished in Europe, and that part of Asia which was Japhets portion, where there were the seven first known Churches, Revel. 2. and 3. Yea this promise to Japhet is so performed, that Shems po∣sterity is cut off, and Japhet dwells in his Tents, the Gentiles Church have the name of Jsrael, Mich. 5.3. Gal. 6.16. And he is a Jew which is one inward, Rom. 2. Obs. 6. There is a two fold state of the Church, in the growth and  in via and in patria. What the Hebrew hath, Tents, is in the LXX. houses, implying a two fold state of the Church one fleeting, and the other durable and constant, yee read of both, Ephes. 2.22. vers. 4.14.15.16. Mysticè. But what further spirituall meaning is there of Shems Tents? or houses LXX. and Japhets dwelling in them? The true Shem as I have shewen and proved largely, is the Lord Jesus Christ, Who dwells in his Saints, Psal. 90.1. Joh. 1.14. , Hebr. 3.6. He works in them, Esay. 26.12. they in him, Joh. 3.21. This is that which the Antient Divines, call , Mutua coincessio. The Tents of Shem are called so in regard of the peoples dwel∣ling in the wilderness, till they came to the Holy Land, and to Jerusalem. The promise then is to Japhet and his children, even to those who are strangers from the Common-wealth of Israel, and from the City of God that if they will be perswaded by God, be∣lieve and become obedient, they shall dwell in those Tents, who mean time dwell in the tents of wickedness, Psal. 84.10. To dwell, is Alicubi commorari diutinè cum delectatione: It is to abide long in a place; for Qui hic & illic est, nullibi est; it is with delight; o∣therwise a man may abide long in a place where he has no delight at all, and therefore he is not said to dwell there, as in a Prison, or in some place where he has ill neighbours, Psal. 120. to dwell with Mesec. But the Lord saith of Jerusalem, Here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein.
Behold the great promise of God, that his tabernacle shall be with men, Levit. 26.11. Ezech. 37.27. Revel. 21.3. 2 Cor. 6.16. A new heaven and a new earth, even that dwelling place of Shem, the Jerusalem that looks down from heaven, Revel. 21.10. which is the everlasting righteousnesse, Psal. 85.11. A Jerusalem whereinto the ungodly must not enter, Revel. 21.27. That is, they must not enter into the righteousnesse of God, Psalm 69.27. A Jerusalem that hath gates, Psalm 118.20. Yea walls and bulwarks, Esay 26.1, 2. a new Jerusalem in Jerusalem, Zach. 12.6. Cities that have been ruined are not wont to be re-edified and built in the same place where they were before. Tyrus, Rome, Tusculum, Babylon, yea Jerusalem it self is scituat at this day in another place then it was, in our Saviours dayes in the flesh. For Mount Calvary, which was without the gate, is now about the middle of the City; if credit be to be given to Chorographers. Jerusalem then in her own place, is even there where she was trodden down. There where the righteousness of God hath been trodden under foot, Hebr. 10.29. Rom. 9.26. even in thine own soul, O man. The heavenly Jerusalem, Hebr. 12.22. Ponam Jerusalem in omnibus Gentibus; Domus Dei in omnibus locis, Ambrose. Let no man think that this is to be understood only of the heavenly Jerusalem hereafter to be inhabited when we have put off the body. No, Hebr. 12.22. Ye are come, &c. He saith not, Ye shall come, but ye are come al∣ready. They shall build all the old waste places, Esay 58.12. even the desolations of those souls, wherein there was no thought of God, Psal. 104. they shall be re-builded, and shall become a quiet habitation, Esay 33.20. especially the Tabernacle of Da∣vid, Amos 9.11. the Love; and shall be an habitation of God in the Spirit, Ephes. 2.22. How shall Japhet be perswaded to dwell in the houses or Tents of Shem Psal. 15.10. So Psal. 84.3. The Sparrow hath her nest in thine Altars; Chal. Par. The Dove, that is, they who are born of the Spi∣rit; and the Swallow  the free-bird, or the pure in heart. LXX, the Turtle, the soul mourning for sin. For there was no place in the outward Temple for Birds to nestle near the Altar. The roof of the Temple was stuck thick with golden broaches, lest the birds might settle on it, and defile it, saith Josephus. Here the voice of the true Minister, the man of God; he is a Tentmaker as Paul was, , whose office is to perswade unto the Tents of Shem. They are Gods Fishers and Fowlers. Fistula dulce canit volucrem dū decipit auceps; what though accomp∣ted deceivers? Christ was esteemed such, and his Apostles; but though deceivers, yet true, 2 Cor. 6.8. and 12.16. Did I make a gain of you? there's a trial. Hear the voice of thy God, Esay 30.20. A voice behinde thee, &c. He speaks to the heart, Hos. 2.14. He speaks not in a crowd. He took the man out of the crowd, Matth. 7.33,
34. there is such a din and noise heard in the world, &c. He who would go to another place then that wherein he is, must first forsake that wherein he is; we must first go out of our selves. If thou wouldst hear him, thou must go out of the crowd. Thou must retire to thine own heart, and hear what God saith unto thee there, Psal. 85.8. Audiam quid in me loquatur Dominus, I will hear what God speaks in me: He hears those qui conver∣tuntur ad cor, who turn to their heart: He perswades the heart. Gods way of bringing Japhet and his sons to dwel in the Tents of Shem, is by perswasion, by information, instruction, counsel, advice, exhortation, &c. Gen. 24. Abrahams servant went to fetch a wife for Isaac: see his behaviour through that long Chapter. God prospered his way, brought him to his Masters kindred, &c. Eliezer is Gods helper . Flesh and blood would have detained Rebecca, but ask at her mouth, Verse 57, 58, 67. And thus the Lord deals with all the sons of Japhet. But what if they refuse to be led into Sarahs Tent? what if they will not belive? what then is to be done, but to leave them to the Lord? what other course took the Apostles? Sarah is the free-woman, and such must her children be. May we not compel men to come and dwell in the Tents of Shem? Luk. 14.23. Compel them to come in. No doubt we may compell men to come in: but how? Instantiâ & importunitate: saith Ludolphus; Besides ther's no decorum in it, the parable is taken from inviting men to a feast. 'Tis not handsome to compel them. Nor is there any doubt, but that God useth some times forcible meanes to bring men in, as in S. Pauls example, and the Angel in Hermas saith, Cogam credere, I will force them to believe; not that the Lord enforceth the will against the nature of it, or drawes Japhet otherwise then with the cords of a man, even so as it is naturall for him to be drawn, Act. 26.19. If any man were forced into Shems Tents, surely Paul was, but I was not disobedient, saith he. Such meanes the Lord uses as he knows effectuall, and such as will prevail for the chainging of the will. Yet where this word  is used, it implies no violence, Math. 14 22. and Mar. 6.45. He compelled them to go into a ship. What? did he strike them, or drive them, in by force? surely no; they were unwilling to depart from him; but he forcibly perswaded them to go into the ship, so Luk. 24.28. They compelled him. How? did they lay violent hands upon him? I suppose no; but they used forcible perswasions; they constrained him, saying abide with us, &c. We read, Act. 16. that Lydia a daughter of Japhet whom the Lord had now perswaded to dwell in the Tents of Shem; She to shew her thankfullness to Paul and Barnabas, ministers by whom she believed, constrained them, &c. How? the words before shew. And the like constraint was that of the woman on the prophet Elisha, 2 King. 4.8.
Reproof. 1. Those who say, that Shems Tents shall never be inhabited; that the righteousness of God shall be as a Tent for∣saken. Surely they who say thus, know not the Scripture, nor the power of God. Not the Scriptures, Esay. 45.18. and 54.3. They know not the power of God; they ascribe more power to the Devill; he can fill the Tents of wickedness, Psal. 84.10. But the great God can never fill the Tents of Shem, the Tents of righte∣ousness. Reproof. 2. The sons of Japhet, who will not be perswaded by God to dwell in the Tents of Shem; Notwithstanding there is so vast a difference between the Tents, they live in, and those to which they are invited, Psal. 84.10. And David that had experience of both, so much prefers the one before the other; though as great a difference as between good and evill, blessing and cursing, life and death;Deut. 30.15.19. And God in mercy condescending to perswade us to choose life, yet we are affraid, lest we should be deceived by the truth it selfe, lest God that cannot lye, should lye to us; and we believe our lusts that they will be true and faithfull to us, which cannot but deceive us, Ephes. 4. Reproof. 3. Those who go about to force Japhet and constrain him to dwell in the Tents of Shem; a thing they can never possibly do by any constraint in the world; since, it is Gods property, and he neither uses any such meanes, nor authorizeth any other to use them. Exhort. To the Sons of Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem, they are beautifull Tents, Num. 24.5. The great happiness of those who dwell with the true Shem, they dwell with God, he is their house, Psal. 90.1. These are Aholah, &c. Ezech. 23.4. He dwells with them, they are his house, Hebr. 3.6.Psal. 84.10. He dwells in them and walks in them, Joh. 14.20.—23. David had rather be a door-keeper there, then dwell in the Tents of wickedness. Let us not deceive our selves. No evill shall dwell with him, Psal. 5.4, 5. what communion hath light with darkness, &c. 1. Joh. 2.6. and 4.12.—16. There remains only the sixth and last Axiom, Canaan shall be his servant, or a servant unto them. The doom of Canaan was first denounced generally, A servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren, ver. 25. Then follows a spe∣cial application of his servitude under Shem and the Jewes; of which I have spoken more largely. It remains, that I shew how Ham and Canaan was a servant unto Japhet and the Gentiles. Which because it is not true in regard of the persons of Ham and Canaan, we must seek it in their posterity. And so we shall finde, that what remnants there were of Ham and Canaan in Tyre and Zidon, in Thebes and Carthage, in Egypt and Ethiopia, they all submitted themselves, and became servants to the Greek Mo∣narchy
raised by Alexander the Great, or his Successors; as al∣so to the Roman Monarchy. Both which sprung of Japhet. And so it is true according to the History, That Ham and Canaan or the Canaanites, became servants unto Japhet or the sons of Japhet. I have considered hitherto Shem and Japhet, Ham and Canaan, severally, and apart, both in their history and in their mystery. Come we now to the Consideration of them joyntly. The most antient historians, and from them the Poets among the Heathen tell us, that Saturn was the first father of all, after the flood. And therefore Orpheus calls him , and , the father of all, the author of mankinde. They adde, that he devoured all his children, except onely three, Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto; which three remaining divided the world among them. Most certain it is, that truth is more antient than a lie, or fable. For a lie is the corruption of truth; and truth is the substance and foundation of a profitable fable. And therefore it supposeth truth before it. The Mythologie therefore and truth of his fable, is this. Whereas Saturn is said to have devour'd all his children; it is to be understood that Noah, whom they meant by Saturn, condemned the world,Hebr. 11.7. to perish by the flood. And this is no uncouth manner of speech in Scripture; wherein the Prophets are said to do that,Gen. 49.7. which they fortell, shall be done. Jacob divided Simeon and Levi in Jacob,Jer. 1.10. and scattered them in Israel, Jeremy must pluck up and plant,Ezech. 43.3. destroy and build. And Ezechiel went to destroy the City. And thus Noah condemned and consumed all men, whom he foretold, that they should perish by the flood, being a Prophet and the eighth preacher of righteousness.2 Pet. 2.5. As for his three sons remaining, the first Jupiter Hammon, who was that but Ham? He was famous in Africa, which was Hams portion. I will punish, saith the Lord, the multitude of No. That is, Hammon of No;Jer. 46.25. No, where Hammon their, God was worshiped. Whence it's called No-Hammon,Ezek. 30.15. Nah. 3.8. which the LXX turn Diospolis, the City of Jupiter Hammon. By Neptune their God of the Sea they understood Japhet, as I have shewen; to whom all the Isles of the Gentiles, were al∣lotted by Noah. And then what remained for Shem? Shem they understood by Pluto. For Shem being a most holy man, and a sincere worship∣per of the true God, he was most hated by the Idolaters of his time, as I shewed before; whom they made a God indeed, but thrust him down to Hell. Out of all which, we learn, what a perverse judgement the wicked world hath of good and evil. Ham the worst of all the three brethren, they made the highest God: Shem, the best of all men, a figure of the true God, they made a Devil; yea, the
Prince of Devils. Japhet, because a better man then Ham, there∣fore they made him inferiour unto Ham. And because he was not so good a man as Shem, therefore he is made superiour unto Shem. And this is the judgement of the wicked world. They put good for evil, and evil for good; darkness for light, and light for dark∣ness;Esay 5.20. bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Why then should it discontent any one of the true Shems chil∣dren, to be dis-esteemed by the wicked world? Did they not say, that the true Shem the Lord Jesus, who had God with him, that he had a Devill? Yea, they thought they said well,Mat. 11.18. Iohn 8.48. Matth. 10.25. when they said so. Nay, did they not call him Beelzebub, the prince of the Devills? And what great matter is it, If they so call those of his house∣hold? Nay, did they not say of Simon Magus, who had a Devill,Acts 8.10. that he was the great power of God? The like is the judgement of the evill world even at this day. So that it may seem a safe rule and very often true, to judge of good and evill men quite contrary of the worlds judgement of them. Malum esse oportet quem laudat Nero. Bonum esse oportet quem odit Nero. He must needs be an evill man whom Nero commends, and good, whom Nero hates. What a great folly then is it to esteem or disesteem our selves, according to such perverse judgements of wicked men?—Examenve improbum in illa Castiges trutina? nec te quae∣siveris Extrà. But what application can we, who profess our selves Christi∣ans, make of these three joyntly? The soul of man or , the souly man, or natural man is Japhet. This natu∣ral man is in the midst between two; he hath somewhat above him, as the heavenly man, or man from heaven, with all his graces and vertues; this is Gods Candle,Prov. 20.27. Iob 29.3. which shined upon Jobs head. This is the true Shem, the divine light. He hath some∣thing beneath him; which is the brute nature figured by Ham, a zeal and fervent heat in its due posture and subordination, to serve the divine and humane nature; whence proceeds a service∣able inclination, a bowing down and humbling it self to purvey and inquire after what is necessary or convenient for the well-being of the divine and humane nature; and this is Canaan, which signifies a Merchant.Luke 16.11, 12. This suits well with what our Lord teacheth. If ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your trust the true treasure? And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another mans, who shall give you that which is your own? Here the natural man or Japhet is put between Shem and Ham. Ham and Canaan are purveyours for Mammon, called the Mammon of unrighteousness, because often gotten, and often used unrighteously, and so said to be another mans. The true treasure that's Shem the treasure hidden in the field of the mans heart; which by grace is said to be our own, according to that
of the Apostle , the things which are freely given to us of God.1 Cor. 2.8. Hence it is that Plotinus (who is said to have in him much of a Christian,) tells us, that in a man there are three things,1 Cor. 2.16. . 1. The minde of God and Christ, which is the Lords Candle; 2. the soul of man; and 3. the brutish nature. The two former make up that which is truly a man, so called by him, : For so the Wiseman saith, That the fear of God, and the keeping his Commandements are  the whole man.Eccles. 11.13. What ever is more then these, is either the beast or the Devil, whereby Ham and Canaan called by the LXX  a domestick ser∣vant, become rebellious and unserviceable unto God and man; and therefore must be put out of dores; for the servant abides not in the house for ever.Iohn 8.35. Zech. 14.21. For the time then is come when the Canaa∣nite shall be no more in the house of the Lord of hosts.
Out of that Land went forth Ashur,Genesis. Chap. 10. Ver. 11.12. and builded Nineveh and the City Rehoboth.] I prefer the marginal reading, which is this, He went out into Assyria. It is true, that it gives good satisfaction to the Reader to know the antient monuments and records of old time touching the Authors and Founders of Cities; but to the Godly learned it's more profitable and delightfull to know what both of old and also at this day is doing in the world; yea, to understand, that, what so long since, and so far off is reported to be done, is now present, and brought home into a mans own bosom. And such is this old story of Nimrod. He is said to be the son of Cush, vers. 8. Whence the Poets have made their God Bacchus from  Bar-cush the son of Cush, who by an Euphony, is called Bacchus. This Nimrod went out into Assyria. Nimrod, that is, the Rebel, the mighty and cunning hunter and persecutor of men; For there is craft and subtilty required to hunting;Gen. 25.27. and therefore Esau is said to be a cunning hunter. And whereas Nimrod is called  prevalent and powerfull,  is Fortitudo animi & corporis, a prevalency in mind and body. Nimrod now become a cunning, bold and daring hunter, even before God, he proceeds to seek an happiness in his wickedness, that is, , which signifies Happy; according to the Etymon which Leah gives of her son Asher.Gen. 30.13. And this his process is to him an happiness; as actions have their denomination from the end they tend unto. So  to pro∣ceed, signifies to be happy and blessed, which is beatitudo viae,3 John 2. the bliss of the way of wicked men. And in this tyranny Nim∣rod placeth his happinesse, his ultimate end, which is beatitudo patriae, the bliss of the countrey which ungodly men travel unto; accordingly, our Lord saith of such, they have their reward, they have their consolation. According to this, the Apostle writes to the Corinthians, Now ye are full, now ye are rich,1 Cor. 4 8. ye have reigned as Kings without us. And the Church of Laodicea saith of her self, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; which yet knew not that she was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blinde, and naked. So the daughter of Babel said, I shall be  a Lady or Queen for ever. She was given to pleasures and dwelt securely, saying in her heart, I am, and there is none beside me, &c. Thus Babylon glorifies her self, and saith in her heart, I sit as a Queen. Thus Nimrod the Rebel come out of Babel, having found his bliss and happiness, his Ashur, he builds the City Nineveh, which is  a world of iniquity, and Rehoboth the broad streets of that City. And truly it very nearly concerns every one of us, to beware and take great heed of the direful increase of sin: For as it is true and well known, Bonum est sui diffusivum, That which is good, is
diffusive of it self; so is it as true, that malum est diffusivum sui, evil is also of a spreading nature. It begins in the fansie and vain thoughts of the earthly man, which knowing no better thing then earthly objects, things neer a-kin unto it, and delightful unto sense, it easily draws the concupiscence unto them. Which how∣soever according to original rectitude, it propends to good, and that Bonum honestum, and is subject to the rational appetite, and so to right reason, (as the Philosopher could say,) and right rea∣son to the Law of God; yet having declined from that first in∣tegrity unto the sensible, present, and delightful good, which most-what is dis-joyn'd from the true and honest good, it be∣comes more and more prone unto evil: as he that's falling down a steep precipice, easily falls lower and lower Dum in profundum venerit peccatorum, (Prov. 18.3. V. Lat.) until he be immersed and overwhelmed with sin; and drawes with it the superiour, the rational appetite, yea, the reason it self, the , the Rudder of the soul; as he that's sinking, will lay hold though on his best friends, and pluck them with him into the same pit of destruction. And the reason it self being brought off to Nim∣rod that rebellious party, like Ahitophel fallen off to Absalom, the faction growes so strong, that the heart gathers iniquity to it self, Psalm 41.6. and takes delight and pleasure in it: So that when the man does evil, then he rejoyceth, Jeremy 11.15. Then Nimrod is come to Ashur, then the rebellious heart is come to its happiness. This great mischief proceeds from a very small beginning. The contagion of this leprosie begins with a spot, and spreads it self over the whole man. It kindles from a spark; and then iniquity burns all before it like a fire.Levit. 13. Esay 9.18. Jam. 3.5. Behold how much wood a little fire kindleth. It enters into the vain thoughts and fansie, and is conceived often-times by a word, & concepta cogitatio carnem commovet ad concupiscendum, evill words corrupt good manners. Prophane and vain bablings increase to more ungodliness, 2. Tim. 2.17. Sin hath no measure. And as unsatiable is the tyranny of iniquity. For Nimrod the Rebel having gotten an hold in the soul, leaves it to iniquity in succession. As the Father left his Slave as a chattel to his son; and so the wrongfull right descends from iniquity to iniquity. Or as a Tyrant having usurped a power in the Common-Wealth, betrayes it to his issue.Rom. 6.19. All this comes to pass by our voluntary yielding of our members servants to uncleanness and to , to iniquity unto iniquity. Let us now therefore yield our members servants to righteousness unto holiness. Let us return to the Lord our God:Hos. 14.1.—5. For we have fallen by our iniquity. Let us take with us words, and turn unto the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us gratiously: So will we render the fruit of our lips. Ashur shall not save us. We will not ride upon horses, neither
will we say to the work of our hands, ye are our Gods; For in thee the fatherless findeth mercy. Then shall we hear that gratious answer of our God; I will heal their back-sliding or rebellion. I will love them freely; for mine anger is turn'd away from him. Get thee out of thy countrey and from thy kindred,Genesis. Chap. 12. Verse 1. and from thy fa∣ther house.] What our Translators turn Get thee, is,  vade tibi, or ad te, go to thy self, to thine own benefit; which is not expressed, but neglected by ours and most other Translators; as also the duty signified hereby, is slighted by most men,Rom. 4.23.24. the in∣troversion or turning into our selves. The Lord here speaks to Abra∣ham and to every son of Abraham according to the Apostles rea∣soning.Phil. 3.19. James 3.1. Go out of thine own countrey, , out of thine own earth, thine earthly minde, thine earthly wisdom. Go out of thy kindred, thine own corrupt nature, opposite unto the divine nature,2 Pet. 1.4. thine innate in∣bred corruptions. Martin Lhther turns it Freund-schaft, thy friendship, thy lewd companions, none worse then thine own carnal senses, affections, and lusts; thine own-ship, thy self∣nesse. Go out of thy fathers house. While thou livest in Ʋr of the Chaldees, the false light, the light of Devils,Iohn 8.44. Prov. 9.12. (so S. Hierom renders  quasi Daemones,) who is thy father, but the Devil him∣self? Go thou out of this thy countrey, kindred, and fathers house; be wise for thy self; go thou, though none else will go: Rehoboam would not quit his youthful company,Ecclus. 47.23 but followed their counsel, and so became the foolishness of the people. Thy God calls thee to himself. Its Vetus proverbium , sequere Deum; follow thy God, could even Tully say. . It is the end, accor∣ding to most divine Moses, to follow God. So Philo de Migrat. Abrah. Follow him calling thee into thy self; tecum habita, enter into thine own heart, where thou hast been a stranger;Psal. 85.8. and hear thy God speaking to thee there, as David resolved to do. I will hear what God will speak in me; for he will speak peace to his merciful ones, and to those who turn unto their heart, or turn their heart unto him. So the LXX and Vulg. Lat. For surely the Lord speaks in∣wardly unto men, as well now as formerly.Hos. 1.2. The Lord spake in Hosea: And the Angel spake in Zachary;Zach. 1.9.13, 14.19. as often in that and other Prophesies: In all which places, instead of In me, I know not by what Authority, our Translators turn, With me.2 Cor. 13.3. Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, &c. saith S. Paul. Thus the Lord speaks to us, but we hear him not, by reason of that great din which the world makes in our ears: Turn to thine own heart, O son of Abraham, and thou wilt soon hear him speaking to thee, & saying as here to Abraham, , Go into thy self; which thou wilt finde experimentally to be  most conveni∣ent for thee, and most profitable for thee, saith R. S. J.
And he removed from thence,Genesis. Chap. 12. Verse 8. &c.] The word  signifies Evulsit, he drew or plucked up from thence, viz. the stakes of his Tent, in order to removing from thence Abraham was now in Sichem: That signifies a part. He could not settle in a part, who aimed at perfection. Therefore righteous Abraham travailed to∣ward the south, vers. 9. According to what the wisman saith, That the path of the just is as the morning light,Prov. 4.18. which shineth more and more to the perfect day. To thee be it spoken O Son of Abraham! Set not up thy rest in Sichem, in any part or degree of holyness. The Lord promised all the holy Land to Abraham and to his seed for ever.Gen. 13.14, 15. pluck up thy stakes: Dwell not in what is mutable and changeable; Follow thy father Abraham; and, as he followed God who called him to his foot:Esay 41.2. Rom. 4.12. So do thou follow the stepps of thy father Abrahams faith, and go on unto perfection. Which is no more, than what the Apostle, who was of the seed of Abraham, often exhorts unto,1 Cor. 11.1. Be yee followers of me, as I am of Christ. And be not slothfull,Hebr. 6.12. but followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises.
SERMON V.SERM. V. Imputation of best Reputation. And he brought him forth abroad, and said; Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars if thou be able to number them; And he said unto him, so shall thy seed be. And he believed the Lord, and he impu∣ted it unto him for righteousnesse. THe Jewes have a tradition, that Abram having now obtained so notable a victory of four Kings, who had conquered five, since victory is reckoned among the , the sweetest, and most delightfull things, Abram feared lest his glorious conquest should be the reward of his obedience, and righteousness; And therefore the Lord here puts him out of that fear; Fear not Abram, &c. But we cannot think, that our father Abram served the Lord in this war as a mercenary, or hireling, or looked at any less, any other reward then God himself. Whence it was that he refused all the spoyles which the King of Sodom offered unto him; he expected his reward from him, who had chosen him to be a souldier. We may therefore rather think that Abram (after so great a victory,) was wisely provident and wary lest the Babylonians or Canaanites might surprize him; and least his good sccess should make him secure. As it is said to one of our antient Kings; Quando victor eras, ad crastina bella pavebas. Quando victus eras, ad crastina bella parabas. The Lord therefore ingaged himself for his pay; promiseth himself for his protection, and encourageth him by both. From this gracious promise, Abram gathers in upon his God, and is imboldened to ask a Son and heir of all his goods. Many goods God had given him, Gen. 13. but no child, no heir, to possess them after him. Lord God what wilt thou give me seeing I go child∣less? my servant will be mine heir. It is one of the great evills of barrenness, Haeredem habere non suum. There is nothing will satisfie Abraham but a Son and heir. The Lord secures Abraham,
that his servant shall not be his heir; no; but one that shall come forth out of thine own bowells, saith he, Esay 9.6. So the Chal. Par.  my word shall be thy strength Gen. 15.1. even that  that word which was in the beginning. We have in the words, 1. Gods promise unto Abram, of a numerous and godly seed. 2. Abrams belief of that promise, 3. Gods ac∣ceptance of that belief. 1. The promise is of a numerous posterity, illustrated and confirmed by a signe, à parium collatione, by comparison thus. As thou canst not number the stars of light in the fair heavens; so neither canst thou number thy godly seed, which promise A∣bram believes. We may resolve all these into the following divine Truths. 1. God brought Abram forth. 2. He shewed him the heaven and Stars in it. 3. He brought Abram forth and so shewed him the heaven and the Stars, and bids him try if he can number them. 4. He promised, that his seed should be so. 5. Abram believed in the Lord. 6. That belief God counted to Abram for righteousness. First, God brought Abraham forth; and why did God bring Abram forth  that he might shew him the Stars of heaven which he could not see in the Tent. The word  signifies abroad, which is opposed to  the house out of which the Lord brought Abram. He had made him a promise of a son, and heir, now he gives him an ocular demonstration and assurance not only of a seed, a child, but of a multitude, a great number of children. Why did the Lord bring Abram forth and shew him the heaven and Stars? Abram was by birth a Caldean, and that people was much addicted to Astronomy and Astrologie, so that the Caldean, and Astrologer was taken for one and the same. And Abram is reputed by the Antients to have been extream well seen in those Sciences. Orpheus in Clemens Alex. speaking of God saith, he is invisible, but that he made himself known to Abram the Chaldean—. He knew the way of the Stars, their motions,Matth. 14.19. Mark 7.34. Iohn 17.1. their settings, and their risings. Besides, we cannot but conceive, that Abrams pious soul looked toward the heaven, to pray and blesse God as our Lord Jesus did. Obs. 1. It was a night vision,Dan. 2.19. and 7.2. Acts 16.9. , so S. Chrys. read the words, then onely the Stars are seen and then the Lord reveales secrets to his Saints. The Antients observed that time as the fittest for contemplation: And therefore they called the night ,Iob 33.14.15 29, 30. from  and ; Elihu observed it as the most seasonable time for divine deames. I wish therefore,
that good men were as not too scrupulous about every dream, so not too negligent of all. Obs. 2. Our father Abram absolute obedience unto Gods guidance and direction;Esay 41.2. the Lord called him out of his countrey into a land that he should shew him, and there leads him from place to place, and here called him forth: And the righteous man alwayes followed Gods footsteps.1 Pet. 2.21, 22 Rom. 8.1. The Lord hath also cal∣led us unto his foot, and given his Spirit, after which we ought to walk, and provided Abram as a way-guide before us. O ye children of Abram, Eamus nos & faciamus similiter: let us go and do like wise. There are two guides which offer themselves unto us, the Flesh and the Spirit, Gal. 5.17.Gal. 5.1. Rom. 4.12. Rom. 8.14. It concerns us extream nearly whether of the two we follow: for as many as are led by the Spirit, they are the sons of God. And therefore one of the Ancients reports Gods speech to Abram thus. Away with thy Astrologie, according to the principles of which thou seest in the Stars, that thy wife being barren and old, and thy self also, thou shalt have no issue. Believe in him who made the Heaven and the Stars,Iob 9.9. and 38.31. and it is his peculiar. Obs. 3. The Lords gracious condescent: he vouchsafes to stoop our apprehensions, and comes home to us, and takes us at, and by our imployments, professions, and callings; he takes Abram, an Astronomer and Astrologer at the Stars; the Fisher∣men at their Nets, &c. God brought Abram forth. Whence? out of his Tent. A Tent is Symbolum carnis, a type or figure of the flesh wherein Abram and we all dwell, or sojourn rather for a time; yea, so Christ himself ;Iohn 1.14. The word was made flesh and took up his Tent in us. The Lord brought Abram forth, that is, Extra carnem, aut terminos naturalis ordinis, out of the flesh, or out of and above the rank and order of meer nature, by the guidance of the Spirit; as our Lord was lead by it.Matth 4 1. Ezech. 8.3. 2 Cor. 12.2, 3. And the Apostle, Whether in the body, or out of the body, he knew not. Axiom. 2. The Lord brought Abram forth, and shewed him the heaven and the stars. The Lord bids Abram look towards heaven , the God of Abram directs Abram and his children upward, heaven-ward, God-ward. Not that there is any great piety in looking toward the material heaven, or the stars in it. The Angels rebuked the Apostles for so doing: Why gaze ye up into heaven? Though a great Leader directed his Disciples to look alwayes toward heaven, as he himself was wont to do. And another being sick of a Feaver, contrary to the Physitians advice, would needs lye on his back, that he might look heavenward. And another stood many years upon one leg, looking up to heaven, . All to what purpose? The Heaven of heavens cannot contain him.
Wherefore we must know that heaven is not only that ma∣teriall and visible body well known by that name; but God himself in Scripture is often called and known by the name of heaven. So that the true heaven is not locally above; For heavenly things the things of God are called ,Col. 3.1. that is spirituall: which things above are not to be understood in regard of place and posture; For so we conceive that heaven is above, whereas indeed hell is above, in pride and high-mindedness: , all that is high in men, is an abomination in the sight of God.Luke 16.15. Men conceive that hell is be∣neath; but heaven is indeed beneath in humility, lowliness and meekeness. For surely as where the King is, the Court is; so where God is,Psal. 138.6. heaven is: and that's with the humble and low∣ly. 3. Axiom. He bids Abram try if he can number them, these words may be considered 1. either in themselves, or 2. as the protasis of the comparison. 1. In themselves, and so the heaven and stars are those bodies of light which have an influ∣ence upon the inferior creatures, these are (though not infinite, yet) indefinite in number, their number being very great and very hard to be known; and implyed here not possible for Abram to number; though no doubt there are many more then appear unto us. The Lord keepes some things secret and hid∣den from us,Job 38.39. Wisd. 9.16. Acts 1.7. Esay 47.4. which he reserves as proper and peculiar unto him∣self; Such are they whereof the Lord convinceth Job of igno∣rance, whereof many are obvious to our senses. Yet we know not the reason of them, as the wiseman speakes. Such are the times and the seasons, and the certain and definitive number of the stars. Hence we cannot but observe the subtilty of Satan and our own folly and great misery;Rom. 10.6, 7.8. The Lord hath exposed unto our knowledge all things necessary for us to be known, neither is the law nor the Gospell hid: but the seducing spirit perswades our great contemplators that these things are too poor, too de∣spicable for them to busy themselves about, they must find out the hidden things of God, which he hath put in his own power; that voice of the old Serpent sounds yet in our eares, ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evill. How much more soveraign is the counsell of Moses unto us! Deut. 10.12. and 29.29. Axiom. 4. So shall thy seed be, ratione quantitatis. qualitatis. 1.Gal. 3.16.29. So many shall thy seed be. 2. So qualified shall thy seed be; that is, thy seed shall be like the heaven and stars. The seed of Abraham is either Christ, or they that are Christs: and the Scripture is true of both, so shall thy seed Christ be. And so shall thy seed which are Christs,1 Cor. 12 12. be. So many, though one body,
shall thy seed Christ be. So many, and so virtuous, so shall thy seed which is Christs be. The children of Abram are compared sometime to the dust, sometime to the sand,Gen. 13.16. and 22.17. sometime to the stars, as in the Text; of which I am here to speak in regard of number and nature, so numerous so virtuous. I have spoken something already to their number. In regard of their nature, they are compared to the heaven and stars. Unto the heaven. 1. Lifted up above the earth by contemplation. 2. Large and wide by extent of Charity to∣wards all. 3. Shining by wisdom that makes the face to shine. 4. Calme by tranquility and peaceableness: not so the ungodly.Esay 57.21. 5. Moved by the Intelligences, by readiness pliableness and obedience to the will of God. 6. Raining by instruction and doctrine so  to rain or teach. 7. Thundring by reproof;Hos. 10.12. such were the Boanarges. 8. Affording influence of all good by true bounty and liberality. 9. Most pure from all filthyness, by true sanctity and holyness. 10. The dwelling of the great King by true righteousness. 2. They are Sars, 1. In regard of light by a good conversa∣tion and good nature. 2. The Stars, however they seem little unto us, yet the Astronomers prove and demonstrate them to be very great, many of them much greater then the earth. 3. They are fastned and adjoyned to Christ by faith, hope, and love; as the stars are said to be fastend unto the firmament. 4. They are not all of one but different magnitudes;1 Cor. 15.41. One Star differs from another star in glory. 5. They are lights unto others. There is a dissimilitude and unlikeness also. For we read of wandering stars, and falling stars moved from their stedfastness. Such are also the pretending Apostate and degenerate children of Abraham. But why does the Lord thus speak by outward signes? Why does he shew Abram the heaven and stars, when he makes him promise of a son? The reason is, 1. God teacheth not onely by words, but also by other outward signes, that ingenuous and docible men might inquire into the mind and will of the Lord. 2. The heaven and stars were made for this very end. 3. And more specially the Lord promiseth Abram a son by shewing him the heaven and stars, that there might be some proportion be∣tween what he promised, and the sign whereby he confirmed it. The seed of Abram whether Christ or they that are Christs, are of an heavely nature. Christ is the man from heaven heavenly;1 Cor. 15.47, 48. Revel. 21.2. and such as is the heavenly, such are they that are heavenly, Christ de∣scends from heaven, and so does the Church. Yea the Church according to the letter and old forms of godliness, and according to the newness of the Spirit is compared to heaven. Thus the Lord shakes the old heavens before the first coming of Christ,
and at his second coming he shakes the Church, Ecclesiasticall men, and the Earth, the Potentates, Polititians and worldly wise men. And he has shaken to the purpose, and will yet shake them. Doubt. 1. Though this promise of God unto Abram import a great number of his seed, yet if we believe our Astronomers, the stars are not numberless; for they reckon a certain number of them. Ptolomy, and they who follow him, tell us only of 1022. And if Abram have no more children, and if his seed be only so numerous, in succeeding generations, the bounty of God will not seem so excessive. Answ. 1. There has been alwayes a complaint, Rari quippe boni, that good men are but few; Yet truly if Abrams seed were only so numerous, if also they were so vertuous, so pure, so holy, it must needs be accounted a great and pretious promise of God to Abram that his seed should be so numerous, if so ver∣tuous. 2. But other Astronomers tell us of an infinite number of stars. The , the Glasse of Galileus discovers a far greater number then otherwise are visible and appear to us. And such a numberless number there seem to be according to the Scripture, where it is ascribed unto God as his peculiar and his royalty, that he tells the number of the Stars, and calls them all by their names.Psal. 14.4. Hebr. 12.14. And had we that Optick-Glasse of the true Galileus, of him who reproachfully was called a Galilean by Julian the Apostate, that Glass of righteousness, and holi∣nesse, it would inable us to see more then yet we do or can do. The Prophet prayed for his servant, Lord open his eyes! If we go into Galilee we shall see him and his. Doubt. 2.Esay 52.14. & 53.2. We see no such thing, no vertue, no praise: every man hath good and bad in him, save that bright Morning-Star. But who esteemed him such as he was and is? Answ. They discern them only, who esteem them according to their value, who have seeing eyes, who have the Optick of holiness and righteousnesse; to whom God shews these stars as he did to Abraham. It is the Lapidary only who can value and duly esteem a precious stone. It is the Astronomer only that can judge of the Stars:Phil. 1.10. the Apostle prayed that the Philippians might discern of things that differ. The Psalmist calls Jesus Christ the fairest of men. And the Spouse, the chief of ten thou∣sand. And his Saints are the excellent ones. There is no doubt, but in that which they call the visible Church there are many great lights and stars of the first magnitude, which ignorant and malicious men dis-esteem such an one is Lampas contempta in cogitationibus divitum. There is many a  who is accompted ; As deceivers yet true, as
unknown, yet well known. But when the sons of God shall be made manifest, when the new heavens shall appear, all shall be such. Obs. 1. This answers the great doubt, that hath been long time made and disputed, which is the true Church, and who are the genuine and true children and seed of Abram. Who else but they who are as the heaven and stars? such are Abrams children. What ever men talk of tenents and opinions, and being Orthodox or Catholick, and what other notes are given of the true Church, if the light of life be not in them, if they shine not as the heaven and stars, it matters not of what Church they are, or of what religion they are, or whose children they are. Yet, the Apostle tels us whose they are.1 John 3.10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil. Whosoever doth not righteousnes, is not of God, nor he that loveth not his brother. Obs. 2. We cannot see the true seed of Abram except the Lord reveal them, the things of God are spiritual and inward, which cannot be discerned but by Gods discovery of them. Since therefore according to these the true children of Abram have their denomination, they cannot be certainly known, unlesse the Lord discover them unto Abram, and the children of Abram;Rom. 8.19. therefore he must first make a manifestation of the sons of God. Elijah thought he was alone, and knew none other, nor was Paul known to Ananias, nor the Eunuch unto Philip, nor Cornelius to Peter, until the Lord made them known unto them. Consol. Unto the genuine children of Abram in these per∣illous times. They shall be as the heaven and stars,Esay 57.21. they are not troubled by commotions and tumults. The ungodly are so moved that they have no peace no rest. They are truly called  impeacable and unquiet and full of perplexity; when the sons of Abram keep on their course constant and steady,Phil. 2.15. Psal. 119.165 as the stars shine clearest in the coldest night. They have peace when all the world besides them, wants it, they are not afraid by any evill tidings; Yea the weaker sex, the daughters of Sarah are not terrified by any amazement. They dwel in the new heaven and new earth that cannot be moved, when the star pointed to the morning star, as Christ is called, the great ones of the earth are moved; the Meteors  have a con-signification with Princes and Potentates lifted up above others for their good, these are tossed with the winds too and fro; while mean-time the heavens and the stars, the true children of Abram, they keep on their course. As the Orbs of heaven are involved one in an other, as in Ezechiels vision there was a wheel with in a wheel; even so here is an heaven with in an heaven, there are visible and invisible heavens and stars. And the seed hath a visible and earthly sub∣stance which dies and is resolved into the earth, as the principle
of it; It hath also an invisible substance, Naturale balsamum, which is immateriall, and the cause of life, increase, and multi∣plication;Esay 51.16. Christ in us according to his divine and spirituall nature is the inward heaven;Col. 2.5. 2 Pet. 1.5. The faith in him is as the firma∣ment as the Apostle calls it , the firmament of faith. All the vertues proceeding from the divine nature through faith, are as the stars. Adde to your faith vertue, and to vertue knowledge, and to knowldge temperance, and to tem∣perance, patience, &c. Such are all the vertues and graces, love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness goodness, meekness, temperance, Gal. 5.22. all the stars of light shining from the father of lights. Reproof. The degenerate sons of Abram, yea, rather Bastards then sons, who pretend to be children of Abram, yet have no∣thing of the heavenly nature in them: they seem as stars even of the first magnitude, and talk of heaven and heavenly things as if their Common-wealth were there, when yet their lives declare them earthly-minded; like the foolish Stage-player, they name heaven,Mat. 24.29. but point to the earth, according to the inclination of their earthly spirit, being fallen from the firmament of the li∣ving and operative faith which works by love, who sore aloft, ambitious of domineering and ruling over others, they would be better and greater then their Master a servant of Rulers,Esay 9.15. and 49.7. but minde earthly things; & cover it with a form of godlinesse without any power, Ad populum Phaleras.Esay 8.20. 1 Pet. 1.9. Away with all vain pretences. What s all this trapping without the light of life? not so much as the morning light, how much lesse then the day-star? and therefore he that sits in heaven will laugh them to scorn, the Lord will have them in derision. They are inquisitive after heaven and heavenly things; as the Pharisees and Saduces, their predecessours, would see a signe from heaven;Mat. 16.1.4. Ion. 2.2. Iude v. 13. but our Lord points them to a signe from hell more fit for them; so Jonah called the belly of the fish, Hell. These are the wandring stars, they have a diurnal motion common with the rest of the heavens, and you would think they were no other: but, as the planets, so these have their proper motions, they steal a private and undiscerned course, And walk according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience. Exhort. To shine as the stars. Its the nature and property of Abrams children: they are children of light, children of life and righteousnesse; such was Abram. For where our Translators ren∣der the words, who raised the righteous man from the East? &c. the word is  Righteousnesse.Esay 44 2. For want of a few such, Sodom and the other Cities of the Plain perished. For want of a few such, this City, yea, the whole Land, yea, whole Christendome hath now long time bin, and is yet perishing. Are we such stars? The stars are seen in the night,Phil. 2.15. in times of darkness: 1. In the
darknesse of sin: such bright stars are they, who persist in their faith, love, and obedience, when others are wandring stars and sall from their own stedfastnesse, for whom is reserved the blacknesse of darknesse for ever. 2. In the darknesse of affliction. Aurum in furnace intilat, August. The gold then shines in the Furnace. The stars shine most clearly in the coldest night, even then when ini∣quity abounds, and the love of many, [many objectivè] when common love, when the love towards many waxeth cold.2 Pet. 1.7. All divided judgements love those of their own way and opinion. The general love is a degree beyond brotherly love, and to be added to it. This general love inclines the children of Abram to impart their light and influence unto all.Dan. 12.3. They who are wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many unto Righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. But if the children of Abram, if the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea,Rom. 9.27. barren and unfruitfull, the remnant shall be saved. So those words ought to be read, as I shall shew in their proper place, if the Lord will. Axiom 5. and 6. And he believed in the Lord, and he accounted it unto him for righteousnesse. This is locus , a place of Scripture very famous by frequent quotations of it in the New Testament, and by many controversies thereupon; I shall not trouble you or my self with disputes, there have been and are too many already. Its evident, that these words are to be under∣stood with reference unto the former. They contain the two last Axioms of the Text. Axiom 5. Abram believed in the Lord. I shall first open the words and then shew the nature of faith here first spoken of in Scripture. The word is  from  and  signifying true,Esay 7.9. cer∣tain, faithful, constant, permanent; if not  ye shall not , Esay 55.3. The word notes a firm perswasion that the words which God spake were most true, firm and stable. This belief Abram reposeth in the Lord, in him who is the ve∣ry being it self, and gives being unto his word. 2. As for the nature of faith, I shall discribe it no otherwise then the Apostle doth; faith is ,Hebr. 11.1. the ground or confi∣dence of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. The Scripture proceeding from one and the same Spirit, hath that harmony in it self, that one place answers to another, as in the Glasse, Face answers to face, so that the word , which we turn ground or confidence is the same whereby the LXX ren∣der , that is, hope, expectation, staying, or waiting:Psal. 39.7. And now Lord what wait I for?  my hope is in thee. So that in it two things are implyed;Iob 14.14. with 19.26. and 42.5. 1. An expectation or looking abroad for some good hoped for: I will wait until my change come,
that is, till I see God in the flesh. 2. In the interim a setled, firm, and unmoveable posture against what ever may oppose, or tend to disturbance or disquiet, or hinder the possessing of our soules in patience, so we say , and in Latin Sub∣sistere, not to give way, but to withstand the violence of the wild beast. So that patience is involved in the nature of faith. So the Apostle,Heb. 6.12. and 10.35, 36 through faith and patience they inherited the pro∣mises. According to this discription of faith, Abram here is said to believe in the Lord, that is, to hope for and expect the blessed seed, the seed of promise, and with firmness, stedfastness, and setledness of mind and heart, patiently to wait for it, without discouragement from either his own or his wives old age, in∣disposing them by nature to beget and bear a son, but relying and resting on the power of God able to effect what he promised; according to that,Rom. 8.25. If we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it. The obiect of Abrams faith is. 1. Personall, testis, God him∣self the witness. 2. Reall, Testimonium, the testimony of God or the thing testified and witnessed by him, that thing which Abram believed. 1. The obiect personall, or witness whom Abram believed, is God himself, most fit and worthy to be believed, as having all the accomplishments of a most sufficient witness. 1. Knowledge of what he testifies. 2. Truth and faithfulness in testifying. 3. Goodness and vertue, whereby he is inclined to witness onely what is the truth. 4. Love and bounty to him to whom he wit∣nesseth. 5. Power and ability to effect, and do what he testifies, &c. 2. The object reall or thing witnessed by God and propounded to belief, is what ever God testifies and witnesses, whether it be by information, or precept, or promise, or threatning, or what kind so ever else there is of divine testimony, what ever word proceeds out of the mouth of God, that must be true, and so fit and worthy to be believed. The thing here witnessed to be believed, is the promise of God to Abram, that he should have a seed, a numerous or in∣numerable seed, a vertuous and heavenly seed. This Abram believes; and for the effecting of it he believes in the good and gratious God, who is true in all his promises, and knowes how, and is able to perform them. The reason why Abram believed the Lord, may be considered partly in regard of Gods truth essentiall unto God; So that all truth is in him,1 John 5.9. and he is Summa veritas. Let God be true and every man a lyer. 2. Abrams experience of Gods truth. Obs. 1. Note here what kind of faith Abrams faith was, faith
not only in the truth of God, but in the power of God; God promised a thing extreem hard, yea by nature impossible, that Abram, whose body was now dead, and Sarah, who was barren and her womb dead, they should have a son. Yet Abram believed. To thee be it spoken, O Son of Abram! the Lord promises unto thee that, which by nature is impossible, that unto thee shall a child be born. What though thou be dead? Abram believed in the truth and power of God. The Lord hath said it,Esay 9.6. Iohn 11.25. Col. 2.12, 13. Rom. 4.16. and the promise is of faith, that it may be by grace, to the end that the promise may be sure to all the seed. We have divers distinctions currant among us, that faith is Historicall, miraculous, temporary, and justifying or saveing faith, which are true being well understood, but Abrams saith is a miraculous faith; it inables a man to work wonders.Mark 9.23. Phil. 4.13. Unto him that believes, all things are possible. I am able to do all things , through Christ (the power of God) who in∣wardly inableth me, saith S. Paul. How is this possible? To God only all things are possible, yet the Scripture also saith, to him that believes, all things are possible: Why? because this belief in the truth and might of God,Rom. 4.17. Gal. 3.1.—6. Ephes. 1.18, 19. Rom. 8.10, 11 makes men like unto God himself whom they believe, even God who quickneth the dead. Christ the son is dead in thee, crucified in thee, God quickens the dead. And by this living faith, there is a power in believers, to raise up the dead in them. Obs. 2. Here is faith rightly placed on the due, reall and proper object divine truth testified by God and Christ himself, when the heart gives assent and credit unto the testimony of God, that is the first and essentiall truth, and which cannot lie,Tit. 1.2. Iohn 3.33. then the soul closes with that, and seales to it. He that hath received his testimony, hath set to his seal, that God is true. This is the reason, why that frequent preface to the prophesies, Thus faith the Lord, &c. ought to be of more credit with us then all the demonstrations in the world. Here is saith rightly placed upon the due personall obiect, the power and might of God for the effecting of what he promises.Iob 30.27. 2 Kings 4.16. It's true there may be pangs and throwes, by reason of diffidence and distrust from con∣sideration of our own impotency and weakness. O my Lord, do not lie unto thy servant, saith the Shunamite unto Elisha, when he had assured her, Thou thy self shall imbrace a son. Is there any thing too hard for the Lord? 'Tis true, Idoll Gods, Im∣aginations, bring forth nothing, but imaginations,Esay 66 9. but V. Lat. Numquid ego, qui alios parere facio, ipse non pariam? dicit Dominus, shall not I, who cause others to bring forth, shall not I myself bring forth? saith the Lord. Whosoever receives the seed of the word in an honest and good heart,Matth. 12.50. shall certainly becom the mother of Christ.
Obs. 3. See then, Abrams faith and the faith of Abrams Sons and Daughters, is no bare, no naked faith, but adorned with submission, with humility, with love with obedience; Abrams daughters are clothed with good workes.1 Tim. 2.10. It is no dead faith, it hath a form, a soul, a spirit, a life; And what are these but good workes,Iam. 2.17.20.26. if the Apostle reason right? he saith not, that good workes, are the fruits of faith as commonly they are called; For so the tree may live and bear no fruit, as in winter; but the Apostle seemes to comprehend obedience and good workes in the very nature and essence of faith: what else meaneth he, when he compares faith without workes to the body without the soul? and Abrams faith was made perfect by workes;Verse 22.26. and as the body with∣out the Spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also. It's evident therefore, that the Apostle understood good workes to be the form, soul, spirit, and life of faith. And hence it is that an other Apostle having given a description of faith, for examples of it, he propounds only those faithfull men, who were holy, good, just, Godly, and obedient men in their generations. For other faith is altogether unprofitable to the chief end, salvation. What doth it profit if a man say he hath faith,Hebr. 11. and have not works? ; Potest fides illa, can that faith save him? So Beza turns that place well. Obs. 4. Hence we see who are the true believers, who but they, who walk in the steps of Abrams faith? they who imitate and follow Abrams faith,Rom. 4.12. which is in this place expressed. Abram believed, that God would give him an holy seed, that is Christ, as S. Paul explaines it. This is, or ought to be the belief of every one of us, of every true and genuine son, and daughter of Abram;Gal. 3.16. That the Lord will give us the seed even the son, that the Lord will raise up Jesus from the dead in us. That this is or ought to be the belief of every son and daughter of Abram, appeares from the Apostles reasoning upon the words of my Text, where having said, that it was not written for his, that is,Rom. 4.18.23, 24. for Abrams sake alone, &c. but for us, if we believe in him, that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, &c. , who raised up Jesus the Lord; the word is in the Aorist. in∣definite, as , he hath made, and yet makes the purging of our sins; so he raised up, and yet raiseth up the Lord Jesus.Hebr. 1.3. And the Lord offereth faith unto all, having raised up, or rasing Christ from the dead. So he hath raised or doth raise up his son from the dead. For our better understanding of this, ye may be pleased to compare the example of believing Abram the father of the faithfull,Acts 17.31. 1 Thess. 1.10. with any one of us who are his children and believers, Rom. 4.18. Abram firmly believed; which firm belief of
Abrams, is handled by the object or Subject the promise of God. Abrams, is handled by the object or Subject Gods ability to perform it. Abrams, is handled by the object or the diversity. 1. The promise of God, according to that which was spoken, so shall thy seed be. 2. The ability of God, what he had promised, he was able to per∣form. The diversity, 1. With reference to a contrary object, him∣self and his own body, which was dead; and the deadness of Sarahs womb; neither of which he considered. 2. With reference to the act of belief, not weake, but strong, not weake in regard of his own body and the deadness of Sarahs womb; which he considered not; but strong in regard of God. The like we may consider in a believer a son of Abram, he believes in Gods promise, which is the eternall life,1 Iohn 2.25. and 5.11. and this life is in his son, 1. John 5.11. This is that life of God from which we are alienated and estranged.Ephes. 4.18. Rom. 5.8. Gal. 3.1. Tit. 1.2. This life of God hath been crucified and slain, dead and buried in us while we were sinners, which God that cannot lie hath promised. Whosoever believe and hope in God for this life, they consider not themselves, so impotent and weak, that they are not able to think one good thought of themselves, and though their heart faint, and fail them, as is said of Jacob, yet God is the strengh of their heart.Gen. 45.26. Psal. 73.26. Ephes. 1.18, 19. Mark 9.23. Psal. 110.3. They believe in the mighty power of God, whereby he raised up Christ from the dead. This is the reason, that to him that believes, all things are possible. This is the day of Gods power, that is, his Christ, his Arm. Obs. 2. Here note a great mistake in the understanding of these words. Its evident to common sense, that Abram is here said to believe, that God would give him an heavenly seed, and that exceeding numerous even as the Stars. The Text here mentions nothing at all, it speaks not one syllable of the active and passive obedience of Christ, his suffering, or death; but onely of a nu∣merous and blessed seed with should be like the stars of heaven, &c. So that however it be true, that the imputing of Christs obe∣dience and suffering in us and for us, be in it's right place firmely to be believed, namely as a deliverance from the curse of the law, when we are dead to sin, according to these and diverse other Scriptures, Act. 26.18. Gal. 3.13. Hebr. 10.14. Yet is it not the argument of this place which is my Text, nor con∣sequently the principal object of faith. For the better understanding of this, we must know that the Apostle in Rom. 4. and divers other of his Epistles, endeavours to compose the differences between the Circumcision and un∣circumcision,
circumcision, between the Jewes and Gentiles, and sets him∣self between them as an Umpir, of their controversies. And in this chapter he endeavours to declare and prove that salvation brought by Christ is not bestowed upon Abram and his seed neither out of Circumcision, nor out of the law, nor workes of the law, which either Abram or any son of Abram hath done, but out of the free grace and bounty of God, who of his Clemency and mercy hath given us the salvation even Jesus Christ the righteous, for what had either Abram or any of his seed done whereby he might either deserve, or dispose, or in∣cline the mercifull God to give the redeemer, even the Lamb, to take away the sinns of the world. The Son was most freely given, Esay. 9.6. But that any man may pertake of that affluence of grace and salvation, it's necessary that he believe in him that gives the Son, that he hunger, and thirst after the righteousness, come unto him and drinke, and through the same faith receive the water of life, which may become in him a well of water, springing up unto everlasting life, John. 4. So that his faith is not barren, but fruitful, as having the fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5. Reproof. 1. The great unbelief of many seeming and pretending sons of Abram. They believe not the Lord; they believe not the Lords omnipotency, he sees (they say) no sin in them, although they see it, and know it in themselves; yet, they say, God sees it not. They believe not his power, that he is able to subdue all the enemies of the life in us; that he is able to make us clean. Yet they believe, that the enemy is able to make a man perfectly wicked,Num. 14.11. as the Philosopher calls , a perfect thief, not that God is able to make a perfect honest man. Therefore he complaines, how long will it be ere ye believe me? They believe not his promises, that they shall live and reign with God eternally: or, if they believe his promises, yet not in their method and order,2 Tim. 2.11, 12. as to die with the Lord, that they may live with him; to suffer with him, that they may reign with him. Which is  a saying of faith, or a faithfull saying.Iona 3.5. Mat. 12.41. They believe not his threatnings, nor repent of their sins. And therefore tho Lord threatens that the men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment against them and condem them, who repented and believed the preaching of Jonah. O ye sons of Epimetheus! Ye believe no evill toward you before ye feele it. They believe neither law nor Prophets, nor Gospell of Jesus Christ,Mat. 7.12. whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even to them: For this is the law and the Prophets: Yet who so believes this, as so to do as he would be done unto? and can we marvell, that Gods in dgements are so rife among us? Yea
may we not rather mervail, that his judgments are no more frequent in the earth since the inhabitants of the earth have not learned righteousness? The Lords arme is not shortned, with him no shaddow of change, but we want faith in his power, Math. 13.58. The Gospell is a Gospel, and glad tidings of power.Psal. 71.18. Esay 53.1. John 12.37, 38. Luke 18.8. This David preached when he declared Gods Arm, or Christ, and the prophet Esay, who, saith he, hath believed our doctrin? and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? So S. John understood it, and interpreted it to be Christ. This Arm of the Lord is not shortned, for with him there is no shadow of change, but there is no faith in the earth, no belief in his power.Matth. 13.58. They believe not that God can raise up Christ crucified and dead in them. And therefore no great works are wrought in them because of their unbelief. Consol. Abrams son or daughter heavily complaines; Alas I go childless! Hath not the Lord promised thee an innumerable of-spring? Abram complaines, Alas; what are thousand of children which are as the dust! The Steward of my house is Eliezer of Damascus, one born of blood and of the will of man, that's Damascus. But behold to me thou hast given no seed, one born in my house is mine heir, my servant shall be mine heir. Here the answer of God to thee, O child of Abram; this shall not be thine heir. The servant abides not in the house alwayes, but the son abideth alwayes, he that shal come out of thy self , the LXX;  out of thy self; out of thy heart, so the LXX, sometime render , the heart shall come, the hidden man of the heart which is not corruptible. 1. Pet. 3.4. He is the seed of many thousands; as Joshuah, cap. 24.3. Saith of Abram, that God multiplied his seed, how? it followes, and gave him Isaac, as a seed of many thousands, the increase of God, a new heaven with innumerable stars of light. Exhort. Believe the Lord as Abram did, Abram came first out of Vr, then he came out of Egypt, then he over come the Baby∣lonians; and at length he believed the promise. Omnia, in figura, forsake thy people, &c. depart out of thy carnal sin, Egypt, and the spirituall Babell. Mortify thy sins, then maist thou believe the promise of an heaven and stars made by the father of lights. For if we be dead with him, then we believe that we shall also live with him. Rom. 6.8.2 Tim. 2.11. And therefore it is  a faithfull saying, or saying of faith, if we die with him, we shall also live with him; If we suffer with him, we shall also raign with him. Howbeit, although it be not said that Abram believed, when he left his country, yet unless he had then believed, God pro∣mising an other land, he had not left his own country. No
man will part with the present good, but in hope of inioying that which is better, and therefore, Hebr. 11.8. It is said, by faith he obeyed, and desired a better country, that is, an heavenly, vers. 6. This is belief in the father correcting us, and nurtering us under the law; And such belief is that Hebr. 11.6. This is the portch of the Temple, the fear, the beginning of wisdom, which is an entrance into the holy, even the holy faith. Axiom 6. Abram believed in the Lord, and he accounted it un∣to him for righteousnesse. These words contain Gods acceptance of Abrams belief. The LXX here have  passively, it was imputed unto him; and so this place is thrice cited, Rom. 4.3. Gal. 3.6. James 2.23. Herein let us inquire, 1. What is meant by Righteousnesse: 2. Counting for Righteousnesse. 3. How God may be said to count Abrams belief for Righteousnesse. 1.Esay 51.1. Deut. 6.25. Psal. 24.5. Dan. 4.24. Esay 56.1. The word  is rendred often by , it shall be your righteousnesse, he shall receive , mercy from the Lord and righte∣ousnesse. One expounds the other; do away thy sins by mercy, . Keep judgment and do righteousnesse, for my salvation is neer to come  and my righteousnesse  and my mercy. The word we turn to count is  which the LXX render by , and , but most frequently by  which is to think, esteem, reckon, impute. It is used in Scripture in regard of sin 1.2 Sam. 19.19. Psal. 32.2. negatively, as to discount it, to discharge it, not impute it unto the sinner; Let not my Lord impute iniquity to me, saith Shimei to David. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity. 2. In regard of righteousnesse affirmatively; and so to impute for righteousness,Psal. 106.30. with Num. 25 12, 13. Mal. 2, 5. is, for God to accept, and reward what good is found in us, working according to his will, whereby we give him honour, though it were our bounden duty so to do. Phineas gave God the honour of his power, fearing before his name, and the honour of his justice, then executed upon Israel for their idolatry and whordome; and this the Lord accepted as a righteous and well pleasing service at his hand; and rewarded it with his Covenant of peace, and an everlasting priesthood, in his posterity, who kept the conditions of the covenant. 3. To count or impute faith for righteousness or to esteem it as righteous, may be two wayes understood. 1. Either as faith in Christs obedient death, the attonement for our sinns is accounted to the belief for righteousness, whereby the sinner is acquitted and pardoned, as if he were innocent and had not sinned. 2. Or else as faith in the truth, and power of
God, who promiseth, and is faithfull and true, and able to per∣forme what he promises, is imputed for righteousness. The latter is here meant, as it is evident in the Text. Thus Abram believed in God promising him a son, and able to perform what he promised. And herein lies no small part of our happiness, that though our natures were fully repaired, by sanctification and holiness, which is the positive part of righteousness, yet unless the guilt of our former sinns be taken away by non-imputation, pardon and forgiveness of our old sinnes, we should yet perish. What is it then to be justified? not to be imagined righteous,Rom. 8.10. Psal. 24.5. Jer. 23.6. Rom. 6.18.22 and 14.17. but to be truly made so by the spirit of God, which is the very righteousness it self. The spirit is life because of righteousness. He shall receive righteousness from the Lord, Thus Christ is called the Lord our righteousness, or the righteousness of our God given unto us. Reason. Why did the Lord count faith to Abram for righteous∣ness? 1. Whither can this imputation be referred but unto the gratious estimation of God, whereby he is pleased to over-value the act of his creature wrought by his power, and esteeme it, and reward it above the worth of it? 2. That reason which may be considered in regard of Abram, was the glory he gave unto God by believiug in his truth and power. For he who believes, and trusts in another, hath an high opinion of him, that he is faith∣full and true in what he speakes, and is able and willing to effect what he promises. If any unexperienced chapman should come to one of you, and profess his ignorance in the commodity, he is to buy; and say, that he relied wholly upon you, and trusts you, ye will not deceive such a man; The deceiving of confidence is the very worst of all deceipts. Such a belief had Jehoshaphat a son of Abram; we have no might, saith he, against this great company,2 Chron. 20.12. that cometh against us; neither know we what to do; but our eyes are towards thee. God accepted that faith and bountifully rewarded it.Rom. 4.20, 21, 22. Thus when Abram believed God, and so gave glory to his truth, faith∣fullness, and power, God for that very reason imputed righteous∣ness unto Abram. Objec. If faith be imputed for righteousness, then possible it is that a justified man may be an unjust man; and the holy Text seemes to countenance this inference; what saith the Scripture?Rom. 4.3.8. Abram believed and it was counted to him for righteousness, but to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifies the ungodly, faith is imputed for righteousness, whence David, Blessed is the man,Psal. 32.2. saith he, unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity. Hence some of great name collect these consequences, how truly, I say not; 1. That Abram was one who wrought no
works of righteousness, but only believed in God: and 2. That God justifies the ungodly; so that, though they be lewd and ungodly, yet he accounts them just: what strange collections are these; yet such, as I fear, too many make from these words. Yea 3. Hence it will follow, that he is a blessed man, who hath only the non-imputation of his sin, whose sins are forgiven him, though otherwise he be a sinful man. Let us answer to these three doubts. 1. It seems, that Abram wrought no works of righteousness. Why? To him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifies the ungodly, &c. he works not but believeth. We must know therefore that the Scripture makes no oppo∣sition between good works, and believing in him, that justifies the ungodly; but the opposition lies between the works of the Law, without faith, and with exclusion of faith, and belief on him that justifieth the ungodly. For without doubt to walk in good works,Ephes. 2.10. and to do works of righteousnesse is the end for which man was created: we must know therefore that the Apostle disputes with the Pharisees against works wrought by their own power,Col. 2.12. Gen. 26.5. not against such as proceed from faith in the operative power of God, by which Abraham obtained a glorious testimo∣ny of his obedience. 2. It seems that God, when he imputes faith for righteousness, justifies the ungodly.Exod. 23.7. Prov. 17.15. and 24.24. Esay 5.23. But can this truly be said of the most just God, that he justifies the ungodly? doth he not say expresly, I will not justifie the wicked? nay, doth he not ahhor this in us? How then can God be said here to justifie the ungodly? I have hereto∣fore shewen, that God then justifies the ungodly, when he takes away his ungodlinesse from him. It is not therefore to be under∣stood in sensu composito, as if then, when God had justified the ungodly, he yet continued ungodly; but in sensu diviso, God ju∣stifies the ungodly, by taking away his ungodlinesse from him. And thus Abram being yet an Idolater, as Philo Judaeus, and divers of our own gather out of Jos. 24.2. he believed in God, who justi∣fied Abram, and took away his idolatry and all his sins from him, and made him of an Idolater, a worshipper of the true God; of an ungodly man, a godly man; so God justifies the ungodly. And thus ,Hos. 14.2. Luke 11.4. Mat. 26.28. Acts 13.38. Mat. 8.17. turn'd forgiveness of sins, signifies not only a remission and pardon of sin, but also a taking away of sin. Thus the Lamb of God takes away the sins of the world. Thus in the third doubt, God imputes righteousnesse without works to him whose unrighteousnesses are forgiven, removed, and taken away, and whose sins are covered and buried by their contrary righteousnesse. Besides, though the Scripture were here to be so understood, as they lledge it; yet I answer secondly, that that testimony
out of Psalm 32. is not fully taken, but as it is very usuall in humane authors, as well as in the Scripture it self, where some∣what is left to be supplyed. The following words are, and in whose spirit there is no guie; So that well may the Lord pronounce him just, when he has made him just. For what is that, in whose spirit there is no guile, but according to what the Psalmist speakes, vers. 11. The last words in the Psam, rejoyce in the Lord ye righ∣teouss, and shout for joy all ye upright in heart. Obs. 1. Take notice of Gods exceeding great bounty and mu∣nificence. He reckons that as if it were merit and desert, which is no more then meer duty and due service. When Abram be∣lieved God in his promise, and set to his seal, &c. John 3.35. Abram did no more then what was his duty to do herein; Yea, which in all reason he ought to do: For what is more credible, or so credible and worthy to be believed, as the Primum verum, that which in nature is first true? Yea Abram, did no more then what we afford to men in their measure, when we believe their words, and promises; Yet the Lord not only took this faith in good worth at Abrams hand, but rewarded it with the performance of what was promised, a son, yea, he also gave him a spiritual seed of righteousness, whereby he was the friend and favorite of God, Jam. 2.23. Obs. 2. What we have in the Text, He, that is, God counted unto him for righteousness, that in the Ch. Paraphrast, the LXX, S. Paul, Rom. 4.3. Gal. 3.6. S. Jam. 2.23. is rendred passively, it was imputed unto him for righteousness. Whence we may infer, that what God accounts for righteousness, it is so accoun∣ted. Obs. 3. Abram no doubt was a righteous man before, as may appear by his whole story; wherefore when God is said to have counted this faith to Abram for righteousness,Revel. 22.11. what can we understand hereby, but that, since righteous Abram was righteous still, God added this eminent act of faith unto Abrams account of righteousness? according to the meaning of  and . Reproof. The unjustifiable, and unwarrantable, justifications, 2. especiall, 1. by workes, 2. by fansy. 1. By works, whe∣ther of the ceremoniall law, Gal. 4.10.11. or of the morall law without faith, the Scripture every where excludes them both. Specially, Rom. 4. where the Apostle proves that Abrams justification sprang not from his own workes, but from Gods grace. Reprof Second. Those who justifie themselves by fancy, who imagine that because they believe that Christ hath done and suffered all things for mans salvation, and theirs in speciall, this faith shall be imputed unto them for righteousness, though they
yet live not by faith, yea, though they live in open and notorious sinns: But perhaps the Lord accounts those sinnes dead, and reputes those dead workes only as infirmities and weaknesses of the Saints. Very likely; As if sin were then mortified and dead when it is only thought to be so; As if to be baptized into Christs death, were only to have our sins called by new names, as weaknesses, infirmities and frailties, which were deadly sins before we imagined them to be dead. By this meanes we shall have wicked mens cousenage, murder, drunkenness and adultery, and the Saints cousenage, their murder, their drunkenness, their adultery the very same sinnes, only fansied otherwise, new Christ'ned and called by other nam's; as serving-men are said to be drunk, and their masters sick; when the disease is one and the same. And many like prodigious unheard of distinctions of sins. Thus because Christ was sober, therefore the believing drunkard shall be counted sober, by Christs sobriety. And be∣cause Christ was chast, patient, loving, &c. Therefore the believing letcher, wrathful, envious person shall be counted chast, patient, loving. Why? because Christs chastity, patience and love is imputed to him. O' beloved! Let not us be deceived; for God is not, God cannot be deceived; He alwayes accounts sin, sin. He never accounts a covetous man, liberall; nor a drunkard, sober; nor a letcher, chast; nor an angry man, patient; He judgeth righteous judgment, shall I count them pure with the wicked balances and with the bag of deceitfull weights? Saith the Lord, Mich. 6.11. No; This is the time foretold by the Prophet,Esay 32.8. when the vile person shall be no more called liberall, nor the churl bountifull; but the liberall person deviseth liberall things, and by liberall things shall be stand. He that doth righteousness is righteous even as God is righteous. Saith S. John, 1 Joh. 3.7. O beloved! there is no marvell that the hand of God is stretched out still, since in this day of his judgement there is no true faith to be found, little other righteousness, no better justifi∣cation then this. Cons. Great consolation unto believers the sons and daughters of Abram. The Lord counts their belief unto them for righ∣teousness. The Lord promiseth Jesus Christ the son to be their life and righteousness, and they believe that God is faithfull and able to raise him from the dead, and form him in them to be their life.
IT may be, that I may obtain children by her.Genesis. Chap. 16. Verse 2.] And why did the Translators here cast the sense of the Hebrew word into the margent? since the metaphore of edifying and building the Church, is so illustrious, and notable through out the Scripture? Thus Rachel and Leah are said to have built up the house of Jsrael.Ruth 4.11. Deut. 25 9. 2 Sam. 7.11, 16. So it shall be done to the man who will not build up his brothers house. And whereas David had a purpose to build an house to the Lord, the Lord requites his intention with a promise of building David an house, that is giving children who should sit upon his throne. This metaphor we read used also by Heathen Authors in the same argument; So sounds that known Iambic. , male children are the columnes of houses. And the old Commedian in his Mustela. Novarum esse aedium arbitror similem ego hominem quando hic natus est. And after∣ward, Parentes fabri liberûm sunt. I think, saith he, the man, now this son is born, is like a new house. The parents are the builders of their children. Thus often in the New Testament, we meet with this metaphor of building up and increasing the Church; So the Lord pro∣miseth,Acts 15.16, 17. that he will build again the Tabernacle of David that is fallen down, that the residue of men may seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom his name is called. O that we all were workers together with God, for the rearing up and increasing of this building! O that all we do, were done to edifying, that we would edify one another and build up one another in our holy faith, and commend one another to the word of Gods grace,Acts 20.32. Ephes. 2.22. which is able to build us up, that we may become an habitation of God through the spirit! She shall be a Mother of Nations.Genesis. Chap. 17. Ver. 16. Kings of people shall be of her. [A Mother] is here a supplement, and a bold one, which is not to be found in either the LXX, or V. Lat. or Chal. Par. or Syriac or Arabic versions. The Hebrew Text is more general, She shall be , that is, in Gentes, for nations, namely, to rule over them. For there is no doubt but the Lord herein had re∣ference to the change of her name, which was before , Sarai; which is Princeps mea, my Princess, or Princess of my family; but now I shall inlarge her name and dominion with it; For  Sarah shall her name be. And this is proved by the context; The very next words are an exegesis and explication of these; Kings of peoples shall be of her. For the word answering to people, is , in the plurall, peoples. And the Antients understood the words so, with reference to the dominion over the nations, she shall be called Sarah because  she is a Princess over all. Antea dicebatur princeps mea, quasi unius familiae mater: Postea absolutè Princeps, omnium scilicet gentium princeps fatura. So S. Hierom. Thou shalt not call thy wife Sarai, id est, principem
mean, but thou shalt call hir Sarah, exaltando principem, quia Ecclesia in omni gente principatur. Not Sarai my Princess, but Sarah by exalting the Princess, because the Church rules in every Nation. And, in cujus semine benedicuntur omnes gentes; quia Christus dominabitur in Gentibus. In whose seed all Nations shall be blessed, because Christ shall rule in all Nations. So the Interlineary Gloss. It may also have reference unto the princely grace of faith signified by Sarah the free woman, Gal. 4.23. Which is not a prophesy of calling the Gentiles only to the obedience of Christ, but of that greatest inlargement of Christs dominion, when that shall be fulfilled, which we read, Revel. 11.15. The Kingdomes of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reigne for ever and ever. When all are so become Kings Motûs suos bene regentes, so ruling all their motions and actions, that as sin hath reigned unto death, so may grace reign through righteousness unto eternall life,Genesis. Chap. 22. Ver. 18. Gen. 12.3. and 18.18. by Jesus Christ our Lord, Rom. 5.21. And in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, because thou hast obeyed my vojce.] It is true, we read the like promise before, twice. But it is the like onely, and not the same; which possibly might occasion an inadvertency in the Transla∣tors. For in the too former Scriptures the blessing is given to Abram in his own name, and centred as it were in himself, from whom it should proceed unto all Nations. But in this place the promise is made to Abram in his seed, and by his seed to all Nations. Howbeit this makes not all the difference. The con∣jugation is here changed. In the former places the blessing is given passively, All Nations shall be blessed; But in this place the blessing is promised in a reflexe and reciprocall form. In both the former we read  All Nations shall be blessed; in this, we read  all the Nations of the earth shall not only be bles∣sed, as before, but shall blesse themselves. It's a Scripture of the greatest Marke and note that I know, of all other. Wherein the most high God expresseth, the greatest reward of the most acceptable duty, that his most faith∣full and obedient servant in the world, Abram could perform unto him. This reward is no lesse, no other, than the son of God himself, figured by Jsaac the spirituall joy and delight, the son of Abram,Gen. 3.15. and offered by Abram his father unto God, upon the Altar. In requitall whereof, God promiseth his own son the eternall joy. Of this son of God, although there were before promise made, yet it was not revealed untill now, that his father would give him as a propitiation for the sinnes of the whole world.1 John 2.2. And here the Lord makes this promise unto Abram, whom he made Heir of the world, which promise was to descend upon all Nations. And this promise the Lord here confirmes
with an oath; which are the two immutable things whereby it is impossible for God to lie.Hebr. 6. John 3.33. and 7.39. Ephes. 1.11.14. Unto which when we consent and believe, we set to our seal that God is true. And he reciprocal∣ly puts to his seal, for the conveyance and confirmation of the eternal inheritance. Howbeit this free gift of God, and Christs free oblation of himself, signifies unto us, and requires of us a like Sacrifice and offering up of our sins, prefigured in the Ram, which Abraham offered upon the Altar.Hebr. 10.12, 13. Thus much the Apostles words import; After he had offered up one sacrifice for sins for ever, he sat down at the right hand of God. Yet that Sacrifice exempts not us, but requires of us, that we offer up the Sacrifice of our sins, wherein we have pleased our selves as in our most dearly beloved Isaacs, our delights, our joyes. For it presently fol∣lows in the Apostle, Henceforth he expecteth, that his enemies, which are our sins, be made his footstool. For Isaac a figure of the spiritual joy, offered upon the Altar of the Christian patience, signifies unto us, and requires of us,Phil. 4.4. that all our rejoycing be in the Lord; and that we offer up our rammish, our carnal joy which afterward pusheth and pricks us to the heart, and afflicts us in the time of our perplexity, Extrema gaudii luctus occupat, such joy commonly ends with sorrow. Therefore behind (not behind him) the Ram was caught in the Thicket [ in perplexity] by his horns. Then is the spiritual joy restored, living and intire, and welcom'd off the Crosse with great jubilation; as the Feast of Trumpets (say the Jews) was instituted for the commemora∣tion of Isaac saved from death,Levit. 23.24. and come off from the Altar safe and alive, and the Ram sacrificed in his stead. And therefore in that Feast, they blew Trumpets and Cornets of Rams horns. Which also figured the preaching of the Word; for so the Preacher must lift up his voice like a Trumpet,Esay 58.1. Ephes. 5.14. and awaken men to repentance, that they may arise from the dead, and Christ may give them light and life; and blessed are the people who know that joyful sound.Psal. 89.15. This was the sum of the Apostles preaching both to the Jews and Gentiles. S. Peter thus published the Gospel compendi∣ously to all Nations, or his own countreymen,Acts 2.5. who for the time of the Feast sojourned (, not dwelt, as our Transla∣tors render that word) at Jerusalem, but dwelt in all Nations under heaven. Unto these he preached Christ crucified and ri∣sen from the dead. And S. Paul designed an Apostle to the Gentiles, Having,Act. 26.22, 23 saith he, obtained help of God, I continue unto this day witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things then those, which the Pro∣phets and Moses did say should come, that Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should shew light unto the people (that is the Jews) and to the Gentiles.
Where in all the Penteteuch doth Moses say expresly that Christ should suffer? Where doth any of the Prophets say so? Surely nei∣ther Moses nor the Prophets say so much  in expresse termes: But they who were spiritually minded in all ages, could read the truth in the type and figure, the spiritual meaning in the Letter and History of Moses and the Prophets. They clearly saw Christ deciphered in Moses and the Prophets writings. And that which might facilitate and render the apprehension of Gods and Christs love unto the world more clearly, was that known custome among all Nations, of making their , their Piacularia sacra, their expiatory Sacrifices, of the very worst, and most notorious Malefactours, (the more wicked, the more fit for such a purpose,) that thereby they might purge away their sins, & averruncare deûm iram, saith Livy, make satisfaction to their gods, and appease their wrath, when they sent any pesti∣lence or other calamity among the people. Vpon the head of such an one they laid all their sins, and heaped upon him all the execrations and curses of the people, and then cast him down some steep precipice, with this farewel, , Be thou an expiation for us. For want of such an one, they used the most unclean of beasts, a Swine. Caiphas when he prophe∣sied, said, that one (some such one man) must die for the peo∣ple. And such an one became the spotless; innocent, sinlesse, harmless Isaac, the Son of God. The common guilt and conscience of sin in all nations, Who had pierced the Father and the Son,Zach. 12.10. Rev. 1.7. easily made way in their hearts for the acceptation of such a Saviour and Redeemer; and upon the like termes of suffering with him. This is evident by the effect of S. Peters Sermon,Acts 2.5.36, 7.41. whose Auditors were the Representatives of all Nations. The Apostle requires of them, That they repeat and be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, for the Remission or Removall of their sins. &c. Whereupon they gladly received his word. This will clearly manifest the Defect of the last English transla∣tion herein, yea and of all other that I have yet seen in our own, or any other language, except onely that of Vatablus who turns the words thus, Benedictas dicent sein semine tuo, omnes Gentes orbis, all Nations of the world shall call themselves blessed in thy seed, which he explaines out of the Hebrew. All Nations shall blesse themselves upon or for thy seed; that is, they shall think themselves blessed and happy for thy seed Christ. Or they shall say most truly that they are to be blessed in that seed alone. So Vatablus; and Castellio turns the words to the same effect. All other translations that I have yet seen have onely this expression of , all nations in thy seed, shall be blessed; whereas the word signifies much more, viz, That all Nations shall know, believe
and confess themselves  be blessed in the son of God; Yea, they shall reciprocally blesse themselves, that they are so blessed in the seed of Abraham, the son of God. Nor do I doubt but that every pious soul echoes and closeth with this interpretation; which is made good by all to whom the holy seed is so tendred in the Gospell. For so ye read that they who heard it so preached, Gladly received the word.Acts 2.41. and 8.8. And upon Philips preaching the Gospell at Samaria there was great joy in that City. And at the like Sermon of his to the Eunuch,Esay 53. Acts 8.39. and 13.48. when he had expounded the prophet Esay's speech on the same argu∣ment, The Eunuch went on his way rejoycing. The preaching of S. Paul took so with the Gentiles also. All which and many other are so many proofs of this translation. The Psalmist speakes hom to this.Psal. 72, 17. Men shall bless themselves in him: All Nations shall call him Blessed. Thus Abraham received his son from the dead in a parable, Hebr. 11. Out of a dead body and a dead womb; and in a parable and figure of him, whom Abraham and all the children of Abraham receive from the dead. Whence we may note the great Reward of Abrahams obe∣dience. The Lord stampt the memory of it upon the place Mount Moriah. For as many things of greatest note are re∣corded to have been there done; As that Adam first offered sacrifice there and there was buried, saith S. Hierom out of the Jewes monuments. David also there, by Gods command, built an altar, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings thereon, so that the Lord was intreated for the Land; and the plague was staied from Israel, 2 Sam. 24.24. So above all, in the City Jerusalem the Temple of God was built by Solomon in Mount Moriah, by Gods appointment, in the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite, 2 Chron. 3.1. Let us not gaze onely upon Temples made with hands: What house will ye build unto me? and where is the place of my rest? Ʋnto him do I look, saith the Lord, who is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word, Esay 66.1.2. There's Moriah, the Mount, where God is seen; where the old Adam is dead and buried. There is the true Isaac the Christ of God, the foundation of Gods Temple surely laid. There is the altar of divine patience, whereon the daily sacrifice is offered; There is the fear of God, and all divine service, so the Chald. Paraph. here calls it, the Land of divine worship. There is the land of vision, where the Lord is seen. There is the divine doctrin, and the spirit of God that leades into all the truth of it. There is Ornan the Child of light (so Ornan signifies) the Jebusite, Who had trodden down the righte∣ousness, but now treads down the iniquity, and thresheth the good grain out of the chaff, the spirit out of the letter.
And this is the Reward of Abraham and every one of his children who offer up their delight and joy to the Lord; they receive fulness of joy. So the Lord having said vers. 18. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth blesse themselves, addes , The Reward, because thou hast obeied my voice. So it is in the Arabic Version; and so Aben Ezra understood the words.
SERMON VI. A prudent Wife is of the Lord.SERM. VI. Genesis 24.44. Let the same be the woman whom the Lord hath appointed out for my Masters Son. THe words are part of Eliezers petition unto the God of Abraham his Master, That the virgin who shall answer his request and more then satisfie his desire, may be that woman whom he hath appointed out to be a wife for Isaac. The whole history is plain and certain. Nor dare I say that which yet one of the ancient Fathers hath said, S. Sanctus non nar∣rat historias, The H. Spirit tels no histories. I rather believe what another Father saith, Dum narrat gestum, prodit mysterium, while the Scripture relates an history, it reveales a mystery. Wherefore having already spoken of the history, I shall now treat of the mystical truth contained in it. And in special explain what our Translators turn appointed out. The Lord hath appoin∣ted out a wife for Isaac. The word  which we render, appointed out, signifies al∣so secondly, and that most frequently, to reprove or correct. As also thirdly to prepare: which the LXX here render . And all these significations are fit for this place, especially the two former; and follow gradually one after the other thus. 1. The Lord corrected the woman. 2. The Lord prepared the woman being corrected. 3. The Lord appointed out the woman so corrected and pre∣pared, as a wife for Isaac. Howbeit, herein I cannot justifie our Translators, who know∣ing, no doubt, these three notable significations of the word, they have waved those two, which are more proper, and made choise of the third; because, as I fear, some of them might think, it made for the establishing their opinion of destiny and fatality. But herein they were much deceived, as I hope to make it appear in the handling these three Axioms. Let us begin with the first.
1. The Lord corrected the woman. 1. By the woman under∣stand the Church, or such as are now to be reformed and made the Church of Christ. 2. What Lord is this, and to which of the three witnesses doth it belong? its evident from his act of correcting, that it is the father to whom the Law is attributed, by which he corrects.Psal. 40.8. 3. How doth the Lord correct the wo∣man? The Lord corrects the woman either inwardly or out∣wardly. Inwardly, as by every word of God, so specially by his law; and this he doth in the thoughts and affections of men,2 Tim. 3.16. Psal. 94.12. by pro∣posing unto the consciences of men their evil thoughts, intentions, and purposes, and sinful affections, wills and actions, contrary to the law of God. Thou thoughtest wickedly, &c. but I will reprove thee, and set before thee the things that thou hast done. He reproves the vain thoughts. Psal. 50. The Lord corrects also outwardly, and that by manifold wayes. Elihu tels us of some, Job 33.19. And David, when thou with rebukes doest chasten men. But as in other duties, so in this especially, God makes one man a kind of god unto another, Ho∣mo homini deus. Thus either the voice from the life reproves, Levit. 19.17. or the life it self. Let the righteous smite me and reprove me, Psal. 141.5. Whence Obs. 1. In what condition the Lord findes us when he comes to correct us by his Law, faulty and unruly. Hagar was proud and stubborn, contemn'd her Mistresse, and Ismael was a sawcy Boy,  a jeerer and a mocker. Sarah therefore afflicted Hagar, and at length turn'd her and her son out of dores. ; these things are an Allegory, saith the Apostle, Gal. 4.24. The body of sin and our naturall body depraved by sin, is a servant; So servants are called , Revel. 18.13. Bodies, which we render slaves; of such a body the Apostle speaks. I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, 1 Cor. 9.27. Obs. 2. See an oeconomie and dispensation of God the Father, whereof there is little notice taken in the Christian world. There is much talk of the Gospell of Jesus Christ, which is the dispensation of the Son, but little speech is made of the law of God the Father and correction by it necessarily preceding the Gospell of the Son.Iohn 5.17.21. For as there is a work of the Son, so is there also a work of the Father. Ye read of the Father's raising of the dead,Gal. 4, 19. as well as the Sons. And as there is a shape and forme of Christ in those who believe and obey the Gospell of the Son;Iohn 5.37. So is there a forme and shape of God the Father in those who believe and obey the law of God the Father. God the Father first prepares the woman by correction and discipline, and instructs her, and he then appoints her as a spouse
for the Lord Jesus Christ. First the Father teacheth and brings up Disciples under the law; and then he directs them to Jesus Christ. Seal the law among my disciples,Esay 8.16, 18 Gal. 3.24 Iohn 8.31. and 13.35. and 15.8. which are commended to Christ. This law therefore is said to be a Schoolmaster unto Christ. Now Christ receives those discipled by the Father, and they become his disciples while they abide in his word; Love one another; and out of faith working by love, bring forth much fruit. Whence it evidently appears, that what ever disciples may be said to be the Sons, they were first the Fathers; He framed them and fashion'd them by correction and instruction, and so appointed them out for the Son. The men that thou gavest me out of the world, Thine they were.Iohn 17.6. These the Father appoints out and gives to the son. Hence we read of the Church in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Apostles Epistles unto the Churches to which he wrote. Obs. 3. Behold what is the best Reformed Church; surely it can be no other than that which God himself reformes and corrects. That congregation of men whom God hath reformed and fashioned anew, in whom is the shape and form of God. Axiom. 2. The Lord prepared a wife for Jsaac. The fulness of the holy word is wonderfull; which truely cannot be ex∣hausted by one translation; and therefore, by divine direction, what one renders one way, another turns another way, and so a third and fourth, according to the various signification of the Scripture, and all true. That which els where often meets us, the same is here in the Text; where the word  signifies to correct, prepare, appoint, and instruct. The High and Low-Dutch hath, Thou hast destined or appointed. So Castellio, as also our last Translation. The Spanish, French, and Italian Transla∣tions, as also our antient English Translation renders the word here Prepared; So doth the LXX, , and the Vulg. Latin Praeparasti. But the most ordinary use of the word in Scripture is to correct, chasten or chastise, and so its rendered by  in a bove fourty places of the Old Testament. The word , which the LXX here use, is from  ready and prepared. Which the Etymologist tells us, is quasi  Missus in viam, accordingly we find here in the Vulgar Lat. Preparavit; paro is aptum facio; instruo from , Aditum ceu viam aperire. The LXX accordingly render the word , to instruct or prepare by instruction. To Prepare is a very generall word, and alwayes in order to an end, as here to the end cui, or for whom the Lord prepared the virgin. Pre∣paration of the Church by the law of the Lord, is seen in many acts, which may be comprehended under these two generalls, correction, and instruction.
For whereas the Law is our Schoolmaster unto Christ,Psal. 94.12. God the Father instructs his disciples and nurtures them out of his Law, and thereby prepares and fits them for Jesus Christ. So the Lord does properly , he by instruction sets us in his way.Esay 30.21. Thine ears shall hear a word behinde thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left. What is the reason of so many preparations before the woman be brought to Isaac? prepared she must be by correction, pre∣pared by instruction; and again prepared she must be by Elie∣zer, and the Angel or the Spirit of Gods preventing grace: what need is here of so many preparations before we be fitted and made ready for union with the Lord Jesus Christ? The Church is to be prepared for glory.Rom. 9.23. 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. Now there are degrees of grace and glory: they who had repented, Matth. 4.17: must again repent, Luke 13.1.—5. 2 Pet. 1.9. Revel. 2.5. and 3.19. they are brought to Christ and purged, Hebr. 6.1. yet fruitful branches must be purged John 15.2. Acts 5.31. Mal. 3.3. yea, the sons of Levi. 2 Cor. 7.1, 2. 1 John 3.1.—3. Their pattern is the purity of God himself. The Church to be presented unto Christ,Ephes. 5.27.3 is to be made a glorious Church without spot or wrinkle or any such thing. Whereas there∣fore the defilements and blemishes are many, in reason the washings and purgings of it, the preparations of it must needs be also many. Therefore among the principles of the doctrine of Christ ye read,Hebr. 6.2. Esther 2.5. one to be the doctrine of baptisms, and elsewhere ye read of divers washings. This was figured by Esther. Esther was brought up by Mordecai the son of Jair. Esther is the hidden, the invisible Church. So Esther signifies one hidden; and the vir∣gin here in the text is called  hidden, verse 43. This wo∣man is brought up by Mordecai, the bitternesse of contrition, or teaching contrition, both works of the Law, the son of Jair, that is, illuminating, enlightning, or being enlightned. Such is the Law. She is preparing a whole year before she comes to Ahashuerus. She is prepared by the oil of Myrth. Oyl is a figure of the Spirit, bitterness of spirit. The Law is spiritual which writes bitter things against us: that's correction: and by sweet odours, 2 Cor. 2.14. that's knowledge and instruction. Hence it is said, that John the Baptist, Luke 1.17. must make ready a people prepared for the Lord. One of our best Criticks tells us, that  and , to make ready and prepare are all one; which he under∣stands to be a pleonasme, with which, saith he, the Hebrew Hel∣lenistical tongue abounds. Certainly a very learned man he was, but herein much mistaken, as many more are, who take no no∣tice of the first dispensation of the Father preparing men by cor∣rection and instruction out of the Law, Psal. 94.12. Whom the spirit of Gods preventing grace, figured by John Baptst, receives
and yet further prepared by baptisme of washing and teaching the doctrin of repentance and amendment of life. And being so prepared, John commendeth them to Jesus Christ; Thus John made ready or prepared a people prepared already for the Lord. Hence it is that John Baptist commends his disciples to Christ, Joh. 1.35, 36, 37. and Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. Simon Peter one of them is called by our Lord, Simon Bar-Joannis, Simons Son or disciple of John. Obs. 1. If the Lord God correct and instruct the woman the Church, then ought the Church to be corrigible and docible, and to receive correction. The Lord saith, I will teach thee, but be not like the Horse and Mule without understanding. Ps. 32.8, 9. Obs. 2. Who are the true Ministers of God, serviceable to the father in the correction and instruction by the law, Ministers of the killing letter, 2 Cor. 3.6. Where we read also that there are Minsters of the Gospell, such as are serviceable to the Son in the Gospell of Jesus Christ. Obs. 3. The Church comes not unprepared or extempore, out of her unregenerate estate unto Jesus Christ. She is brought by Eliezer, Gods helper, by John Baptist the friend of the Bride∣groom unto Jesus Christ, Joh. 3.29. Eph. 5.25, 26, 27. Reproof. Those who reject the correction and instruction of the Law. Some are said professedly so to do; but truly I hope better of them. Others extreamly blame these, yet do the same thing. Almost all say, the lesson of the Law is impossible to be learned. So almost all men, upon the matter, forsake the Law. And how then can they perswade themselves, that they are come unto Jesus Christ, who is the end of the Law? Yea, most men leap over John Baptists head, commence Christians, Per saltum, before they have been Johannites. Must not John be the  and , the fore-runner who presents us unto Jesus Christ? 2 Cor. 11.2. Axiom 3. God the Father appointed out a wife for Isaac. The word affords this sense also. For the word  which most frequently signifies to correct or prepare by instruction, signifies also to appoint or designe, as also to point out or make evident; in which sense the Apostle, Hebr. 11.1. saith, that faith is , an evidence, or making things appear which were not seen otherwise. Thus Castellio; High and Low Dutch. This is true, 1. Literally: 2. Spiritually. 1. Literally. And so the reason why the Lord appointed a wife for Isaac, is the pursuance of his own first ordinance and institution, for the propagating of an holy seed. He alone as he knowes the hearts of all the children of men, so he fashions and fits them in a mutual harmony one towards another. And in this sense A prudent wife is from the Lord, Prov. 19.14.
2. In regard of Jsaac himself, he permitted the whole pro∣vision and care of a mutual helper unto God and his father; and therefore the Lord took himself to be ingaged to answer with sutable providence the affiance and trust reposed in him. Obs. 1. The state of matrimony is not despicable, God him∣self appoints a wife for Isaac. Obs. 2. Some ground for that which is vulgarly spoken, That mariages are made in heaven. Obs. 3. No ground for their fond conceit, whose heart followeth their eies after a skin-deep beauty, as if God had appointed them wives in that disorderly way. 'Tis true, God may appoint such marriages, as a due punishment of those, who transgresse that formalis ratio of Christian marriage, 1 Cor. 7.39. , only in the Lord. Mystically. When the Apostle had spoken of wedlock; this, faith he, is , a great mystery; for I speak of Christ and his Church. A and so doth Moses here, when he tells us of Gods appointing out a wife for Isaac, hereby we mystically un∣derstand to be meant the pre-ordaining and choosing a Church for Christ, Ephes. 1.4. Obser. The oeconomy and dispensation of the father. When Abraham sendes his servant, and he provides a wife for his Masters Son, and transacts the whole business without Jsaac his interposing; What can we gather hence, but Abrahams fatherly providence for his Son, and Jsaac's obedience and submission unto his fathers will? These and such as these are good morall observations and all that the ministry of the letter will gather from hence. But we may further observe, that the spirituall Jsaac intermedles not with his own wife; She is first discipled, fitted, instructed and every way prepared by the Father; and then appointed out to him. And therefore it was not without a great mystery, that Adam must be cast into a dead sleep, when his wife was taken out of him. The Mother of all the living ones, the spouse of the second Adam, is taken out of the second Adam, now crucified as in a dead sleep upon the crosse and maried unto him who is raised from the dead, Rom. 7.4. And herein was Isaac also made like unto the Son of God, who had now a wife provided for him without his knowledge, when by his own will, that is, his humane judgment, he neither takes nor rejects any soul. For I came not, saith he, to do mine own will, but the will of my father, Joh. 5.30. and 6.37, 38. I came down from heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. But if I be appointed out for Jsaac, Eliezer will take me. If God hath appointed me to salvation, I shall have remission of sins and amendment of life. If I shall be saved, God will bring me to
the Church, Act. 13.47. If I be ordained unto eternall life, I shall believe, Act. 13.48. These are perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds. If God hath appointed thee to salvation, he hath also corre∣cted thee, nurtured, chastened, and instructed thee, and prepa∣red and fitted thee by his law for his son the spiritual Isaac. And then thou must be corrigible, teachable, pliable, and yielding. The Lord chooseth such sons to be partakers of his holinesse and righteousness, that is, of Christ, Hebr. 12. What wise father will match his son to one base born? now if ye refuse chastise∣ment, ye are bastards, and not sons, Hebr. 12.8. If God hath appointed unto thee his kingdom, it is as he hath appointed it unto Christ; and how was that but by temptations, by afflicti∣ons, by death? For ought not Christ to suffer these things, and (ita, so, Vulg. Lat. and Castellio) to enter into his kingdom? that so suffering with him, we may reign with him, Luke 22.29. and 24.26. Put on as the elect of God, bowels of mercy, &c. These are the orna∣ments of Christs Spouse. The Spouse of Christ is all glorious within, bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of minde, meekness, long∣suffering, &c. her clothing is of wrought gold, that is, charity: that is, her upper garment is love to God her neighbour, her enemy; Above all these things put on charity, Col. 3.14. God the Father does not appoint a merciless, unkinde, proud, impatient Spouse for his Son; he has not chosen a Scould, but one clothed with bow∣els of mercy, &c. He hath appointed a Spouse for his Son ador∣ned with all the vertues and graces of the Spirit. He hath not ap∣pointed a nasty Slut. The Church is a Bride prepared and ador∣ned for her Husband, Revel. 21.2. Who ever is espoused to the Lord Jesus, is such. Object. 1. But if God hath appointed me to wrath, how can I possibly be a Spouse of the spirituall Jsaac? The Lord hath sworn that He delighteth not in the death of the wicked, Ezech. 33.11. Designation, destination or appointing to wrath, it must be an act of Gods will. Now he swears, he wills it not. He swears not falsly, or in vain, as I live, as many an one vseth that oath in vain and falsely. O but this is Gods revealed will; God has a secret will opposite unto his revealed will. 1. If it be Gods secret will, how comest thou to know it? 2. Thou hast herein a worse conceit of thy God, than thou wouldest have of him whom thou thinkest to be an honest man. Obj. 2. But the Lord afflicts me, and laies heavy strokes upon me. These are not the wounds of an enemy, but the chastise∣ments of a father. And these are arguments of his love. When the Physitian purgeth and lets his patient blood, it's a certain
signe, he has hope of his life, and would have him live. Why does the heavenly physitian launce thee, purge thee? Why does he let thee blood, let out the sinfull life, the blood is the life. Thy sins are as scarlet red as crimson. Thou hast not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin, Hebr. 12.4. If the Physitian should leave purging, If the Physitian of thy soul should leave correcting thee and chastening thee, and prescribing cordialls unto thee, If he should give thee over, there were some cause of fear. If the father leave chastning his Son, and let him go out of his house and spend his substance , out of the state of salvation; yet if he return, he receives him. Mark how the Psalmist concludes, and I shall conclude with him, Psal. 118.17, 18. I shall not die but live, and declare the works of the Lord. Why? his reason followes; The Lord hath chastned me sore, but he hath not given me over unto death. Open to me the gates of righteousness; I will go in to them, I will praise the Lord.
Iacob was a plain man dwelling in tents.]Genesis. Chap. 25. Ver. 27. I looked for the word  here used either in the text, or at least in the margent, to be rendred Perfect; but here is no notice taken of any such sig∣nification. Howbeit Martin Luther and the Low Dutch, the Ti∣gurin Bible, and the Spanish, as also Castellio, Munster, Vata∣blus, and Piscator, render the word Intire, which is neer to that which it properly signifies, Perfect; and so two of our old En∣glish Translations have it, and Pagnin. What others have, simple, as in the Vulg. Lat. is the same with what is in our English, plain, the LXX have , si∣ne fuco. . Ceb. Tab. to this purpose, saith R. Sal. he was not experienced in all things; but  as his heart was, so was his mouth: as he thought, so he spake. Howbeit, simplicity is either opposite unto worldly wisdom,2 Cor. 1.12. Prov 8.5 and 9.13 or to divine wisdom. In the former sense, Jacob was simple, plain, intire, and perfect. The word in the Scripture before us is of a twofold significa∣tion; 1. Consumi, perdi, destrui, to be consumed and destroyed. 2. To be finished, accomplished, perfected; which may be comprehended in these two words consumi and consummari,Psal. 104.35. with 37.37. to be consamed or consummated. The reason of this double signification seems to be this, be∣cause the nature of perfection consists in the consuming and de∣stroying of what ever is opposite thereunto, and the accomplish∣ment of that holinesse and righteousnesse which God requires; according to what the Prophet saith,Ezech. 22.15 2 Cor. 7.1. I will consume thy silthinesse out of thee. And the Apostle exhorts, to perfect holinesse in the fear of God. Accordingly the word is rendred by the LXX : all which import unspotted, unreproveable, innocent, pure, guiltless, and siniple plainnesse, and so a privative perfection; in which who∣soever walketh, unto him the positive perfection shall come,1 Cor. 13. Psal. 101.2. whereof the Apostle speakes. And David walking in the former, prayes for and expects the later. What is added, That he dwelt in Tents.] R. Salomon would have understood the tents of Shem & Heber,  as having frequented their Schools. But he is here said to be a perfect man dwelling in tents; which imports his perfect estate; and that he was now perfectly gone out of himself to dwell with his God. The harvest, the full harvest was now come to him, when after the gathering in the fruits of their labours, they kept the Feast of Boothes with greatest expressions of joy,Exod. 23.16, 17. which pre∣figured the eternal reward of all our labours, when we shall be
received into everlasting Tabernacles, Luke 16.9. Deut. 16.13.14, 15. when  thou shalt surely or onely rejoyce: and according to the Apostles exhortation, Rejoyce in the Lord alwayes. Let us,Phil. 4.4. O let us be faithful servants to the Lord, that we may be perfect also, enter into that joy of our Lord, and dwell in the everlasting Tabernacles,Gen. 27. Ver. 34.38. Matth. 25.21. Esau cryed with an exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, Blesse me, even me also, O my father. And verse 38. Blesse me, even me also, O my Father.] What they here turn in both verses, even me also, is , as if it were the Accusative; whereas the word is the Nominative; and Esau saith, I, it is I, or I am thy son, O my father! His speech is interrupted by passion. It is good counsel that of the wise man, Ecolus. 18.30, 31. Go not after thy lusts, but refrain thy self from thine appetites, &. lest thou lose the principal blessing, and when it is too late, seek it with tears,Gen. 27. Ver. 38. Hebr. 12.17. Hast thou but one blessing, O my Father?] Where its said; Hast thou but one blessing? The Relative  [that] is quite left out by all translators, except only that of Pagnin amended by A. Mont. The words should be expressed thus; Hast thou but that one bles∣sing, O my father? [That] is , distinctive; whereby is implyed a twofold blessing, one of the heavenly man, the other of the earthly.Gen. 27. Ver. 39. Thy dwelling shall be the fatnesse of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above.] In the margent we read, or of the fatnesse. But if either way we understand the words, what great difference will there be between Jacobs and Esaus blessing in this particular, except only that the order is inverted? But why then does Esau cry with a great and exceeding bitter cry? Verse 34. And why doth he threaten to kill his brother? Verse 41. Some diversity, 'tis very probable, there is in this part of Jacobs blessing. The words may be rendred thus. Thy dwelling shall be without the fatnesses of the earth, and without the dew of heaven. The Hebrew will bear this sense,  without the fatnesses,  and without the dew. And in the same sense out Translators render the very word, Psal. 109.24. My knees are weak through fasting, and my flesh faileth (or waxeth lean)  of fatnesse, or as another English translation hath it, for want of fatness. So Jer. 10.14. Every man is bruitish  for want of knowledge. And Chap. 48.45. They fled  for want of strength. Lam. 4.9. These pine away stricken thorow  for want of the fruits of the fields. Thus also in Latin à and ab import a want, and  in Greek, whereof Castellio gives examples in his Annotations on the place. But its said, Hebr. 11.20. that by faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come. Was it any part of Esaus blessing
to want the fatnesses of the earth, and the dew of heaven? Surely no; wherefore the words may be thus rendred with a diversity; Thy dwelling indeed shall be without the fatnesses of the earth, and with∣out the dew of heaven from above; & by thy sword thou shalt live & shalt serve thy brother: But the time shall be, when thou shalt have the domi∣nion, and thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck, which came to passe in part, 1 Kings 11.14. but we read of a general revolt 2 Kings 8.22. For the respective blessings of both brethren reached not to their persons, but to their posterities: and there∣fore the Apostle saith, that Isaac blessed them concerning things to come. Howbeit, if this translation of Castellio seem harsh, though the letter and history will bear it, we may understand that of our Translators in the mystery. Whereas therefore Isaac had given Jacob the blessing proper to the heavenly man, the dew of heaven, and fatnesses of the earth, &c. Soveraignty over Nations, &c. This is That one blessing. The other is proper to the earthly man, but in an inverse order to that of the heavenly, The fatnesses of the earth, [his own principle] and the dew of heaven, [imparted to him by the heavenly man.] And whereas service to his brother is added as a part of Edoms blessing, it appears, that it is a blessing to the earthly man to be subject to the heavenly: As for like reason, the Philosopher in the first of his Politicks, could say, that it is the happiness of the Beast to be subject to the Man. And God grant, that we may so bear the image of the earthly, that we may bear the image of the heavenly. That thou mayest be a multitude of people.] Here,Genesis. Chap. 28. Ver. 3. as often else∣where, most voices carried the worse translation into the con∣text, and cast the better into the margent. For  more pro∣perly signifies an Assembly than a multitude; and is often rendred by the LXX , but more often by . An ac∣cordingly the French and Spanish translations have Congregations of peoples. For the word is in the plural. This is not a meer , or strife about words, as per∣haps some will say, who esteem the Church Mole non virtute, rather by the multitude of professors, than by their vertues and graces. For In these words Isaac blesseth Jacob concerning things to come, Hebr. 11.20. and prayeth for the increase of the Church among the Nations. Be thou in caetum populorum, for an Assembly or Church of the Nations. So Pagnin and Vatablas turn the words. And the marginal Glosse of the Spanish Bible speaks thus, Be thou a father and stock of the congregations and peoples. To the like purpose is the marginal note in the Bishops Bible. He (Isaac) hath respect to the
number of Gentiles which should be joyned to the faithful of Jacobs house. This Iacob prophesied that it should come to pass in Shiloh the off∣spring of his son Judah, (for it is evident that our Lord sprang of Judah, Heb. 7.14.) that unto him should be the gathering of the nati∣ons, Gen. 49.10. And the Apostle intreats the Thess alonians by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, , and our gathering together unto him. The Lord be plea∣sed to accomplish Isaacs blessing, Jacobs prophesie, and Pauls ad∣juration unto every good willing soul! But the name of the City was called Luz at the first.]Gen. 28. Ver. 19. Our Transla∣tors have here left out part of the name, which is Ʋlam. The Greek Interpreters exceedingly vary in this word, rendring it some, , others , others : but the true reading is , which yet containes two words, saith Drusius,  (which the Interlineary Gloss turns Eulam) and . But now we have found the name, what shall we do with it? what shall we make of it? One of our best Criticks gives this for the meaning of it, Porticus Nucum, the Porch of Nuts or Al∣monds. But what sense that carries, that will satisfie, I know not. And although Hierom will not allow Ʋlam to be any part of the Cities name, but Luz onely; nor he, nor any who herein fol∣low him, tell us, what the meaning of Ulam is, and what other sense it should have in this place then what I have named. The words put together  signifie the porch of perversenesse. So Prov. 2.14. and 3.32. The froward or perverse is an abomination to the Lord. The word is . So Prov. 14.2. He that walketh in his uprightness, feareth the Lord; but he that is perverse  in his wayes, despiseth him. Where the fear of the Lord, and perverseness are op∣posed. Now  the Porch is the entrance into the true Temple of God, and is the fear of God, which is the beginning of wisdom, Prov. 9.10. So Psal. 5.7. I will come into thine house in the multitude of thy mercy; and in thy fear will I worship towards the Temple of thy holiness. That fear is the porch or entrance into the Temple. Which Porch hath been, and yet is neglected. Whence proceeds adultery, murder, Genesis 20.11. yea, all perverseness; as the Apostle de∣monstrates all wickednesse to proceed from hence, even from the want of Gods fear, Rom. 3.9.—18. because there is no fear of God before their eyes. This Porch Jacob repaired by the unction of the Spirit of fear, which driveth away sins, Ecclus. 1.21. For by the fear of the Lord men depart from evil, Prov. 16.6. And the Jacob called the name of the place Bethel, that is, the house of God. And herein the Primitive Disciples of Christ conversed together, and began their religion, Acts 2.43. and 5.11.12. and 9.31. Jacob returning
to Bethel, built an altar there, and added unto that name, and called it El-Bethel, that is, the God of Bethel, Gen. 35.7. If therefore we finde our selves in Luz, in perversnesse and sin, let us enter into Ulam the Porch, and let us pray to the Lord to implant in us his fear, which will drive out that sin and per∣versenesse, so shall we become Bethel, Gods house. Yea, if with Jacob, we build the altar of patience, the strong, the mighty God will be with us, as he was with Jacob, Gen. 28.15. and of weak with Jacob, will make us strong as Israel, Gen. 35.10. Heb. 11.34. Esau said, I have enough, my brother.Gen. 33. Ver. 9. The word  which is turn'd enough, signifies abundance, vast, large, and great plenty. The LXX have , I have many things. The Vulg. Lat. Habeo plurima, I have most things. But none of these amount to what we call [enough] which is an  a self-sufficiency. A learned Rab. observes, that these words Esau spake out of the pride and swelling of his heart, like Pharaoh or Nebuchad∣nezzar; for in his whole story it may be noted, that he never names or owns God, unlesse happly when he sware away his birth-right, Gen. 25.33. But Jacob as it appears by his whole hi∣story, acknowledgeth God to be the author of all the good which befell him; especially Gen. 32.9, 10. I am not worthy of the least of thy merits; for, With my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands. And in his discourse with Esau, These are the children which God hath graciously given thy servant, Gen. 33.5. And Verse 11. God hath dealt gratiously with me. And accordingly Is∣aac, though he blessed both Jacob and Esau, yet in blessing Jacob, he names the Lord and God, Gen. 27.27, 28. See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed. Therefore God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatnesses of the earth, &c. But in blessing Esau he useth neither name, Verse 29.40. But our Translators here make Esau say, I have enough, when he said, I have much, and they make Jacob say, I have enough, when he said, I have all things, Ver. 11. Howbeit, let us improve the sense of the Translators to the best; They might render  enough, which is much; implying, that he who hath much, ought to be satisfied, and to think he hath enough. They might render  enough, which is all things, imply∣ing that he, who hath enough, is satisfied, and desires no more, he indeed hath all things. And the reason is, Desiderium sold & ve∣ra est confessio paupertatis. He who desires any thing, confesseth himself a poor man. As Ahab King of Israel was yet a poor man, because he wanted and desired one spot of ground, 1 Kings 21.4, 5, 6. And Haman, though in all the glory of a sole favourite to the greatest King, yet wanted Mordecai's knee to make him honourable.
Though the Translators might thus Philosophize, yet nor  nor  will bear their translation. Let us examine what they make Jacob say, Gen. 33. v. 11. I have enough. I have enough.] The words of Jacob so rendred by our Tran∣slators, are , I have all things. Esau saith v. 9. I have enough;Gen. 33. Verse 11. but it should be rendred, I have much. The word is . Jacob exceeds Esau, and saith, I have all things. But how had Ja∣cob all things? One of the learned Jews saith; Three men the blessed God gave to taste in this world the Fountain of the world to come. 1. Abraham, because it is written, Gen. 24.1. And the Lord had blessed Abraham  in all things. 2. Isaac, because, Gen. 27.33. and I have eaten  of all. 3. Jacob, because Gen. 33.11. said, I have  all things. So he. These three the holy & blessed God took into his Name, which he said should be for ever, Exod. 3.15. and made them partakers of his nature. And therefore they might every one of them well say, I have all things. Jacob in special manner had God with him, Gen. 28.15. For, ha∣bet omnia, qui habet habentem omnia, He hath all things who hath God with him, who hath all things, saith one of the Ancients. In which sense, the Apostle is to be understood speaking of himself and his fellow Apostles, , As ha∣ving nothing, and possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6.10. Mysticè. Hereby is signified unto us 1. The moderation and reasona∣bleness of the natural man; Esau saith, I have enough, or I have much. He was content with what he had. 2. The affluence and abundance of the heavenly man, and his benediction and influ∣ence upon the natural man. Jacob saith, Take, I pray thee, my bles∣sing, that is brought to thee; because God hath dealt gratiously with me, and because I have all things. Put away the strange gods that are among you,Gen. 35. Ver. 2, 3. and be clean, &c.] Our Translators use often this word [among] for what properly is in, or in the midst of men; as John 1.26. Gal. 3.1. Colos. 1.27. Marg. and elsewhere. The word  here used signifies medium, the midst or inmost part, which is the heart, the usurped seat of the idols and false gods, Ezech. 14.3. Out of which, Jacob re∣quires all of his houshold, to put them away, in order to their going up to Bethel. This was not expressed in Gods command, Verse 1. but implyed onely. Whence yet Jacob rationally ga∣thered a command to be given unto his house. And from this place, Aben Ezra infers, that every evil man who goes to pray, he ought to purifie himself. And good reason; for what agree∣ment
hath the Temple, or house of God, [that's Bethel] with idols? 2 Cor. 6.16. Since therefore, O house of Jacob ye are the Temple of God, (as it follows immediately) and ye are now to ascend, and to return unto your heart, (Psal. 85.9. LXX and Vulg. Lat.) how can ye think of the goodness of God in the midst of his Temple, unlesse ye be clean? 2 Cor. 7.1. Yea, how can ye ascend into the hill of the Lord, and stand in his holy place, unless ye have clean hands and a pure heart? Psal. 24.3, 4. Revel. 21.27. When all the outward Images, Crosses, Pictures, and Cruci∣fixes, and all the painted Glass-windows are broken, it may be then hoped, that zealous reformers will consider these things; and that Mammon is a strange god, and Covetousnesse is idolatry, Col. 3.5. that the belly is made a god by them who mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19. that pleasure is a false God; and they are true idola∣ters who are lovers of pleasure, and of their own wills more then lovers of God. O house of Jacob! put away these and all other strange gods that are in the midst of you, in your hearts, and be clean, and change your garments, as Jacob, and the Apostle adviseth, put off the old man with his deeds, and put on the new man; and let us arise, and go up to Bethel the house of God. Esau went into the countrey from the face of his brother Jacob.]Gen. 36. Ver. 6. What countrey went he into? Verse 8. we read, he dwelt in Mount Seir. What they turn [into the countrey] is  into the earth. For Esau the earthly man declined to the earth, his own inheritance, that is, the natural being. And indeed whither else could his many earthly and sinful thoughts and works [wives & chil∣dren of the Canaanitish and Ishmalitish race] sway him? And therefore Moses relating the generations of Esau, tells us, he is Edom, v. 1. of this Chapter: and, that we may take the more notice of it, he tells us again, v. 8. Esau is Edom, that is, the earth or earthly man; and therefore he propends and inclines unto the earth. For, in whom there is a great increase of blessings both spiritual and temporal, there is great danger, lest the earthy de∣part from the heavenly. Let good men who are rich in this world, take heed of this, lest their wealth plunge and sink them into an earthly minde. Its infinitely better, with Crates, that Esau cast all his riches into the Sea, and be subject unto Jacob, then that the burthen of them should drown Jacob and Esau both in destruction and perdition, 1 Tim. 6.9. Let him rather say with that Philosopher, Hence all ye vain and evill concupiscences; I will rather drown you, then be drowned of you. Let him take and follow that good counsel of the Apostle, 1 Tim 6.17, 18, 19.
Jacob said,Gen. 37. Ver. 35. I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning.] Jacob had said before, v. 33. An evil beast hath devoured him; Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces. And here he saith, he will go down to the grave unto his son. If  be the grave, is it not also the belly of the evil beast? such an other mis-translation they put in the margent, Jonah 2.2. Where having rightly turn'd Hell, what v. 1. they render the belly of the fish, they think to mend the matter by saying in the margent, or the grave. For the avoiding this exception, were it not better rendred the Dead? or, since  and  signifie the common state of the dead, why may it not be so rendred? or, what if we render the word Hell, if we explain the meaning of the words to be, the common state of the dead? It hath a spiritual meaning in it. Joseph, who is also called  Jehoseph, Psal. 81.6. The increase of the Lord, or the perfecti∣on, is torn in pieces by the evil beast, of sin in the general, or more specially of envy in his brethren. Therefore Jacob resolves that he will go down to the grave or death with him. To this evil beast, S. Stephen refers the sale of Joseph, Acts 7.9. And what Jacob here saith of his son Joseph, he prophesied at unawares of the spiritual Joseph, the Christ of God, who is rent in pieces, fractions and fa∣ctions in these last dayes. Yet who is grieved for the breach of Jo∣seph? Amos 6.6. who resolves to die with him, and as Jacob here, to be buried with him? Thy signet,Gen. 38. Ver. 18. thy bracelet, and thy staff that is in thine hand.] Hie∣rom indeed renders the word , armillam tuam, thy bracelet. But does the word signifie so any where else? was there any such fashion among Gods people, for men to wear bracelets on their hands. It is true, the Sabeans put bracelets on their hands, E∣zech. 23.42. but its spoken of women, as the affix there proves, what is said of the bracelets, Numb. 31.50. they were taken from the Midianites. But Saul wore a bracelet, 2 Sam. 1.10. True, but the Chal. Par. turns it , Phylacteries or Prayer-ornaments, These probably he put on as his , fore∣knowing his death, 1 Sam. 28.19. So the Jewes about to die, put on their Tephillin, as the Christians receive the Lords Sup∣per or their  or  viaticum, often on their death∣beds. However  is not used in any of these examples: And  the usual word which signifies bracelets, is the womans ornament, Gen. 24.22.47. Numb. 31.50. Ezech. 16.11. and else∣where. But if the word here used signifie not bracelets, what's the meaning of it? Since the other two parts of the pledge given by Judah, were appertaining to the hand, as the signet and the staff,
its probable this third also may signifie something thereto be∣longing: and since Pagnin renders the word Frustum panni par∣vum, a small piece of cloth; we may turn the word Handkerchers, That which may make this probable, is the version of the LXX. who turn . Aquila  a chain. The Scholiast turns . S. Cyril interprets it an orament where∣withal Judah clad his skin after the Chaldee mode. But Meur∣sius in his Glossar. Graecobarb. interprets  and , which Isidore turns Manuale which is in English an Handkercher. Unless with Papias, we understand Orarium to be Stola Sacerdotalis a long garment which Sacred Per∣sons wore as an Ensigne of dignity. And so, as in the next Chap∣ter, Gen. 39.13. Joseph is famous for leaving his garment that he might keep his chastity; so in this Chapter, Judah is infamous for pauning his garment, that he might enjoy his lust. Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him.]Gen. 39. Ver. 4. Why is men∣tion made here first of Josephs service? We finde before, that Po∣tiphar bought him: and Potiphar is twice before said to be Jo∣sephs Master, but now first Joseph is said to have served him. Here is a manifest oversight of our Translators, in that they turn'd  here used, for . The Scripture here clearly di∣stinguisheth these; implying, that in the former words Joseph  served his Master as in the field, or elsewhere at large in some inferiour imployment. But his Master observing, That the Lord was with him, and that the Lord made all that he did, to prosper in his hand; hereupon Joseph found grace in his sight, and he waited upon him, or ministred unto him; that is,  properly here used. Which implyes a greater neerness unto him to whom he ministred, and that in a more generous and liberal way, as ha∣ving won upon his favour, and now become his favourite. And therefore the LXX here turn the word  he pleased him. Thus the words are distinguished both in military and Church affairs. The Soldiers served the Kings in their wars: the servants of Hadarezer made peace with David,  and served him, 1 Chron. 19.19. But the Princes, and such as were of the Kings Life-gard did  minister unto him. Here again is a mis-translation of that word. The chief fathers and Captains of thousands and hun∣dreds, and their Officers that served the King , who ministred unto the King, 1 Chron. 27.1. These are more evidently differenced in the Levites offices.Num. 8.24, 25, 26. This is that which belongeth to the Levites: From twenty and five years old, and upward, they (that is, every one of them: for the Verbs are all singular) shall go in to war the warfare in the
service () of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. And from the age of fifty years they shall return from the warfare of the service, and shall serve no more, but shall minister () with their brethren in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, to keep the charge, and shall do no service (.) Here is a clear difference observed by the Translators themselves; whereby they really acknowledge the exception against their two former mistakes to be just. From fifty years old and upward, the Levites were exempted from labour, and then imployed in works more easie according to their strength. Such provision the Lord made for the Levites in the time of the Law. And should not they who have served him in this time of the Gospel, and have warred a good warfare, become milites emeriti veterans, and such as may rest after all their labour? There is much discretion and equity commended unto us in that old Verse; . Laborious works belong to young men who are strong to la∣bour. Middle-aged men who are passed their hard labour, have learned by experience to give counsel to the younger. As for old men (— Quid enim nisi vota supersunt?) what can they do but pray for Gods blessing and good success to others labours and counsels? But the service and ministry here spoken of may concern all, who hope to be made Kings and Priests unto God. There is a time of great labour, wearisome service, and hard duty, while we fight the Lords battels against the spiritual enemies: nor is any one man or woman exempted from this ingagement. For the Levites must war that warfare of the Lords service. And we read of the women who warred their warfare also at the door of the Taber∣nacle (a place mis-translated)Exod. 38.8. 1 Sam. 2. who came thither to pray, (so the Chald. Par.) or to fast, (so the LXX,) or to watch (as the word also signifies) all good duties to be performed at the door of the Tabernacle, at the entrance of Gods service, which is the fear of God; that so growing up we may approach unto the door, that is Christ, and in conformity unto his death, we may enter into the true Tabernacle. This is the young mans work who overcomes the evil one. 1 John 2.12. This war continues until the fiftieth year, which is the year of Jubilee, the year of Remission, when the sins are remitted and removed, and done away by the Spirit of the Lord, which gives liberty to run the way of Gods Commandements, Psalm 119.32. Hither the Apostle was come, when he said, He had fought the good fight, and kept the faith, 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. For so after this time of service, followes the time of mini∣string unto the Lord; when having done our own work, we are
vacant,Ezech 44.15, 16. and at leisure to do the Lords work in his Church, (so we understand those to be idle, Matth. 20.3.6.) as the promise is made to the Levites the sons of Zadoc, that they shall be the Priests of the Lord, and shall draw neer to minister unto him in his mystical Temple, and offer unto him the fat and the blood. The Lord enable us all to become such servants, that we may be Ministers; such Soldiers, that fighting the good fight of faith, that we may obtain the crown of Righteousness; such Levites, that we may be adjoyn'd unto the Lord (they are  true Levites who cleave unto the Lord) and become of one spirit with him, even the sons of Zadoc righeous ones who minister unto the Lord in newnesse of the Spirit, and Truth, and Life. They shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him who was separate from his brethren.]Gen. 49. Ver. 26. The words which the Translators turn, Separate from his brethren, are , which I rather render The Nazarite of his brethren, as he who was more eminently holy then any, then all his brethren. A Naza∣rite was such an one as separated himself unto God; 1. from Wine. 2. from shaving his head. 3 From uncleanness by coming at the dead how near or deer so ever to him; as Father or Mo∣ther, Brother or Sister, as it appears largely, Num, 6. The Nazarites were such unto the Jewes. And these they stir∣red up in times of distresse, to call upon the Lord. Joseph was such a Nazarite of his brethren, as being the most eminent of all his brethren, for 1. Piety and holiness, as appears by his whole story; and for 2. Dignity also; for the birthright was Josephs, 1 Chron. 5.1, 2. And most reasonable it is, that in Gods account and true estimate, he who in vertue excels others, should also exceed them in biss and happiness. And so some of the learned Jews understood here by  a Prince and Ruler. Whence the LXX, The blessings shall be on the crown  of his brethren whom he ruled, though they mistake and set the crown not on the head of Joseph, but of his brethren. And therefore although he were the youngest save one of all his bre∣thren, yet had he the honour of the Birthright, as if he had been the eldest. This promotion is according to divine Heraldry. For honourable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years; but wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and the unspotted life is old age, Wisd. 4.8, 9. In which respect Jo∣seph  is rendred by Castellio Excellenti simas fratrum suo∣rum, the most excellent of his brethren. Thus the Vulg. Lat. hath Nazaraei inter fratres suos, a Naza∣rite among his brethren. Pagnn, Nazaraei fratrum suorum. So Va∣tablus, so Munster, so the Tigurin and Spanish Bibles. Martin
Luther also, and three Low-Dutch translations; but not one of all our English translations from the first to the last, which all have one expression not true without  understood, Separate from his brethren. Now in that Joseph was the Nazarite of his brethren, and the most excellent of them, as Castellio renders the word , he was a notable type of the Lord Jesus, as he who is eminently ho∣ly, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Hebr. 7.26. and the first-born among many brethren, Rom. 8.29. who also was called a Nazaren, and hereby typified by Joseph the Nazarite of his bre∣thren; as some conceive, who read Nazaren with , not with  ts. And truly these letters are sometime used promiscuously one for the other, as 1 Chron. 16.32.  for , Psal. 96.12. thus  for , and many the like. They who read the word Nazaren with  understand hereby the Lord Jesus so devoted and dedicated unto God, as the Nazarites of old were. For whereas others sanctified somewhat of their goods, as Sheep or Oxen unto God, the Nazarites, above all o∣thers, devoted themselves unto God, as the word  signifies to separate after a wonderful manner, (as I shall shew,) which eminently and above all others, was fulfilled in our Lord Jesus Christ, who devoted and offered himself without spot unto God, Hebr. 9.14. and gave over himself to his Fathers will, even to the death, the shamful, painful, and infamous death of the Cross, which is implyed in his speech, John 17.19. , I sanctifie or devote my self. The word , devo∣ted or sanctified, is used by the LXX to signifie a Nazarite. Therefore Philo Judaeus tells us, that the Nazarites , &c. devote and sanctifie themselves, hereby de∣monstrating holiness, and the height of their love unto God. For every man is to himself , the greatest and most precious thing he has. And therefore he who offers up himself unto God, as our Lord Jesus Christ did, he no doubt, offers up , that great vow, as the Nazarites vow was called. And hence it is that our Lord is so often called a Nazaren, Mat. 26.7. Mark 1.24. and 7.19. and 10.47. beside many other pla∣ces. Whence also his Disciples and followers are called Naza∣rens, Acts 24.5. whence ipso nomine nos Judaei Nazaraeos appellant per cum, saith Tertullian. The Jews by him call us (Christians) Nazarites after that name. Now although this be the opinion of very learned men, yet , as Aristotle saith in regard of Plato, from whom he differ'd in judgement, its lawful and honest to prefer truth before our friends. For whereas our Lord is called a Naza∣ren, it is not from  to separate. For the Nazarite was by his
vow to separate himself from Wine and strong drink, and not to come at the dead, Numb. 6.1. — 6. But our Lord Jesus both drank wine, Luke 7.34. and touched the dead corps, Luke 8.49. with ver. 4. And therefore although this vow of a Nazarite were fulfilled in Christ, according to the truth, and by the Spirit of holinesse, yet was it not accomplished in him according to the letter of the carnal commandement. Nor was our Lord from thence called a Nazaren from  but from  virgultum a sprout or twig; because he was brought up in the City of Nazareth or rather Natsareth, as its written in the Syriac, Matth. 2.23. whence he was called  a Natsa∣ren, as it was written in the title on his Cross; which title, they say, they have at Rome. Yet in the Greek tongue he is called , a Nazaren; because that, as the French and some other Languages affect smoothnesse of pronunciation. But was Joseph the Nazarite of his brethren, for this end, that his brethren should not be, or rather that his brethren should be Nazarites? whether so or no, sure I am, our Lord Jesus devo∣ted and sanctified himself unto God, by the Spirit of holinesse, as a spiritual Nazarite, that his brethren might be spiritual Na∣zarites also. For so he saith expresly, John 17.19. , for their sakes I sanctifie (devote and consecrate my self to God as a Na∣zarite,) that they also may be sanctified, or become Nazarites. For so what Amos 2.12. is  Nazarites, is turn'd by the LXX , that is sanctified ones. Who ever shall thus willingly devote himself unto God (for such a will the Lord requires, who loves a cheerful giver, especial∣ly of himself, who gives himself unto God) without doubt he shall be looked at as a strange man. And therefore our Lord saith, whosoever  wonderfully separates himself to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to separate himself unto the Lord, who ever doth so, shall be wondred at and become a wonder or a Monster unto many, as David saith of himself, Psalm 71.7. And it is the condition of all such, Esay 8.18. Zach. 3.8. And Saint Peter gives the reason; Because they run not with the men of the evil world (from which they have separated themselves,)1 Pet. 4.4. into the same confusion of luxury; as those words should be rendred. Such as these are exemplary men in holinesse of life; who shine forth as lights to the dark world in a wicked and perverse generation. This concerns us, O ye Nazarites, who ever are dedicated and consecrated unto God; it concerns us, O ye Nazarens, who grow up unto him in all things, Ephes. 4.15. who is the true  the sprout or sucker, out of the root of Jesse, Esay 11.1. that every one
of us endeavour to excel to the edifying of the Church, 1 Cor. 14.12. and so to be a Nazarite of his brethren; to abstain from wine where∣in is excess, and to be filled with the Spirit. Not to pollute our selves with dead works, not to come at a dead soul (as the words signifie, Numb. 6.6.) not to communicate with any how neer so ever unto us, in their dead works, to preserve and increase our holy thoughts. To stir up our selves in these times of distresse, to pray unto the Lord for our selves and our brethren. So shall the blessings of our God descend upon us, as they descended on the head of Jo∣seph, who was the Nazarite of his brethren.
EXODƲS. Chap. 1. Verse 3. All the soules that came out of the loynes of Jacob. VVHat in the context, the Translators call the loynes, they acknowledge in the margent to be the Thigh, in the Hebrew: as also they do, Gen. 46.26. And why then should that be rejected, which the Spirit of God dictates, and that cho∣sen, which seems best to their own humane spirit? when the Scripture saith, the Thigh, how dare we say the Loyns? Imo haud longè hoc vocabulum ab ipsa re abludit; cum  utrius{que} sexûs  significet, Gen. 46.26. Numb. 5.21. Nimirum seminales venae tres è lumborum venis ortae, antequam in crura descendunt, per femora virorum ac mulierum recurrunt, fecundum{que} semen in vasa generatio∣nis utrisque devehunt; quod ferè Valesius ait, cap. 13. sacrae philo∣sophiae. The Scripture useth this phrase, as many other, for modesty sake. As the Jews speaking before children, they call a Swine  another thing, lest the children, by hearing it named, should lust after it. Yea, the holy Spirit not only clothes the uncomely parts with more abundant comeliness of words; but also imposeth on the Thigh, a more venerable respect, in that its made a symbolum and token of Life and Truth: for Abraham adjured his servant, Gen. 24.2, 3. and 47.29. Jacob his son Joseph, by causing them to put their hands under their Thighs, when they sware; whence Christ was to descend, according to the flesh, who is the eternal life, 1 John 5.20, and essential truth, John 14.6. And therefore the Prophet foretels, that he, who should swear on earth, should swear by the God Amen, or Christ the Truth, Esay 65.16. And that oath which Abraham imposed on Eliezer, [Gods helper, 1 Cor. 3.9. a figure of John the Baptist, who was to make ready a people prepared for the Lord, Luke 1.17. even a Spouse for Christ the true spiri∣tual Isaac.] That oath was taken by the Lord God of heaven, through the mediation of Christ, Gen. 24.2, 3. by putting his hand under his Thigh; out of which, according to the flesh, the Messiah was to come. And so much the Chald Paraphrast. there
speaks expresly, Thou shalt swear , by the Word of the Lord, by that , that Word, John 1.1. The God of Truth, that , Rev. 3.14. which could not but be done with great reverence. Howbeit Jacob, after his victory over the Angel, halted on his Thigh, Gen. 32.31. whereby may be mystically implyed, that however he himself had obtained a solid victory over the Angel, yet his posterity, who proceeded out of his Thigh, should in lege claudicare, halt in their obedience unto the holy Law of God. As, although Christ brake the head of the Serpent, yet the Ser∣pent prevailed against the heel of his mystical Body. And would God it were not too truly performed in these dregs of time! when the Serpentine brood, a sort of people, who call themselves Ranters, who pretend to the height of Christian pie∣ty, yet break all that boundary, wherewith God and Nature hath inclosed certain secret actions and words; and lay all civi∣lity, modesty, sober, orderly, and venerable behaviour quite waste. O thou that art called Jacob, are these his doings? Mic. 2.7. O that it were well considered by those, whom it most con∣cerns, that, For these things, the wrath of God cometh upon the chil∣dren of disobedience, Ephes. 5.6. As for us, who are the Surroga∣tus Israel, called the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. let us not halt as weak Jacob, but be strong as Israel; let us make up and repair the breach of modesty, sobriety, chast, decent and orderly con∣versation, Esay 58.12. And so far be it from us that we should act any uncleannesse, that Let not so much as the name of it be heard amongst us, as becometh Saints, Ephes. 5.3. Fortior est qui se quàm qui fortissima vincit Maenia.—He who ruleth his own spirit, is better then he who takes a City, Prov. 16.32. What though thou yet be weak? Thy strength is not thine own. Be strong in thy God. When  the Thigh-bone of Jacob was put out of joynt,Gen. 32.25. then he was called Israel. So that its no contradiction, When I am weak, then I am strong, 2 Cor. 12.10. The more they afflicted them,Exod. 1. Ver. 12. the more they multiplyed and grew.] Is not the Hebrew here proper enough, and the English answe∣rable thereunto, altogether as good? which sounds thus, word for word; As they afflicted them, so they multiplied, and so they brake forth. For so  signifies to break forth as water, which bears down all Dams and Banks made to keep it in, as the waters of Noah's flood overturned the earth, Job 12.15. Or it may signifie the great increase of children, as the Lord makes promise unto Jacob, Gen. 28.14. Thou shalt break forth to the West, and to the East, to the North, and to the South: and great increase of goods, Gen. 30.30. So Satan saith of Job, that his cattle  breaks forth in the land.
And the enemies here of Gods people, afflict them; and as they afflict them, so the Lord multiplies them, and they brake forth in increase of children, and increase of strength, as the Psal∣mist commemorates both, Psal. 105.24. He increased his people exceedingly, and made them stronger then their enemies. And herein Israel according to the flesh, and their enemies, and their support and defence, maugre all their opposition, pre∣figure the Israel of God, and their spiritual enemies, and the grace and strength of God supporting them. As the waters of Noe brake forth, so was the Ark supported. And the Lord saith, that his peoples afflictions are as the waters of Noe. And as their enemies, Mich. 7.19. the true Egyptians increase, and break forth; so doth the spiritual Israel also: For so the Lord saith to his Church: Thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left, and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate Cities to be in∣habited, Esay 54.3.9. And, which may be a spiritual commentary on the words before us, As the sufferings of Christ (analogical to those he suffered; such as we suffer for his sake; such as he ac∣counts as done unto himself, Acts 9.5.) As these sufferings of Christ abound in us; so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. Wherefore droop not, despair not, O thou Israel of God! It is true, the Egyptian burdens are great? but Israel is strong, and like a Palm tree, Psal. 92.12. which growes against the weight that is laid upon it. Be strong, and expect and pray for the stronger one, Luke 11.22. Cum duplicantur latores, venit Moses, saith the Proverb; When the tale of the Bricks is doubled, then comes the spiritual Moses. Be strong, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye who put your trust in the Lord, Psal. 31.24. And she called his name Moses: And she said, because I drew him out of the water.] Here Pharaohs Daughter gives a genuin Ety∣mology of Moses's name; not because he was drawn,Exod. 2. Ver. 10. but because I drew him out of the water. Which was well, if the Translators would have let it alone. But they put in the margent, as an ety∣mon of Moses's name, That is, Drawn out. But so the child had not been called , but , that is, drawn out. But the name  is active, and signifies drawing, or him who draweth; Pha∣raohs Daughter thereby prophesying at unawares, what Moses should do. His Parents, at his circumcision, had given him ano∣ther name, which, saith Clem. Alex. lib. 1. Strom. was Joachim, [the Resurrection of the Lord,] as hereby presaging, that the Lord, through this Joachim, would renew the world, raise up and re∣store his people Israel, bring them out of Egypt. And such a re∣stitution is as life from the dead.
But by the name of Moses, more properly, was prefigured, what literally the Lord, by Moses, afterward should do, viz. bring the people out of the waters. Where is he that brought them up out of the Sea? &c. that led them by the right hand of Moses, &c. Esay 63.11, 12, 13. Hereby also was foreshewen what spiritually Moses doth; viz. He draws men out of the sea of wickednesse; as David confesseth, 2 Sam. 22.17.  He drew me out of many waters. Or, accord∣ing to the proper work of Moses, which then was, and afterward should be, He shall draw me out of many waters. For by Moses is figured the Tractus Dei Patris, the drawing of God the Father; of which the Son speaks, No man can come unto me, except the Fa∣ther, who hath sent me, draw him, John 6.44. And this work of the Father, Moses faithfully performs in men, whether they regard it or not. For, the Apostle saith, that Moses was faithful in all Gods house, as the servant of the Father. And this thou wilt not deny who ever thou art, if thou well consider it. When thou hast an op∣portunity to go beyond thy brother in bargaining, (opportunitas est maxima peccandi illecebra,) opportunity may possibly invite and draw thee so to do: But what is that which withdraws thee from so doing? what else but Moses? he is the drawer of the Fa∣ther, and Gods faithful messenger unto thee. Thus when thou lookest upon a woman, and wouldest lust after her (opportunity is an arrant Baud.) The Fathers servant Moses withdrawes thy heart from thinking on a woman, Job 31.1. I withheld thee, saith the Lord to Abimelech, from sinning against me, Gen. 20.6. Thou hast eaten and drunk enough to suffice nature; whence now is it, that thou forbearest? Thou hast one within thee, who saith, Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excesse, Ephes. 5.18. Cynthius aurem vellit.—Thy Monitor Moses inwardly speaks unto thee. Thou art wrath∣ful and wouldest smite, yea kill him, who provokes thee. What is that which holds thy hands? Thou hast a faithful and meek Moses in thee, who saith, Doest thou well to be angry? Be angry, and sin not; that is, Be angry with thy self, that thou mayest not sin. Thou art sad, and terrified by apprehension of some future evil which is likely unavoidably to befal thee; whence thou art rea∣dy to lay violent hands upon thy self (desperation, saith the Phi∣losopher, is the cause of , self-murder.) What's that which now whispers to thee, and saith, Do thy self no harm. Stultum est, ne moriare, mori; Its folly to die, lest thou shouldst die. Thou hast committed one or other of these sins; what cau∣feth that remorse in thee? Ye have one who accuseth you, saith our Lord, even Moses, John 5.45. And truly men are very much too blame, who take no more notice of Moses's work in themselves: since from hence it comes to passe, that men heedlesly suffer themselves to be drawn aside by their earthly affections and lusts. For, as God the Father, so
the father of lies hath his Drawer also. Ye read, Gen. 36.36. of Samlah of Masrecha, one of Edoms Kings. We have drawing on the right hand, and on the left. Moses on the right hand drawes from vanity unto Christ and his kingdom. Samlah on the left hand, (so Samlah signifies,) he drawes unto vanity; that is, Masrecha, the drawing of vanity. For he who is so tempted, is drawn away by his own lust, and enticed, saith S. James, 1.14. O let us who are of Gods houshold, be faithful unto Moses, as Moses is faithful unto us, and to all Gods house. It will be our wil∣dom to yield unto his drawing, and the benefit is inestimable, which thereby will redound unto us. A man of understanding trusteth in the Law, and the Law is faithful unto him, as an Oracle, or, as the answering of Urim, saith the son of Syrach, Ecclus. 33.3. A great incouragement to the people of God to believe God and his servant Moses. And it came to passe when Moses was grown,Exod. 2. Ver. 11. that he went out un∣to his brethren, and looked on their burdens; and he spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew one of his Brethren, &c.] What our Transla∣tors here render, grown, (as also ver. 10.) is , Moses was grown great: or, he was a grown man. For S. Stephen saith, that that time, when it came into his heart to visit his brethren, he was full forty years old, Acts 7.23. In which interim the Protomartyr saith, Moses was learned in all the learning of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds, ver. 22. Which makes that probable which Josephus Antiq. lib. 2. and Clem. Alex. lib. 1. Strom. report of Mo∣ses his being General of the Egyptian forces, and waging war with the Ethiopians, of whom he obtained a glorious victory, &c. and many other great works wrought by Moses before he visited his brethren. And therefore the LXX turn  ver. 10. , grown strong and manly; and the same word ver. 11. they render  grown great. Accordingly Arias Montanas hath magnus factus, in both verses, he was grown great. And the great exploits, if we believe Josephus and Clem. Alex. both already atchieved, and now undertaken by him, declare him to be no youngling. The onely wise God makes choise, and furnisheth such, as he sets a work, with great abilities proportio∣nable to great enterprizes. But whereas we have a spiritual Moses with us, even him whom the Lord said, he would raise up like unto Moses, Acts 3.22. would God he were grown great in us, Ephes. 4.13. that he might effect the like works in us, which Moses wrought among the Hebrews according to the flesh, when he was grown great! He came forth the first day, and flue the Egyptian. And at the first coming of the spiritual Moses, he destroyes  the Egyp∣tian, even the known sin, which entangles us in its straitnesses. Moses appeared the second day, ver. 13. and went about to com∣pose
a difference between two Hebrews, and said  to the wicked one; (which our Translators turn, to him that did the wrong, which is not a translation of , but a good paraphrase taken either out of the LXX, or out of Acts 7.26, 27.) wherefore smitest thou thy fellow? And so at the second coming of the spi∣ritual Moses, he reproves the false Righteousness. Moses, after all his miracles in Egypt, drowns Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea. And the spiritual Moses atchives this great work also, Mich. 7.15-19. which is ascribed unto Jesus, Jude v. 5. V. Lat. All these three great works we finde promised to be wrought by the Spirit of Jesus, John 16.8, when the Spirit shall come, he will reprove the world of sin (the open and known sin, the black Egyp∣tian) because they believe not in Christ, that he is The I am, John 8.24. And Moses supposed, that his brethren would have understood, how that God, by his hand, would deliver them, but they understood not, nor believed, Acts 7.25. 2. He shall reprove the world of Righ∣teousnesse, even the false righteousnesse of the flesh, which the pretending religious world counterfeits out of their knowledge of Christ meerly after the flesh; whereas our Lord saith, He goes to the Father; and they see him no more. 3. He shall reprove the world of Judgement, because the Prince of this world, even the spiritual Pharaoh himself is judged, and cast out, John 12.31. Now because the Hebrews believed not Moses, Acts 7.25. therefore their deliverance out of Egypt was interrupted and de∣layed, Exod. 2.14, 15. Nor can the spiritual Moses do his great works in us, because of our unbelief, Matth. 13.58. Wherefore O ye believing Hebrews, who are in your passage from sin to righteousnesse, from death to life, from the letter to the Spi∣rit; or, as Philo Judaeus interprets , Gen. 14.13. one who is passing out of the state of sin and corruption, into the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. (that's a true  a true Hebrew indeed) let not us think low thoughts of the spiritual Moses, let not us limit or stint our belief in the Lord Jesus; but let us in this our jour∣ney,1 Pet. 1.13. Gird up the loynes of our mindes, and hope perfectly for the grace that is to be brought unto us at the revelation of J. Christ, who is the great God, Tit. 2.13. who is able to save us  even to all perfection, who come unto God by him, Hebr. 7.25. And God said unto Moses,Exod. 3. Ver. 14. I am that I am.] The words in the Hebrew are in the future , I will be what I will be. And although it be true, that there is oftentimes enallage temporum, and that the present tense is sometime understood by the future, yet it is not so here. For if such an unlimited change may be, ac∣cording as men shall be pleased to make it; to what purpose are the times distinguished? It is true, Hierom hath Sum qui sum, as
ours render the words, I am that I am. But he gives no reason for that translation; no more do ours. Wherefore if good rea∣son can be given, why we should adhere to that expresse text of Scripture, rather then recede from it, it will be of more weight with reasonable men then all mens authority against it. Let us try. The great name Tetragrammaton Jehovah is so composed by di∣vine artifice, that it signifies the three parts of time, past, pre∣sent, and to come; as I have shewen largely on Gen. 9.26. When therefore the Lord calls himself , [I will be], he implyes that in the later part of time, he will more clearly manifest his Deity in and to the Humanity. That we may the better under∣stand this, we may observe, that the whole tract of time from the beginning to the end of it, may be generally divided into two parts or ages; one of type, prophesie, and promise; the other, of truth, fulfilling, and performance of what was typified, fore∣said, and promised. And this later eminently began when Christ appeared in the flesh; and therefore we finde so often, especial∣ly in S. Matthew, ut impleretur, that it might be fulfilled, &c. This time is expressed in the Prophets often by The last dayes, those dayes, that time, &c. which the Apostles call the end of the world, the later times, &c. Yea, although S. Paul speaks of his own times and calls them the ends of the world, 1 Cor. 10.11. yet he tells us also of later dayes which should come after his time, 1 Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. 2 Tim. 3.1.5. Now the Lord and his Prophets foretelling what shall come to passe, they refer us in the first age or part of time to the ac∣complishment of it in the later part of time. So we understand what our Lord saith to Moses, Exod. 6.2. that He was not known to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by his name Jehovah, that is, as it im∣ported a fulfilling of his promises; otherwise no doubt he was known by that name unto them. And the Prophets point at the later times for the fulfilling of their prophesies: Examples are obvious, as very often when we meet with this phrase, They shall know that I am the Lord, often in Esay, Jeremy, Ezechiel, &c. And they refer us unto the later times for a more cleer under∣standing of what they write, as Jer. 23.20. And the reason is, because in the Messiah, the Lord would more clearly manifest himself and his wayes and works. So Hos. 3.5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return and seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his Goodnesse, in the later dayes. Whereas therefore the Lord now begun his work with Moses, he made himself known unto him by his name  [I will be:] For all that time, he was a God that hid himself under types and shadowes, Esay 45.15. Until his only begotten Son declared him, John 1.18. And then he who had called himself  [I will be] in the beginning of his work, he calls himself , Ego sum, I am,
as often elsewhere, so especially John 8.59. , Before Abraham was, I am. Thus in this his first bringing up of Israel out of Egypt, he styles himself  [I will be] but the time would come when he should bring his people again from the depths of the Sea, Psal. 68.22. Esay 51.10, 11. Zach. 10.10. This is wrought by the Lord who cals himself  [I am,] who perfects that first rude draught of his first historical work, in Spirit and Truth. The Lord hath not communicated himself all at once, but at first made himself and his Name known by Moses and the Pro∣phets , in many parts and many man∣ners, in prophesies and promises, in figures, and types; but in the last dayes he speaks unto us by his Son, who fulfils all the types, Col. 2.16, 17. prophesies concerning himself, Luke 24.44. and promises; for all the promises of God are in him yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. and by him comes grace to fulfil the Com∣mandements, Rom. 8.4. and truth to fulfil types and promises. He fulfils the great promise of the Father, even the promised Spi∣rit. He fulfils the oath of the Lord, that all the earth should be fil∣led with the glory of the Lord, Numb. 14.21. when all behold as in a glasse, the glory of the Lord, with his open face, and are translated into the same image from glory unto glory, even by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. So great fulnesse flowes into these last times, fulness of Righte∣ousnesse, when it rowls down like a mighty stream, Amos 5.24. And fulnesse of peace like a river, Esay 66.12. and Joy, fulnesse of joy, joy unspeakable and full of glory, Psal. 16.11. 1 Pet. 1.8. The kingdom of God in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Rom. 14.17. This is Gods plenty, this is the fulness of God, which flowes into these last times. All this fulness dwels in Christ, Col. 2.9. when  becomes , when what God promises to be, He fulfils in Being. O what manner of men ought we to be who look for such things? who hope that these things shall be fulfilled in our selves! O let us not deceive our selves by flattering imagination and self-love in a matter of the greatest moment; wherein, as in a stra∣tagem of war, we can erre but once, and then, when it will be too late to correct that most dangerous and last errour. But, since we look for such things, let us be diligent, that we may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 2.14. So  [I will be] will be , I am unto us, yea, , who is and who was, and who is to come, Revel. 1.4. and we also shall be filled with all the fulnesse of God. Ephes. 3.19.
They will not hearken unto my voice. For they will say,Exod. 4. Ver. 1. The Lord hath not appeared unto thee.] Its but harsh English, but the sense is good verbatim, They will not hear in my voice. I deny not but 'tis the Syntax and costruction of  as with  and  so here with . I know also, that there are certain idioms and proper∣ties in all tongues, as in the Hebrew: Yet when there is special Emphasis in Hebreisms, and special hints are given of the divine wisdom speaking in them, I cannot omit them. Such I conceive to be in these words before us. For there is an inward word conveyed by the outward, which the heart hearkens unto. O . The minde-hears, and the minde sees. Accord∣ing to which, we understand our Lords reasoning, Psal. 95.7. To day if ye will hear his voice [ in his voice,] harden not your hearts. And the reason which Moses alledgeth here, makes to this pur∣pose; For they will say, The Lord hath not appeared unto thee; and consequently not spoken by thee. By this argument S. Paul proves his Apostleship and mission, 1 Cor. 9.1. Am I not an Apostle? Am I not free? How proves he that? Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? Whence we may understand our Lords speech; He that heareth you, he heareth me. Because the inward Word of God is conveyed in the outward voice. Aliud est verbum, aliud est vox, saith holy Anselen. A word and a voice differ formally one from other. Primùm vox sonat, ut verbum possit audiri, saith S. Gregory. The voice first sounds that the word may be heard. There is an inward word called , and an outward , as made up into flesh. Between these two is his voice, to whom the Lord hath appeared; and it is verbi vehiculum, the Vehicle, the Chariot of the Word, which conveighs it unto the heart of the hearer. As John Baptist calls himself the voice of the cryer, for the same reason. The Evangelist first describes the inward word, John 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and that Word was God. Then before the essential Word was to be uttered, he de∣scribes the voice. A man sent from God, whose name was John; the same came for a witness to bear witness of the light, that all men through him might believe. Then he describes the Word made flesh and dwel∣ling in us, which cries in John, and John is the voice of the Crier; who hath cried in all men who have spoken any divine truth, from heaven, even from the beginning, saith V. Bede, as yet it doth; sometime informing and instructing, sometime checking and reproving, sometime complaining, sometime comforting; whither are to be referred all the acts of conscience, which are Gods cryings in the soul. And thus Christ cried () unto the Spirits in prison. 1 Pet. 3.18, 19. Thus Wisdom or Christ cries, Prov. 1.20. 1. and 8.1, 2, 3, 4.
This inward essential Word must first be in, and appear in those who are the vehicles of it unto men, before they can be the voyces of God and Christ crying unto them. For so the Son must first be in S. Paul, before he could preach him among the heathen, Gal. 1.16. This was that whereof Moses here doubted; They will not, saith he, hear (or hearken after the inward word) in my voice; for they will say, The Lord hath not appeared unto thee; and so not spoken in thee and by thee. Thus the Corinthians sought a proof of Christ speaking in S. Paul, 2 Cor. 13.3. And therefore the Lord furni∣sheth Moses with miracles to perswade the people, that he had spoken by Moses. To thee be it spoken, who ever thou art who callest thy self A Minister of the Word. Look into thy self, whether the Lord and his living word hath appeared in thee, and spoken in thee, or no; and whether by thy voice, that word be conveyed unto men; so that they, who hear thee, may be truly said to hear Christ speaking in thee, and by thee, 1 Cor. 9.1. If that word be in thee, thou oughtest to speak, Acts 13.15. If yet thou doubt, whether they will believe thee, (because all are not workers of miracles, 1 Cor. 12.29. Yea, John Baptist was a Prophet, and more then a Prophet, Matth. 11.9. yet did no miracle, John 10.41.) live thou the life of that word, unto which thy voice gives testimony, and that life shall be the light of men, 1 John 1.4. And because that life of God is strange and rare in the world, it will perswade more then the word, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. more then many miracles. Barnabas exhorted, that with pur∣pose of heart the Antiochians should cleave unto the Lord; for he was a good man, and full of the holy Ghost and of faith: and much people was added unto the Lord, Acts 11.23, 24. O my Lord,Exod. 4. Ver. 13. send I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send.] I know, that  sometimes may imply intreating, as Gen. 43.20. , we beseech thee, my Lord: and the like, Judg. 6.15. and so it might be understood here. But then two expres∣sions of intreaty should be in these words, one in , the other in ; unlesse  be rendred [now] as Vatablus turns it, Mitte nunc, send now. But I conceive, with Arias Montanus, that  may be here rendred pro me, for me, or in my stead; and that to good purpose. For, whereas Moses by all means deprecates and de∣clines the Embassie and sending unto Pharaoh, he here desires the Lord to send one whom he would afterward send, for him, or in his stead. Whereby he implyes Christ himself who was to be sent. And so Hierom turns  qui mittendus est, who was to be sent.Gen. 49.10. For so no doubt that word  was read  in Hie∣roms dayes. And our Lord for this reason makes so frequent mention, that he was sent as in other places, so especially in S. Johns Gospel from the fourth Chapter to the twentieth. And for what other reason, can we conceive, that S. John saith, the
Pool of Siloam is by interpretation Sent; but that hereby he would have us to understand, that Jesus Christ was sent into the world, to enlighten every man that cometh into the world? John 1.9. And therefore being about to cure the blinde man, John 9.4. I must work, saith he, the works of him that sent me while it is day: the night cometh when no man can work. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world; when he had thus spoken, he anointed the blinde mans eyes, and sent him to wash in the Pool of Siloam, Sent, that through the power of Shiloh, he might be enlightned, and receive his sight. Whereas therefore Moses foreknew by divine revelation, that the Lord would send his Son the great Redeemer and Saviour of the world, to bring his people out of Egypt; and that he was to be  qui mittendus est, he who was to be sent, whom the Thargums and learned Jewes interpret  the Christ; yet hitherto he knew not, whether he himself should go before that Shiloh, as a figurative and typical Redeemer; because in his first entrance upon that work, he found great opposition made against him, Exod. 2.14, 15. he therefore desires the Lord to excuse him, and to send the great Redeemer, by whom he would send, for him, or in his stead. He also out of profound humility, judged himself unworthy of so transcendently honourable an imployment, as to be sent on an Embassy, from the Blessed and onely Potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, 1 Tim. 6.15. unto Pharaoh King of Egypt; as wise men dare not hope or promise so much of themselves, as indeed they are able to do; whereas on the contrary, rash, ignorant and arrogant men intrude and thrust themselves blind∣fold into the greatest Enterprizes. And therefore after all his reasons alleaged, and all his objections satisfied, he beseeches the Lord to send in his stead and for him, whom he would send. Consider this, thou who art rich in opinion of thy self, because learned with other mens learning, who presumest thy self to be an Embassador of Jesus Christ; because he saith to his Apostles, As the Father hath sent me, so send I you, Joh. 20.21. And because the Apostle saith of himself and his fellow Apostles, We are Em∣bassadours for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. hath the Lord therefore sent thee? Art thou therefore his Embassadour? Moses a most godly and learned man in all divine and humane learning, Acts 7.22. was afraid to undertake so weighty a burden, (as also Jeremy and many others have been,) and would most willingly have with∣drawn his shoulder: And darest thou out of thy pride of knowledge, , boldly take the burden? How justly may the Lord complain, as in former ages, I have not sent these prophets, yet they run, I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesie? Jer. 23.1. How true is it that very much learning, divine and humane, renders men
humble and lowly; but a very little learning makes men proud? O let us wait upon the Lord, until our iniquity be taken away, and our sin purged by the spirit of judgement, and the spirit of burning; and then if the Lord shall furnish us with suitable abi∣lities, and make an overture, and open a way, saying unto us, whom shall I send? let every one of us be ready to say, Lord, here I am, send me, Esay 4.4. and 6, 7, 8. Yet even then let us not dare to speak of any of those things, which Christ hath not wrought by us, Rom. 15.18. but let us speak as the Oracles of God, and minister of the ability which God giveth, 1 Pet. 4.11. And thou shalt be to him instead of God.] It cannot be denied,Ezod. 4. Ver. 16. but that  signifies God. But does it not also signifie A Judge or Prince? Psal. 82.6. I have said ye are Gods; which v. 7. he calls Princes. And Moses accordingly explains one by the other. Thou shalt not revile the Gods, , nor curse the Ruler of thy people, Exod. 22.28. And so S. Paul understood it and applyed it to Ananias the High Priest, Acts 23.5. And what inconvenience will follow, if so we understand the word to be here used, that it signifies a Prince or Ruler? Sure I am the ancient Expositors of this Scripture have so rendred  here, as the Chal. Par. , thou shalt be un∣to him for a Prince. So again Chap. 7.1. And so the Arabick Ver∣sion; the LXX, He shall be thy mouth; , which Hierom follows, Tu autem eris ei in his quae ad Deum pertinent; But thou shalt be unto him in things pertaining unto God. And the Apostle hath the same expression. Every high Priest taken from among men is ordained for men, , in things belonging unto God. And thus  may be rendred here, to God, as as Internuntius, a middle or mean by whom Aaron may inquire the will of God: So the Targ. Jerusal. and Gods Truchman and Interpreter, by whom Aaron may understand, what the will of God is. And for this reason Justin Martyr, Orat. Par. ad Gen∣tes, saith, that Moses was called Mercurius by the Egyptians, for his profound understanding and interpreting the will of God: As the people of Lystra for like reason called Paul, Mercurius, Acts 14.11. And truly it were to be wished, that there were a more sober use of this name, and a due limitation of it when it is given to men; since at this day, there are who abuse this phrase and make a very course application of it, when they call him whom they repute the chief of their party, their Lord God, and the same one who is no good man. Their reason. Because the Lord said to Moses, I have made thee a God unto Aaron. How much better were it, that every one of us who fear God; should sincerely aim at and labour to obtain those exceeding
great and precious promises of God, to become partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust? 2 Pet. 1.4. And since, as Tully could say, it is Proprium Dei ser∣vare & benefacere, its Gods property to preserve from evil, and to do good; herein let every one endeavour to be homo homini Deus, every man a god unto another. The Lord incline and strengthen every one of us so to be! And Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord,Exod. 5. Ver. 2, 3. that I should obey his voice to let Israel go, &c. And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us. Let us go, &c.] Moses and Aaron here named the Tetra∣grammaton , whom Pharaoh saith, he knoweth not, that is, he owns not for his God; and therefore he denies obedience unto him. And here he first hardens his own heart against the com∣mandment of God; whom, because the Lord punisheth not in his person or neer relation, as Exod. 12.29. the Lord by his cle∣mency is said to harden his heart: whereas indeed Phararoh, by occasion of Gods sparing him, further hardens his own heart, Exod. 8.15. and 9.34. until the death of his first-born awakened him. And then his hard heart began to be more pliable, Exod. 12.29, 30, 31. because he feared he should be the next: which is the reason of that doubtful speech, Exod. 3.19. He will not let you go, not by a mighty hand, or marg. but by a strong hand. nolens volens. Unto these words of Pharaoh, Who is the Lord, &c. I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go: Moses and Aaron make an∣swer, according to our Translators, thus; The God of the Hebrews hath met with us, &c. This answer doth not satisfie Pharaohs que∣stion. For though I deny not but  signifies to meet with one, as it is used for , Exod. 3.18. because  and  are inter∣changable; yet whether some other signification may not be more fit for this place, let the godly learned judge. Pharaoh saith, Who is Jehovah? &c. Moses and Aaron answer thus; The God of the Hebrews is called upon us, &c. That's their answer word for word; and its proper to Pharaohs question, wherein they certifie Pha∣raoh, who Jehovah is, and their relation unto him; He, that is, His Name is called upon us, we are called by his name: which is a very frequent Scripture phrase, Esay 43.7.  every one that is called by my Name, &c. Thy name  is called upon us, Jer. 14.9. and very many the like; which is a satisfactory answer unto Pharaohs question. And thus the Chald. Par.  The God of the Jewes is called upon us. And so the Samaritan is here translated. Thus also Arias Montanus. Deus Hebreorum invocatus est super nos. O that we well considered, who, and whose name is called upon us, who it is who owns us for his people, and knowes who
who are his! which is one part of Gods sure foundation and seal; so should we, who name the name of the Lord, depart from iniquity, 2 Tim. 2.19. So we should be bold in him, as those Jews were, who gave this answer to them who asked them, We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth, &c. Ezra 5.9. So as Moses and Aaron here, when Pharaoh asked, Who is Jehovah; they an∣swered, The God of the Hebrews is called upon us. Let there more work be laid upon the men.Exod. 5. Ver. 9.] The Hebrew words sound thus, Let the work be heavy upon the men: which might have satisfied our Translators, and been put into the Text, and not cast into the margent. For there is a time of volunta∣ry service of sin, when men bear the work and service of sin lightly; of which state they speak, Numb. 11.18. It was well with us in Egypt: until the Lord came to visit and redeem them, Exodus 4.31. And then the spiritual Pharaoh and his Task-ma∣sters, the ruling lusts, lay load upon them, make their work heavie, and them sensible of it; Opera carnes, terrina opera, opera seculi, actûs terrae, & luteae explere ministeria; works of the flesh, earthly works, works of the world, the durty drudgery of sin, saith Origen; such as the Apostle calls the service of un∣cleannesse, Rom. 6.19. and make them servants of the pot, of fil∣thy lucre, Tit. 1.7. of divers lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3.3. Of this state speaks the Apostle, Rom. 7.15. &c. Now the service of sin becomes involuntary, and now the servant cries out for delive∣rance, Verse 24. Who shall deliver me? The answer is, Gratia Dei per Jesum Christum. V. Lat. the grace of God by Jesus Christ. Cum duplicantur lateres, venit Moses. When the tale of Bricks was doubled, then Moses came; and then the people were most fit to receive him. And when men groan under the Egyptian burdens, which are their sins, then is the spiritual Moses, the Prophet like to Moses most welcome; and such he invites and welcomes unto himself, who are weary and heavy laden, and he gives them rest, Matth. 11.28. And I will sever in that day,Exod. 8. Ver. 22. the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there, &c.] What the Transla∣tors here turn, I will sever, is  which signifies more then a meer severing or separating. It addes somewhat which may excite wonderment, as indeed such a separation ought to do, if duly considered. For what, through want of due regard, is neglected, the same advisedly considered of, may provoke admiration. And a very powerful means this separation was to perswade the heart of Pharaoh into an acknowledgement and admiration of Gods great power, if he had not hardened it, but rightly thought on the exact division that God made between the good and the evil,
the oppressed, and their oppressours, the Israelites and the E∣gyptians. Yea, not onely between their persons, but also between their cattle, as Exod. 9.4. where the Lord makes the like won∣derful separation. The end which the Lord herein aims at, is, that Pharaoh, yea, and all ungodly men in the world might be induced to take no∣tice of the divine power and God-head, Romans 1.20. and so be brought to believe in God the Father. This was the very end which the Lord here intended, as ap∣pears by the following words. I will marvellously separate the land of Goshen, &c. to the end that thou mayest know that I Jehovah am Lord, or Governour (so the Greek, Chald. Pharaph. and Arabic Version) in the midst of the Earth. By like wonderful separation in distributing rewards and pu∣nishments in the world, the Lord begins the first dispensation, and advanceth belief in God the Father. Such a marvellous separation the Lord made when he divided Noah and his family from the world of the ungodly; Lot and his houshold, from the Sodomites; and the obedient, who, at Gods command yielded themselves captives to the King of Ba∣bylon, from those who disobeyed and remained in Jerusalem. Which the Prophet compares to good and evil Figs. And of the good, he saith, I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, &c. And of the evil, I will deliver them to be removed into all the Kingdoms of the earth for their hurt, Jer. 24. per tot. by these exact separations of the good from the evil, whereby God pre∣serves the good, and signally punisheth the evil, he makes him∣self known: the Lord separated between his Church and the re∣bellious Jewes, when Jerusalem was to be destroyed, warning his people to remove to Pella, Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 5. which was a mar∣vellous separation intimated in Pella, somewhat like to  the word here used. The Psalmist takes notice of this providence, Psal. 9.15. The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made, in the Net which they hid, is their own foot taken. Whence he infers, v. 16. The Lord is known by the judgement which he executeth; the wicked are snared by the works of their own hands: Which David accounts wor∣thy of deep meditation; and therefore addes, Higgaion, A Me∣ditation, or object worth our thinking and speaking of it; as that word signifies. Which because it cannot be done without depressing our earthly and carnal thoughts, and raising up our spiritual and heavenly, the Psalmist addes thereunto, Selah: which therefore is far from being a meer Musical Note, or dictio sine sensu, a word without a meaning, as yet some have thought, I say not how un∣worthily of any part of Gods Word. The like effect of this providence, he notes, Psal. 58.10, 11. The righteous shall rejoyce when he seeth the vengeance, &c. So that the earthly man Adam
(hereby convinced) shall say, Verily, there is a reward for the righte∣ous: Verily there is a God that judgeth in the earth. This is Gods constant providence in the world, though in some examples more eminent than others; whereby he leaves not himself without witness unto any person or nation. So that when Pharaoh frustrated the end of Gods goodness towards himself, as all Atheists and Epicureans do, he and they sin against much light. For God the Creator, who made us this soul, he knows his own work, and how men are apt to reason from their ob∣servation of humane counsels, actions, and their events: so that when they see (as they may see, if they will be patient and duly consider) a marvellous separation of the good from the evil, a requital of the good with good, and the evil with evil; they may hence collect, that there is a Wisdom, Justice, Power, and Goodness, acting and ruling in the world, ordering and disposing humane actions unto their respective ends, even the Lord the Ru∣ler in the midst of the Earth. This marvellous separation of the good from the evil, the good God therefore makes, that men may acknowledge and own his eternal power and God-head;Rom. 1.20. Heb. 11.6. believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them who diligently seek him. Otherwise if they hold this truth in unrighteousness, and become vain in their imaginations, so that their foolish heart is darkned, they render themselves as Pharaoh did, without excuse. O let the true Israel of God timely and seriously consider this; They are in Goshen, a people near unto God, Psal. 148.14. that's Go∣shen (appropinquatio, approximatio) the Lord hath marvellously se∣parated between you and the Egyptians. Yea, saith Moses, if the Lord be with us, we shall be wonderfully separated from all the people that are upon the face of the earth, Exod. 33.16. An honourable, a glorious separation! as the LXX here , I will glori∣fie, even to wonderment, the land of Goshen. All the Land of Egypt is pestered with , Exod. 8.24. a mixture of sundry sorts, whe∣ther of Flies, and so its , a troublesome evil; or of wilde beasts, Lions, Bears, Wolves, &c. and so its , a destructive evil (though the former be more probable, according to Hierom and the LXX.) The good God hath made promise marvellously to separate us from all these, the evil beasts, the roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. and all his lusts, unreasonable and bruitish affections: from the swarms of Flies: Beelzebub dominus muscae, the Lord of the Flie, as he is interpreted, the god of Ekron, 2 Kings 1, 2. whence the Poets had their Acheron, he stirs up swarms of worldly thoughts and cares. From these troublesome and destructive mixtures, he hath gra∣ciously promised marvellously to separate his Israel. Yet hath he not exempted his Israel from separating themselves from these
swarms and mixtures; yea, he requires of us sobriety and vigi∣lancy, and stedfastness in the faith, that we may resist them, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. For he that is born of God, keepeth himself: and the evil one toucheth him not, 1 John 5.18. He keepeth himself in Goshen, even drawing near to God, and the evil one cannot draw near to him, as it is in the Syriack. Its said by some, that all the sins committed in the Wilderness, were suggested by the  the great mixture (it is not said of whom or what) that went up with them out of Egypt, Exod. 12.38. And 'tis very true; for hence indeed proceeds the sin of Israel; when we mix our selves with beastly lusts; when we entertain in∣to our hearts swarms of earthly thoughts and worldly cares. O thou Israel of God! if God so marvellously separate us from these, let us also marvellously separate our selves from them. Let us draw near unto God, and he will draw near unto us, James 4.8. Hear what he saith unto us, Come out from among them, and be ye sepa∣rate, saith the Lord, and touch no unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. And I will put a division between my people and thy people.Exod. 8. Ver. 23.] It is confessed in the margent, by the Translators, that , the word which they render division, signifies in the Hebrew, Re∣demption. And why then was Redemption cast into the Margent, and Division put into the Text? Surely beside that the genuine & proper signification of the word, , (which is either , redemption, Psal. 111.9. or  a ransome and price of re∣demption, Exod. 21.30.) is here neglected; the minde of the holy Spirit also is hereby obscured; which, under the outward Re∣demption, aims at, and figures an inward Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ, the spiritual Redeemer. Whereof the Prophet David speaks, Psal. 111.9. He sent redemption unto his people: which S. Au∣gustine and Euthymius understand of Christ. As God sent them re∣demption by Moses, so a more excellent redemption by Christ, Psal. 130.7. in which place we have  and . And the Lord Jesus gave his life  a ransom for many, Matth. 20.28. Nor do I doubt but the reason why we finde in the history of the Israelites coming out of Egypt, so frequent mention of the Lords out-stretched Arm, (as Exodus 6.6. Deut. 4.34. and 5.15. and 7.19. beside many other places) is, that thereby the holy Spirit might intimate unto us, the Redemption wrought by Jesus the Arm of the Lord, as he is often expresly called (Esay 40.10. and 51.5. and 53.1. compared with John 12.38.) who should bring his people again out of Egypt, Psal. 68.22. And therefore with good reason, the translations of the Reformed Churches, or the most of them, render the word  here Redemption; as the French Bible, the Spanish, the Tigurin, Martin Luthers, Piscators,
and two Low Dutch translations, Vatablus, and Munster, and, of our old English Translators, Coverdale and two others. And I doubt not but all who love Redemption rather then Division, will be of the same minde. O thou Israel of God! The Lord hath sent and put his Re∣demption between his people and the spiritual Pharaohs people. The Lord the Redeemer comes to Zion, to them who turn from transgres∣sion in Jacob, Esay 59.20. that he may redeem our souls from deceit and violence, (that we may not use deceit or violence towards others. not others toward us.) Yea, he gave himself for us (a  a ransom) that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and pu∣rifie unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Titus 2.14. O when will it once be! Intreat the Lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty thunderings and hail:Exod. 9. Ver. 28. and I will let you go, &c.] The words, Pray to the Lord, , which the Translators turn, For it is enough;) sound onely, & multùm, and much: which if we refer unto the act of prayer, as Arias Montanus doth, it may import Pharaohs request for the intention of their prayer, Pray ye to the Lord, and that not perfunctorily and negligently, but much, earnestly, and zea∣lously; as the King of Nineveh (thought to be Sardanapalus, as no∣torious for lasciviousness, as Pharaoh was for cruelty) in his fear of destruction, he commanded the people to cry mightily unto God, Jonah 3.8. Qui frigidè rogat, docet negare, he who prayes coldly, brings with him a denial of his prayer. And thus  may signifie , much, and intensely. As for  enough, joyn'd to the mighty thundrings and bail, as the Translators render it, there is no doubt but Pharaoh would think he had soon enough of them; but here he seems to fear, they were so great, that they could not be removed without prayer and that much, earnest and zealous prayer. But let us hear, what answer Moses returns to this request of Pharaoh. And Moses said unto him;Exod. 9. Ver. 30. as soon as I am gone out of the City, I will spread abroad my hands unto the Lord, &c. But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye will not yet fear the Lord God.] The word  which is here turn'd, not yet, includes a nega∣tive; and so it makes that sense which the Translators have gi∣ven. But it signifies also priùs, antequam, priusquam, before, or before that, as Exod. 1.19. According to this signification of , the words will yield this sense, As for thee and thy servants, I know, that ye are afraid of the face or presence of the Lord God; [ is à propter, à conspectu: or, because  may signifie the angry face or countenance of the Lord,] I know ye are all afraid of the wrathful face of the Lord God; before, that is, before I pray; which
was the thing desired, and here supposed in the speech of Moses to Pharaoh,  from the face or presence, is quite left out by our Translators. It includes fear, as Psal. 3. in the title, David fled  for fear of Absalom, as the woman fled , from the face of the Serpent. Its evient that the words will bear this sense. Which the Arabick Version inclines to in part, referring these words to those which follow, verse 31. as also Vatablus. Now it rests to be inquired into, whether is the more proba∣ble meaning of the words, and whether suits best with the con∣text. That of the Translators is this; I know, that ye will not yet fear the Lord God. The other, I know that ye are afraid of the face of the Lord God before I pray. Moses is desired to pray to the Lord, and that earnestly, that the thunders and hail may cease. Whether disposition of these two, is the more likely to encourage Moses and Aaron to pray unto the Lord for Pharaoh and his servants; and more proba∣ble to incline the Lord to hear their prayer. According to the former, Moses knew, that they would not yet fear the Lord. What incouragement could this be to Moses to pray for them? They did not yet, nor would they yet fear the Lord: therefore pray and pray earnestly. How does that follow? Simon Magus in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, intreated Peter to pray for him, Acts 8.24. but we read no answer that Peter made to that motion. What incouragement had he to pray? Nor is it likely, that the Lord should be inclined to hear Moses's prayer for Pharaoh and his servants: For upon like consideration the Lord forbids Je∣remy to pray for his people, Jer. 11.14. and 14.11. The other disposition is this. I know that ye are afraid of the face or presence of the Lord before, that is, before I pray. This disposi∣tion might be a good motive unto Moses to pray for Pharaoh, as for his own sinful people now under a slavish fear, Exodus 33.4, 5, 6. And the like fear might incline the Lord in like case to spare Pharaoh as he did Ahab, 1 Kings 21.27, 28, 29. and Reho∣boam and his people, 2 Chron. 12.1.—7. It is clear, that Pharaoh and his servants were, for the present, in a more hopeful condition to be praid for, according to this later translation, then they are according to the former. How∣beit Moses speaks doubtfully of Pharaoh and his servants, , they were in a mutable state under sla∣vish fear. Ye are afraid of the face or presence of the Lord before I pray for you; whereby is implyed a contrary disposition feared to be in them, which would be discovered after he had prayed for them. While the judgement was upon them, they feared; but when that should cease, they also would cease to fear, and would return to their own inclination.
Moses full well knew the false and corrupt nature of men. So true is that Distich, and the English of it; Daemon languebat, Monachus tunc esse volebat: Daemon convaluit, Daemon ut ante fuit. The Devil was sick, then he a Monk would be: The Devil was well again: the Devil a Monk was he. Our corrupt nature is so base and servile, its far better when its kept under, then when it is at liberty. Thus it was under the Law, Jer. 22.21. And thus it is and hath been in the time of the Gospel: For the Church of Christ was more pure, holy, just, loving, patient, long-suffering, &c. in the time of the Apostles, and afterward until Constantines dayes, then ever it hath been since in any age. Our own experience may prove this, within these few years; that the lives of men professing religion, were more sober, just, godly, and every way more truly Christian, when there was a power over them to check them, then ever they have been since, while men may do what they list. How many examples might be given for proof of this, in these our dayes, of Cheaters, of Gamesters, of Whoremon∣gers, of Drunkards, &c. who while the Lords hand is upon them, by sicknesse, or otherwise, while  the voy∣ces of God, his threatnings are thundred out against them by the Sons of Thunder, O how humble they are! how prodigal of large promises of amendment! how full of confession of sin! just like Pharaoh here, how firmly (a man would think) do they binde themselves with vowes and promises! How humbly do they desire Moses and Aaron to pray, and that much for them? Yet when the Philistines are upon them, (Potione cadentes, as Hierom ren∣ders Philistine) when their Pot-companions resort unto them, they break all vowes, all covenants with God and men, as Samson brake his cords. But Moses and Aaron well know, that these Egyptians, (or, as we call them in our English, these Gypsies, are afraid of the face of the Lord before they pray for them; and that upon their recovery, they will return to their own byass. The Israel of God hath better learn'd Christ, and well knows, that it is more noble to be brought off by the whisper of Gods voice perswading us, then by his terrible thunders threatning us; rather by the goodness of God leading us, then by his severe judgements driving us to repentance. But the good God sanctifie every dispensation unto us which may win us unto himself, whether it be His Rod, or his Spirit of Meekness!
SERMON VII. The right Dressing of, and due Addresse unto the Paskal-Lamb, preached in Comme∣moration of Mr. SHIELD, one of the Worshipful Company of the COOKS, at S. Mary Alder-mary, London. Febr. 2. 1655. being Candlemass-day. And for a preparation to the Communion. Exod. 12.9. Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire, his head with his legs, and with the appurtenance thereof. THis was wont to be a Festival-day. And accordingly I have prepared for you. The Jewes had their , their preparation for the eating of the Passe∣over; which was the killing of the Lamb, and fleaying of it; the Butchers-work. Then followed the dressing of it, the head and legs, and appurtenance; which must not be half-roasted, or raw-roasted, nor boyled at all; but down-roasted; that's the Cooks work. And be∣ing thus prepared it must be eaten by all; and much good may it do us! Not with much curiosity, variety, and excess, as ye are wont to provide for your City feasting; but with all simplicity and plainness, one dish;Gen. 18.7, 8. according as our father Abraham entertained the Angels with a piece of Veal and a dish of Butter: and I have so provided, yea, it is provided to my hand, one dish now in season, Lamb; and this Lamb of the Passover in season all the year, all the acceptable year of the Lord.
From Verse 1. to Verse 28,SERM. VII we have Gods direction touch∣ing the Passover. Feast of unleavened bread. This direction is given by God to Moses, and by Moses to the people. The direction is of two kindes of acts; where of some prepa∣ratory of the Lamb; setting it a part: Essential: Killing it. Essential Sprinkling of the blood, ver. 7. Eating the flesh, verse 8. which is illustrated by Adjuncts Consentany. Dissentany, Verse 9. Which is my Text: which dissentany is illustrated by a diversity, Not raw, nor sodden at all with water. The words are the rule of the Modiparator, or Moderator con∣vivii, the rule of the Master of the Feast, where in ye have first his Bill of fare, What we must eat. Secondly, How drest; and that 1. Negatively, how not, Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all in wa∣ter. 2. Positively, how we must eat it, eat it rost with fire, &c. 1. We must eat the head of the Pascal-Lamb with his legs, and with his purtenance. 2. We must not eat of it raw. 3. Nor sodden at all in water. 4. We must eat it rost with fire. Axiom 1. We must eat 1. the head, 2. the legs, and 3. his appurtnance. These parts we may consider 1. a part. 2. joyntly. First, a part; 1. the head, the most eminent part of the bo∣dy. All the nerves and sinewes have their original in the head; whereby the head ministers unto the members all their power and strength of moving and acting. It is seated in that eminent posture, that it becomes him who in all things ought to be the chief, to be called the head; though otherwise he be one with his my∣stical Body: For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of that one body being many, are one body, Col. 1.18. 1 Cor. 5.7. and 12.12. so also is Christ. And so though he be the head, yet is he also the Paskal Lamb it self. The flesh of Christ, the Lamb is the Word, John 1.14. through whose help we keep the spiritual Passeover, the passage from sin to righteousness, whereby the destroying Angel passeth over us, Deut. 8.3. the living Word. Man liveth not by bread only, but by every word which cometh out of the mouth of God, Matth. 4.4. Thy words were found, and I did eat them, Jer. 3.15.16. that is, partake of them, and had communion with them. Christ is the head of his body, the Church; and not only so, but the head of every man is Christ, 1 Cor. 11.3. & 2.16. in the head is placed the judgement, We have the minde of Christ. This gives light and direction unto the
whole man: for it is the Lords candle, that Job said, shined upon his head. Obs. 1. Own our Head and Prince. This was figured by Aha∣shuerus, which is an head and Prince of his Church; as Ahashue∣rus was the Head, Prince, Lord, and Husband of Esther, the hid∣den and invisible Church; as those names signifie. Obs. 2. What is principally to be partaken of in Christ; his Head, his ruling part; we are to receive him as our Prince, our Ruler, and Governour. This is that which is aimed at first in these words. Many can be content to partake of him as a Pro∣phet, as a Priest, as a Sacrifice; but few as an Head, few as a Prince, Head and Governour. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him, Col. 2.6. Obs. 3. What part of the word is principally intended by the Head? what else but the ruling part? the Head-sum of the Law, and Faith, even love out of a pure heart, 1 Tim. 1.5. Reproof. 1. Those who aim at a Church like the Cyclops a Com∣mon-wealth without an Head, without order of the members supe∣riour and inferiour. Reproof. 2. Who reject Christ, and will none of him as their Head; We will not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19.14. 2. His Legs, : They have their name in the Hebrew from bowing or being bowed. They have analogie and propor∣tion to the arms and legs of a man, which are the instruments of motions and actions. And therefore commonly by the feet and legs, we mystically understand the passions and affections, which move and carry out the soul and the whole man; and put him upon actions, which are signified by the hands and arms. The eating therefore of the legs of the Paschal Lamb, is having communion with Christ in motions and actions, to walk as he walked, 1 John 2.6. So S. Paul walked; and he tels the Corinthians of his wayes that were in Christ, 1 Cor. 4.17. Communion in power and strength, signified by the Arm, which is Christ, Esay 40.10. and 53.1. By the Feet of the Lamb, we may understand the lesse Comman∣dements, as by the Head the greater, Hos. 8.12. These are  which may signifie the great things of the Law, in regard of the lesse, Matth. 23.23. For the Commandements of God are not all of one cise. Whence it follows, That Obs. 1. There are degrees of the word and Commandements of God, some greater, some lesse. 2. Both greater and less must be kept. Head and feet of the Lamb must be eaten.
Axiom 3. His appurtenance. The word is , his inwards. The word properly signifies all the intrails, more specially the Heart. And by the Heart, the will, love, and mercy, is to be under∣stood. The eating then of the inwards of the Pascal Lamb, is the partaking of the will of Christ, that it may be our meat to do his will, John 4.34. S. Paul had Christs love and mercy in him; I long after you, saith he, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.8. Obs. 1. All the Commandements, prohibitions, promises and threatnings, are to be received, fed upon by faith, and in∣wardly digested into life. Observe all things whatsoever I command you, Matth. 28.20. Believe all things which the Prophets have writ∣ten, Luke 24.25. To receive the most intimate requiring of the Law inwardly, and to love the Lord our God with all our heart, and with the spirit of our minde. Obs. 2. The participation of Christ, is not outward onely, but also inward. His words are spirit and life, John 6.63. His law is spi∣ritual, Rom. 7.14. The law of the spirit of life, which is in Christ Je∣sus our Lord. His whole worship is spiritual, John 4.23, 24. Hitherto we have considered these members a part. Come we now to the handling of them joyntly. And here let us in∣quire; Why must these three be eaten? The whole Lamb must be eaten: And why is there more special mention made of these three parts? 1. They are the three parts which specially suffered in the true Pascal Lamb. His Head crowned with Thorns. His Hands and Feet pierced with Nails, and his Side with a Spear. 2. We have been wounded in all these, in our Head, our intellectuals, in our inwards, our morals, in our actions and affections. From the sole of the foot even to the head, Esay 1.6. 3. We have woun∣ded him in all these; we have crowned his head with our thor∣ny cares. In his hand is the hiding of his power, Hab. 3.4. But what are these wounds in thy hands? These with which I was wounded in the house of my friends, Zach. 13.6. even in those who enfeeble Christs power under pretence of infirmity, and weakness of the Saints. Obs. 1. All our motions and actions (which are signified by the outward members,) these are directed by the Head, by the minde of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. All our inward willing and nilling, all our love, hope, desire, fear, joy, grief, all the actions pro∣ceeding from these, these are guided by the minde, and understand∣ing, by the Head Christ. And therefore the words in the text, if truly translated, are very observable. Ye shall eat the head with the legs, and the purtenance thereof. The word is  the Head, a∣bove the legs, and above the purtenance thereof. The head must rule the legs and feet, all the motions and actions. The head must be above the inwards, it must guide the passions, and motions, and af∣fections of the heart. Though these parts be specially enjoyned, the whole Lamb must be eaten.
Obs. 2. The holy Spirit of God implies and requires our whole conformity to Jesus Christ, under the names 1. of eating and drinking; unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, John 6.53. His flesh is his Word; the Word made flesh, John 1.14. His Spirit is drink; He hath made us to drink into one Spirit. 1 Cor. 12.13. Hence is our spiritual life, Christ our life, Col. 3.4. To me to live is Christ, Phil. 1.21. 2. The Spirit re∣quires our conformity unto him in clothing; put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. Yea, we must be armed with him; what the Apo∣stle calls the armour of light, Rom. 13.12, 13, 14. he explains and calls the Lord Jesus Christ. Reproof. 1. Who will eat the Head, who will be contempla∣tive Christians; but not the legs and feet; they are not practical, not affectionate. Such an one was Judas; he knew Christ and preached him; but his bowels gushed out, he had no mercy. Reproof. 2. Those who are practical, and perform some out∣ward work materially good, without the inwards. As the Pha∣risees would perform some outward duties, without the inward and spiritual commandment. Our Lord saith, Except your righte∣ousnesse exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.Matth. 5.20. Nor is that Authors tenent other then Pharisaical, who writing a work of Wisdom, adviseth men to supply the necessities of the poor and miserable; but not to be moved or troubled at their miseries. His reason: Because, saith he, it damps a noble spirit. I know not wherein he placeth the nobility of spirit, unless, with Aristotle, he account , pride and haughtiness of mind, a noble spirit. He considered not, that a Christian spirit is a merciful spirit. For surely our sympathy and commiseration is the best part of our alms; which is a contract of , which is from , mercy. S. John will determine this controversie: Whoso hath this worlds good, saith he, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up (he saith not his purse, but) his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?1 John 3.17. Reproof. 3. Who eat the inwards, not Christs, but their own; as the envious man does , he eats his own heart. Reproof. 4. Who eat not the Head, partake not of the Lambs dominion, but will make Rezin their King, their own wilfulness, Esay 7. and set up over them Tabeel, a god, such as seems good to themselves, as the Chal. Par. turns Tabeel. I beseech ye take it not amiss, that I set before ye the fragments that were left the last night. It is the judgement of one of the most pious and learned Fathers, that by the fragments that were taken up, Matth. 14.20. are to be understood the more abstruse and difficult parts of the word which the people left. And so the Apostle distinguishes between  and , 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. I fed you with milk, and not with meat; for ye were not able to bear it.
Hitherto we have had the Bill of fare, the parts of the Pas∣cal Lamb principally to be eaten. Come we now to the manner of eating the Pascal Lamb. And first negatively, and that's two wayes: 1. Not raw. 2. Not sodden at all in water. First, We must not eat it raw. The word is  which we turn raw, of doubtful signification in the Hebrew, which descends from the Arabic  with changing of a letter usu∣ally changeable , or , Crudum, cruentum, quod sangui∣ne coctum; Scal. It's meant not simply raw, but half roasted; a fault, I fear, too often committed; that as the Cooks buy their meat raised or blown up, (an old sin of the Butchers, which Aristotle men∣tions in his Elenchs) so the Cooks half roast their meat that it may seem fair to the eye, and be sold off the dearer. Rat. Why not raw or half roasted? The Law forbids eating with the blood, and gives reason, because in the blood of the beast, is the life of the beast. Now if we enquire into a further reason of that Law. The Lord thereby would prevent cruelty, lest eat∣ing with the blood might incline men to love blood, and so shed blood. Nero and Domitian two of the worst Emperours of Rome, loved hunting and shedding the blood of beasts; and afterwards were most cruel in shedding the bloud of men. Obs. 1. Mysticè. Not raw. The Lord would not that wee should have communion with the life of the beast, neither in the concupiscible, as lasciviousness and luxury; nor in the irascible, as savageness and fierceness, Eccles. 11.10. Obs. 2. The Lord would not that we should feed upon his Word in the crudity of the letter. As in these and such examples, Except a man hate his father and mother, &c. sell all thou hast, and give to the poor, &c. These, and the like Scriptures, must be un∣derstood cum grano salis, according to the intention of the Spirit of God, not literally, not rawly. For if we hate father or mo∣ther, how can we honour them? Doubt. But why does Moses forbid eating with the blood, when Christ the true Moses, and the true Pascal Lamb gives us his blood to drink? Answer. The Israelites in Moses dayes were not come to the renewing of the life; but they were daily admonished and exhor∣ted to amend their life; howbeit herein they were very slow, yea, murmured and hardened their hearts against Moses. And therefore they were not suffered to eat the blood. For in the blood is the life, Deut. 12.23. Unto which life they could not come by reason of their unbelief and disobedience, Hebr. 3.19. and 4.11. But the Disciples of Christ who had now passed from the flesh into the Spirit, and were come from the death into the life, Christ gave to these his flesh to cat, and his blood to drink, even for a renew∣ing of the life.
3. Not sodden at all in water. Seething, and boyling, as also stewing, requires water or other liquor, wherein to stew, boyl, and seeth meat, and make it fit for eating, by working out the scum, and drawing out the crudities. Mysticè. Sursum corda. I come not to teach the Artists their own art. What then is meant by water, wherein the Lamb must not be sodden? By wa∣ter mystically is understood doctrine, Ephes. 5.26. Doctrine in Scripture is humane or divine. Humane doctrine, as mens traditions, are here forbidden; their fear of me is taught by the precepts of men. Of this water the Prophet complains; thy wine is mixt with water; the spiritual doctrine of divine consola∣tion is blended with mans doctrine, mans invention: for that water which is divine doctrine is elsewhere commended. 2. The Lord requires the simplicity in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3. and godly sincerity in all our services. And therefore 1 Cor. 5.8. as here he forbids the water of humane doctrine, so elsewhere, the lea∣ven of hypocrisie, in eating the spiritual Passover.Esay 29.13. & 1.22. But why must not the Lamb be sodden in the water of humane doctrine, or mans doctrine? 1. In regard of the water it self. 2. In respect of the seething or boyling meat in that water. 1. The water it self is from beneath, the water below the hea∣vens; whereas the divine water is water above the heavens. Now because its water from beneath, its feculent and sapit contiguam glebam, it relishes of the earth whence it comes, and that is from the earthly mans wisdom and invention, James 3.15. Of this our Lord speaks, Ye are from beneath, I am from above, John 8.23. 2. In regard of the seething or boyling, and the effect of it; the humane doctrine and wisdom cannot reach unto the sub∣lime nature of the divine wisdom and Word. The Natural∣lists say, and experience proves it, Aqua tantum ascendit, quan∣tum descendit; Water can ascend no higher then the Fountain from whence it comes: That which is of the flesh is flesh, that which is of the earthly spirit is earth, John 3.6.31. Since therefore the Pascal Lamb is , strong meat, the weak water of mans do∣ctrine cannot prepare it, maturate it, or fit it for the nourish∣ment of our souls. The water of mans doctrine cannot prepare the spiritual Pas∣cal Lamb. The truth of this appears in the business we have in hand, the mystery of the Lords Supper. For the learned men of three divided Churches have been long time seething and boyl∣ing, and parboyling this mystery, and all to little purpose; The Lamb is raw. There hath been more paper blotted about this contro∣versie, and opposition of science and humane learning, against humane learning and science, then about any other that I know, in the Christian Church.
Reproof. 1. Those who kindle their own fire and boyl the Word in the water of their own doctrine contrary to the express precept here, not sodden at all in water. All the New Lights which have shined now many years, they have not brought forth or shined to the life, which is the end of all. The young Prophet went forth to gather , and gathered wilde Gowrds, 2 Kings 4.39. which are called fel terrae, the Gall of the earth for their bitterness; these he gathered, and shred into the pot: and when they came to be eaten, they cried out, O man of God, death is in the pot, &c. They could never have eaten it, had not Elisha cast in his Meal. Many sons of the Prophets have gone forth into the field to ga∣ther , lights, new lights of humane learning, lights of ima∣gination, which shine like rotten wood in the night of ignorance; what else can be gathered in the field of the world, but fel terrae, the gall of the earth?Matth. 13.38. which they gather out of their own earthly minde, Phil. 3.19. And these they shred into the pot, and powre out to feed the people withal. But the hungry souls after the word of righ∣teousness, cannot feed on this food; for its no food of life; they cry out, that death is in the pot. And it would prove death, did not Elisha cast in the Meal, even the meal of that wheat which fals into the ground and dies, John 12. and brings forth much fruit of life. It is that Meal which takes away the bitterness from all mens learning; and what followed upon it?  there was no harm in the pot, the words are, there was no evil word in the pot, and so Arias Montanus turns that Text, Non fuit ver∣bum malum in olla, there was no evil word in the pot. Reproof. 2. The people who contentedly feed upon the Word boyled in the water of mans doctrine, heated by the fire of their own spi∣rit, which works not out the creudities, nor scum of the sinful life. It is a dreadful threatning ye read, Ezech. 24.6.—14. Wo to the bloody City, to the pot whose scum is therein, &c. 4. Come we to the positive preparation of this spiritual food. It must be rosted with fire. Fire is natural, and indifferent, or spiritual, and that good or evil. The rosting by a natural fire is the drawing of crudity and rare∣ness out of the meat. Mysticè. But the spiritual fire is here to be understood, and that which is good, and that either good in it self, or good for us. 1. Good in it self; so God himself is a fire, Hebr. 12.29. And he is essentially good: and his Spirit is a fire, S. Luke 4.16. 2. Temptations also inward and outward: Afflictions are a fire, called a fiery trial that is to try us, 1 Pet. 4.12. and these are good for us. It is good for me that I was afflicted, Psal. 119.71. 3. The Word also is prepared by the patience and practice of it and the examples of the Lord himself, the Prophets and Apostles. Be∣ing
so prepared, it becomes more savory and more easie of dige∣stion. Of this the Psalmist speaks, Psal. 119.140. thy word is fiery. 4. Zeal also is a fire, and although in it self it be indifferent, yet in regard of the object, in a good matter, it is good to be zealous. How shall the Paschal Lamb be rosted? When they rost meat, the superfluous moysture and crudity is dried and drawn out of it. But is there any supersluity in the true Pascal Lamb? surely no; What necessity then is there, that it be rosted? The Word has been sodden by Commentators and Expositors; and every one hath left his false gloss upon it, according to every mans hu∣mour, according to which there are many Christs, Matth. 24.24. and all these must be consumed by the fire of Gods Spirit. 2. The Word is most savoury, when we partake of it in our afflictions, then it has the best relish. At other times it is like meat to men that have no appetite. But when we are under the fire of afflictions, pressures, and calamities, O how sweet the Word is then unto us! as to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet, Prou. 27.7. as a morsel cut off the Spit. The Apostle re∣members the Thessalonians of their appetite, 1 Thess. 1.5, 6, 7. Our Gospel came not unto you in word onely, but also in power, and in the holy Ghost; there's one fire. And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction; there's ano∣ther. Doubt. Why does the Lord propound these mysteries under outward things, as of a Lamb, &c. Love is defined affectus uni∣onis, an affection of union, oneness, and sameness with the par∣ty loved. Now because one man who loves another, cannot re∣ally be one and the same with him, Disparata non possunt fieri u∣num, disparates cannot be the same; he imparts something to him wherewith he may be in a sort one and the same with him: such is that which enters into us, as our meat and drink; and such as is nearest to us, as our garments and what else is needful for the preservation of our being. Thus Jonathan loved David, 1 Sam. 18.1, 3, 4. Their soules were in a sort one: but how did Jona∣than expresse that? He stript himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave it to David, and his garments, &c. Does the Scripture, think we, intend only to express humane passion? Jonathan fi∣gures the holy Spirit; (so his name signifies, The gift of the Lord,) and he clothes David; as when Judges 6.34. the Spirit of the Lord is said to come upon Gideon, the Hebrew Text saith, the Spirit clothed Gideon. Rom. 13.14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Thess. 2.8. Being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you our own souls, because ye were dear unto us. There is no love without communication of something from the party loving to the party loved. Thus John 3.16. God so loved,—that he gave his only begotten Son. Gal. 2.20. He loved me, and gave himself
for me. Ephes. 5.2. Christ loved us, and gave himself for us. So he loved the Church, and gave himself for it, ver. 25. And thus the Lord Jesus Christ to testifie his intimate love unto us, he communicates himself unto us by the Sacrament of his body and blood; which is called therefore Sacramentum uni∣onis, whereby he affectionately imparts himself unto us, John 6.55, 56, 57. My flesh is meat indeed, &c. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, &c. Terms of art are as weights wherewith we weigh silver and gold. And such are the Sacra∣ments and vertues in them, and conveyed by them. For where∣as spiritual things have no proper name of their own, saith Dion. Are∣opagita, its necessary, that if we must know them, they borrow the symbolical representations of themselves, from outward and sensible things, whereby they may be accommodated and fitted unto our understanding: For it is impossible, saith he, , that the Divine Ray should o∣therwise shine unto us, then as it is inveloped and hidden in va∣riety of holy coverings. Seeing therefore that which we par∣take of in the Sacrament inwardly is a spiritual thing, and the very same spiritual grace, whereof the Israelites were partakers in the Passover; and even the Israelites and we (Surrogatus Is∣rael,) the true Christian Church eat of the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. The difference of the outward Elements makes no difference in the spiritual grace. For Christ, of whom we partake in the Sacrament, is properly no more Bread and Wine, then he is Manna, and Water out of the Rock, then he is the meat and drink Offering, then he is a Pascal Lamb. All which signifie Christ. The difference there∣fore is only in the outward signes. Obs. 1. As there is an inward hidden man of the heart, a spiri∣tual and heavenly man;1 Pet. 3.4. so in reason there must be an inward spiritual and heavenly food, which he inwardly feeds upon, and wherewithal he is inwardly nourished. And therefore when our Lord had spoken of his body and blood to be fed upon and drunk, he saith, My words they are spirit, and they are life: even the truth of God: Veritas est animae pabulum, the divine truth is the food of the soul, the Pascal Lamb, the spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3. That bread of God which comes down from heaven, John 6.33. That hidden Manna, that food which endures unto the everlasting life. All this is Christ the truth, the spiritual Bread, Meat, Manna, Pas∣cal Lamb. And this is that which the true believer inwardly eats and feeds upon in the holy Sacrament. This is that which our Lord meant, when he said, Matth. 26.26. This is my body, this is my blood, &c. For surely his natural body, his outward flesh and blood was present with them at the Table; and of that he could
not be understood to speak, but of his inward and spiritual body and blood, which he gave, even his living Word and Spirit. Of this he speaks fully, John 6.48.—58. Obs. 2. As there is an inward and spiritual man, and a pro∣portionable food for him, so must there be an inward and spi∣ritual participation of that food. For it is not possible corporal∣ly and bodily to eat that which is spiritual and heavenly. And therefore what we read in the text, Eat not  of it, Moses expresseth otherwise toward the end of this Chapter. A stran∣ger  shall not eat thereof: what is turn'd thereof, is  in, as Arias Montanus renders it exactly; a stranger shall not eat in it. And again, when thou hast circumcised him, then  he shall eat in it: and so often in the following words. The participation of Christ is inward in the Sacrament. It is something inward, that the believer feeds upon. So the Psal∣mist, dwell, saith he, in the land  & pasce veritatem, and feed on the truth. Obs. 3. Christ is to be partaken with, and in his afflictions; the Lamb must be eaten roasted: the sawce is bitter herbs, the bread is bread of affliction. 1 Thes. 1.5, 6. the cup is of Christs passion. Exhort. Be we all exhorted, not to eat of the Lamb raw nor sod∣den at all with water, but roast with fire, his head upon his legs, and upon the purtenance thereof; yea, to eat the whole Lamb; let us endeavour after a full communion with Christ. 1 Cor. 1.13. Is Christ divided? ver. 30. He is made unto us wisdom, righteousnesse, sanctification, and redemption. Conform our selves to his minde, motions, actions, life, strength, &c. Whether do we thus com∣municate with him? Whether are we strong against our spiri∣tual enemies, by Christ who is the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. The Lord tels Joshuah, Chap. 7. There is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, , therefore thou canst not prevail against thine enemies. There must no uncircumcised person eat of the Passe∣over. There must of necessity therefore be an inward circum∣cision of the heart, that the accursed thing may be removed; a laying aside all filthiness, , and superfluity of naughtiness, that we may receive with meekness the ingraffed word which is able to save our souls. This is no hasty business. 'Tis true, the circumcision of the flesh was soon dispatched; but that of the Spirit is a long work  circumcidendo circum∣cidetur, Gen. 17.13. in circumcising he shall be circumcised. Its long a doing, as that which answers to it, mortification, moriendo, morieris, dying, thou shalt die. Its a long, a lingring death. That sinful life which we have lived in the flesh, was not contracted in an instant, no, nor in a short time; Nemo repente fit pessimus, no man is stark naught upon a sudden; but by little and little: and by little and little is the sinful life to be deaded and destroy∣ed;
and the holy life to be raised from the dead. Nemo repente fit optimus, no man becomes so good as he ought to be, upon a sudden. What the Lord promised Israel according to the flesh, Exod. 23.27, 28. and made it good to them outwardly; the like he promiseth and makes good to Israel according to the Spirit in∣wardly, He sends his fear before us, and drives out the spiritual ene∣mies: for the fear of God driveth out the sin, Ecclus. 1.21. O but, it's better, thou wilt say, to die once then be alwayes a dying. O how painful is it to die unto sin! Every sin is a life, (such as it is,) and therefore to part with it, must be painfull as death. How tedious and irksom is the pain of circumcision! It's said of the Sichemites, that they were sore on the third day. Their pains then prevailed, saith the Chald. Paraph. as all wounds are most sore on the third day. But thy wounds may be sore thy two first dayes, Hos. 6.2. The law of the Father which brings in the fear, Exod. 20.20. that has torment, 1 John 4.18. The Go∣spel of the Son requires the mortification of sin, Romans 6.8. But then followes the third day, the quickning power of the Spirit. But alas! I am unclean, and guilty to my self of many sins; and how shall I eat the Pascal Lamb? 2 Chron. 30.18, 19, 20. A multitude of the people—had not cleansed themselves, yet did they eat the Passeover otherwise then it was written. But Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, The good God pardon every one, who prepareth his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not according to the purification of the Sanctuary! And the Lord hearkned to He∣zekiah and healed the people. And thou hast a greater then He∣zekiah, even the true Hezekiah himself (the strength of the Lord) even Christ himself at the right hand of God making intercession for us, Rom. 8.34. We say we are partakers of him by faith; if so, we feed on faith, we live the life of God from which we have been estran∣ged, Hab. 2.4. By faith we are nourished up in the words of faith, 1 Tim. 4.6. By faith we grow strong, strong in the faith, Rom. 4.20. By faith in Christ we walk, 2 Cor. 5.7. By faith the heart is purified, and hereby we become pure, as he is pure, 1 John. 3.3. for whatsoever toucheth him and hath communion with him, must be like unto him. Surely if we be partakers of Christ by faith, such as he is, such are we also. For every one who saith he abideth in him, he himself also ought so to walk, even as he walked, 1 John 2.6. The Lord Excludes strangers from eating of the Pascal Lamb, Exod. 12.43. The stranger is he who is the son of a strange god. For as the people of the true God, are his sons and daughters, 2 Cor. 6.18. So the people of a false god, are , the children of that false God, and so strangers to the true God, yea, enemies unto him, and
Apostates, as the Chald. Par. calls them there; and Gen. 17.12. he calls such an one as is not of Abrahams seed  filius populorum, as in Latin, they call such an one a Bastard. But what? Is such an one Exclusissimus, altogether excluded? Yes, no doubt, in sensu composito, while he is such, not in sensu diviso: For Exod. 12.48. If he and his be circumcised, he may eat the Passover. They who have put off the body of sins in the flesh, which is the true circumcision, Col. 2.11. and worship God in the Spirit, Phil. 3.3. such are no more strangers or foreiners, but fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the houshold of God, Ephes. 2.19. Unto such now re∣conciled, now of his house, he saith, Eat, O my friends; drink, ye, drink abundantly, my well-beloved, Cant. 5.1.
And the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of E∣gypt.] They who say,Exod. 13. Ver. 18. they went up harnessed as our Translators turn , and Hierom, Armati, armed, &c. Aquila and Symachus , they are yet much neerer the business then the ordinary Greek Interpreters: who referring the sense of the word to the time, turn it , in the fifth gene∣ration the children of Israel went up out of Egypt; as also the Sama∣ritan translation hath it: which is point-blank contrary to what the Lord saith to Abraham, That in the fourth generation they should return into the land of Canaan, Gen. 15.16. But harnessed or armed is a general word; and therefore they have put in the margent, Or by five in a rank; herein following Theodotion who renders  by fives. Nor yet does this version reach the meaning of the original word; which porperly signifies girded; which the Latins express by acccincti; because the Girdle was wont to be worn under the fifth rib, which in the Hebrew is called , that is, the fifth, the Hypocondria, under which is the Liver and vesica fellea, and the Spleen, 2 Sam. 2.23. Abner smote him  about the fifth rib. So Rab. David and others interpret that place. And the Ch. Par. turns  by , that is acccincti, girded: and Jos. 1.14. Ch. Par. hath , where the LXX render the word , bene cincti, well girded. For, because the He∣brews wearing their Arms Ad , to the groin or fifth rib, they were said to be , girt, as the Greeks, armed to the brest, were said to be , muniti ad pectus, fenced to the brest. The Romans also had their cingulum militare, their Military Gir∣dle, which was called Balteus, or Balteum, a Belt, which the Low Dutch call Sweert-gordel, a Sword-girdle; part of their arms, and properly the Soldiers Girdle. Yea, and a principal part of his arms: as Isidore tells us, lib. 19. cap. 33. Balteus dicitur non tantum quo cingitur, sed etiam à quo arma dependent. The military Girdle (as he calls it before,) is not only that wherewith the Soldier was girded, but that also on which his weapons hung. So that  is to be rendred here, girded. But why have we stood so long upon a critical meer , a strife about words? It is not so. For, as I have for∣merly shewn; the Lord in the Israelites journey out of Egypt, prefigures our passage out of the spiritual Egypt, the straits of sin: And therefore as Moses describes Israel according to the flesh, armed, and harnessed, and especially girded for their journey; so under that figure, he signifies Israel according to the Spirit, har∣nessed, armed, and principally girded, and so prepared for their journey.
And as that people were trained up and fitted to go forth to war, Numb. 1.3. So thereby was typified the training up of Gods people, and preparing them for the spiritual warfare: As Seneca saith of Virgils description of a stately Steed; Aliud agens de∣scribit virum fortem: when he seems to do something else, he de∣scribes a valiant man: And when Moses seems to present unto us Military men armed, he indeed intends to describe the soldiers of Jesus Christ, how they go  girded out of the spiritual Egypt. The principal part of their armour is their Girdle; which sig∣nifies, truth, faithfulness, and sincerity. And the Apostle, when he arms the Christian Soldiers, Ephes. 6. having discovered the ene∣my, ver. 12. he sounds an Alarm, ver. 13. then he first arms them, Cingulo militari, with the military Girdle: and gives the word of command, to stand in Battalia, ver. 14. Stand therefore, having your loyns girt about with truth. For truth, sincerity, and faithfulness, is first required in a Christian Soldier, when he comes forth of the spiritual Egypt. Which was also required by the unleavened bread in the Passover, when they came out of Egypt; as S. Paul interprets it, 1 Cor. 5. The unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. And therefore ye have both together, Exod. 12.11. They must eat the Passover with their loyns girded. The Girdle also imports strength, and constancy, according to Psal. 18.39. Thou hast girded me with strength; when now we are to fight with our spiritual enemies. And in this posture the Christian Soldier ought Stare in procinctu, to stand ready girded, to be in a readinesse and wait for the on-set of the enemy. The Girdle also requires Chastity. It girds the loyns; Quoniam in lumbis origo seminis est & concupiscentiae. And therefore the Lord hereby figured his Spouse, the Church, which should be chaste unto him, Jer. 13.11. Yea, among the ornaments where∣with he decks his Church, Ezech, 16.10. one is a girdle of fine li∣nen, which S. John tels us, is  the righteousnesses of the Saints; the word is plural, Revel. 19.8. even all the vertues and graces of the Spirit. So that it were to be wished, that they who render  armed or harnessed, would shew us, where the Israelites had their arms. Is there any probability, that a no∣torions Tyrant holding a numerous people in servitude and bon∣dage, (who therefore oppressed them, lest they should increase and rebel, Exod. 1.10. who yet now were multiplyed and waxen very mighty, ver. 20.) is it likely, that Pharaoh should permit to these, arms, or the use of arms? N. Lyra raiseth this Spirit, but layes it not. Surely their armour was  the whole ar∣mour of God, which depended upon their faithfulness and sincerity, as the Roman Soldiers armour hung upon his Girdle. And there∣fore , which our Translators in the marg. turn five in a
rank, signifies quinquagenarios fifties. For fifty is the sacred num∣ber of the Jubile, and portends in a figure, the remission of sin, and all the vertues and graces of the Spirit, which should be gi∣ven in the Pentecost; and meantime are girded up together in faithfulness and sincerity; according as the Philolospher could say, that Virtutes sunt connexae, vertues are knit together: which shall be administred unto us, as we grow up in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3.18. Meantime, O my fellow travellers out of the spiritual Egypt, toward the promised Land, and my fellow soldiers engaged with me in the same common cause against our spiritual enemies, let us gird our loins with the girdle of truth; let us be sincere and faith∣ful unto the Captain of our salvation. He himself is so girded, Esay 11.5. Righteousness is the girdle of his loyns, and faithfulness is the girdle of his reins. It is a Soldiers honour to be as his Comman∣der in chief. He will gird us with strength; and according to our faithful use of his strength, he will give us more grace: for to him who so hath shall more be given, until he make all grace a∣bound in us. Hear the Military Oration of a great Commander under the Commander in Chief; Gird up the loyns of your minde; be sober and hope to the end (or perfectly) for the grace that shall be brought unto us at the revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13. His chosen Captains also are drowned in the Red Sea: the depths have covered them:Exod. 15. Ver. 4, 5. they sank into the bottom as a stone.) It had been as good English, and more consonant to the Hebrew text, to have rendred the former words thus, The choise of his Captains, &c. And the later thus, the depths shall cover them: they shall sink into the bottom as a stone.] I shall endeavour to prove these in their order. It is very ordinary in the Psalms and other parts of Scripture conceived to be written in meeter, that the later part of a verse, is the Exegesis or explication of the former. Exam∣ples are obvious, Psal. 114.1. When Israel came out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of a strange language, and ver. 8. He turn'd the Rock into a standing water, the flint into a fountain of waters, So, Praise the Lord all ye nations; praise him all ye people. And of this nature that Scripture is which we have before us. Yet it cannot be denyed, but that in it there is some variation, not in the words onely, but also in the sense. In these words one and the same thing is three wayes expressed. Take them first in the Translators words. 1. The chosen Captains are drowned in the Red Sea. 2. The depths have covered them. 3. They sank into the bottom as a stone. As for the first; I render it, The choise of his Captains. And the Translators themselves so turn the same word here used, , In the choise of our sepulchres, Gen. 23.6.
Nor were they very happy in rendring  Captains; who were the third sort of Governours in the kingdom. The Chald. Par. renders the word Valiant, or Mighty ones. The first in order of dignity was the King. Then , the second; such was Joseph to Pharaoh, Gen. 41. Such was Elkanah to Ahaz, 2 Chr. 28.7. marg. After him  the third. Such was Daniel, Dan. 5.29. in civil business,  (according to the Chaldee,  for ) the third Ruler in the Kingdom. In military affaires they were such as the Triarii in the Roman Army, the most strong and valiant, who bare up the weight and the greatest brunt of the battel, saith Veget. lib. 3. cap. 14. as when the Army was in danger of a rout, it is a proverbial speech, Res ad Tria∣rios redit: And therefore the Tigurin Bible renders the word here Triarii. The LXX renders the word , as here, so in divers other places, Exod. 14.7. 2 Kings 7.2. What is here turnd the Red Sea, is  Mare junci or carecti, from the Sedge and other shrubs growing in it, and neer it. So that some have thought it to be more fitly called the Reed-sea, then the Red Sea. The LXX here and elsewhere most-what renderit , the Red sea, not from the colour of the water, or sand, or any thing else there different from other Seas, as experience proves: But it was long believed to have had that name from Erythras, Erythrus, or Erythraeus, a King of the Land near unto it; so that as neighbouring countreys gave names to their Seas, so this. But when inquiry hath been made, who this Erythrus was, all his story was resolved into a fable. The truth of which is, that this Erythras was Esau, who was called Edom, from , which in the Greek is , Red, Gen. 25.25.30. which name Esau had, because he came out of his mothers womb Red. And the same was confirmed to him from his insatiable appetite after Jacobs red pottage. He and his posterity dwelt near that Sea. This antiquity hath been discovered to this later age, by a very learned man of our own nation. What is further added, the depths have covered them, and they sank, &c. The Verbs are both future, and should be rendred, The depths shall cover them, and they shall sink. The words are  and  from . But how will that suit with the history? There is no doubt but the holy Spirit here aimed at the spiritual understanding of this history. And therefore although the story of bringing the children of Israel out of Egypt, and drowning the Egyptians, be of all other most true and fa∣mous; and accordingly it is thrice testified in the Preter tense, ver. 1. and 4. Yet was it not related onely for it self, as if we should rest therein, but that we ought to look at a greater mercy of God, and a more general. Therefore we read a promise of bringing the people of God out of Egypt many ages after, Zach. 10.10.
For our better understanding of this, we must know, That the Lord now about to manifest the great work of Redemption, which he would make common unto all Nations, which is there∣fore called , a common salvation, Jude, v. 3. He was pleased to choose the Land of Canaan, as a publick Theatre, and in it, Jerusalem the midst of the world then inhabited, ac∣cording to that of the Psalm 74.12. He wrought salvation in the midst of the earth. This Jerusalem had two ill neighbours, Egypt, and Chaldea, the one Southward, the other Northward. And with one or other of these, the people of God were alwayes much afflicted, and captived first in Egypt, then in Chaldea. And out of both the Lord delivered them. This story is evident in the Scriptures. Now let us call our thoughts from abroad, and look home∣ward. In our journey towards the Jerusalem which is above, the mother of us all, we have experience of two like evil neighbours, of which the Israel of God speaks, Psal. 66.12. We have gone through the fire, and through the water, and thou hast brought us forth into a well watered land, ; so the LXX turn the word  Refreshing; such as we hope for, are called , the times of refreshing, which shall come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3.19. Egypt is a muddy watry soil. Chaldea is notorious for Ur, now cal∣led Urchoa, (as appears in Ptolomys Maps) which signifies fire; out of which Abraham came. Answerable to these two, the Jewes tell us of two kindes of Spirits, the one a dull Spirit delighting in uncleannesse, which excites and stirs up to the carnal sin; the other a subtil Spirit, which takes pleasure in, and moves unto the spiritual sin. The , the animalish or souly man, according to his living soul, is obnoxious unto both these, in respect of his concupiscible and irascible powers, whereof I shall speak more in its proper place. Eccles. 11. ult. Of these two, Egypt typified the straits of the sensual lusts and pleasures, wherein the brutish man is intangled, and captived: thus the Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fell in the slime-pits, Gen. 14.10. Of such ye read, Prov. 23.27. Gal. 5.19. In the Land of E∣gypt, say they, we sat by the flesh-pots, when we did eat to the full, Exod. 16.3. Chaldea and Babylon prefigured the more witty and lear∣ned mans slavery under spiritual wickedness in heavenly things, Ephes. 6.12. Most men are first captived by their sensual and brutish lusts; and therefore the Apostle calls them Youthful lusts, 2 Tim. 2.22. because men commonly live the life of the beast, before the life of the man. And therefore as the first captivity is in Egypt, so the first deliverance is out of Egypt. Into Egypt they went without any compulsion, and were received with feastings, saith the Wiseman, Wisd. 19.16. And so Rom. 6.19. men yield their mem∣bers
servants to iniquity. But the spiritual Pharaoh detains them in his straits (that is Egypt) as the Fowler entertains the Birds with a bait into his net; but he will not let them go, yea, not by a mighty hand, Exod. 4.19. and 6.6. and out-stretched arm; that is, the Son, who is the Arm of the Lord, Esay 40.10. who therefore is said to have brought the people out of Egypt, Jude v. 5. V. Lat. and to have overwhelmed their enemies with the Sea. This history speaks not only of those people and those times past; but comes home to us and our present times also, and declares the everlast∣ing wayes of God, and the spiritual estates of men in all ages. That of the pious Father is most true; Dum narrat gestum prodit mysterium, while the Scripture tells us an history, it reveals a my∣stery. For what the Lord did then for his people according to the flesh, was typical and representative of what he then did, and now doth, and ever will do for and in his people according to the Spirit, especially in these later dayes. And therefore the Verbs are both in the Future, The depths shall cover them: and they shall sink. For warrant of this spiritual interpretation, I desire the Rea∣der who is spiritually minded, to compare herewith, what the Prophet Micah speaks of this argument expresly, Mic. 7. per tot. Having complained in the person of the Church, and lamented the iniquity of all sorts of men, he professeth his hope and confidence in the God of his salvation. Then he recomforts himself in hope of delive∣rance, and that such, as formerly from the danger of Ogg King of Bashan, and Pharaoh King of Egypt, both together, Psal. 68.22. And both recorded by the Prophet Micah, v. 14, 15, 19. The Lord be pleased to give us his spirit of grace, that we may know the things which are freely given to us of God, comparing spiritual things with spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.12, 13. He vouchsafes to shew us wonderful things to be wrought in us according to his peoples coming out of Egypt. That he will subdue our iniquities, even the choise of the spiritual Pharaohs Triarii, His strongest and valiantest ones, even all our mighty sins, Amos 5.12. all our ruling lusts, and that he will be pleased to cast all our sins into the depth of the Sea, that we also may sing every one his part in that , that triumphant long of Moses, Exod. 15. Revel. 15.3. Thou didst blow with thy winde; the Sea covered them.Exod. 15. Ver. 10.] Since the whole story is allegorically to be expounded, as appears by what hath been said on ver. 4, 5. we ought, upon all occasions, to transfer the history to a mystical meaning, which these words hold forth. And thus what we turn — with thy winde, is  with thy spirit; so the LXX ; Thou sentest forth thy spirit. And the Chaldee Paraph. Thou didst say , with thy word.
So that Baptism is hereby signified; according to which, the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. All passed thorow the Sea (children and all, Exod. 12.37.) and were all baptized to Moses in the cloud and in the Sea. Whereby was prefigured the baptism of Christ in his person and followers. For so the Spirit of God descended upon him, and the voice from heaven testified of him, Matth. 3.16, 17. And by the same Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, 1 Cor. 12.13. and that Spirit flutters over the waters, as in the first creation, Gen. 1.2. so in the second; and makes the new creatures, when the Egyptians are drowned, Mich. 7.19. that is, the body of sin is destroyed, that hence-forth we should not serve sin, Rom. 6.6. Consider this, O ye Christian men and women, who say, ye are baptized into the Name of Christ, yet live in your sins; and flat∣ter your selves that ye shall live for ever with Christ. Know ye not, that so many of us as are baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized into his death? Rom. 6.3. If so, ought any one sinne to live in us? The Lord hath made a gracious promise, that he will have com∣passion on us, and that he will cast all our sins into the depths of the Sea, Mic. 7.19. as he cast all the Egyptians. Let us pray unto the Lord, that he will send forth his Spirit into us, whereby we may morti∣fie our sins, and so live, Rom. 8.13. For if we so die with him, we then be believe that we shall also live with him, Rom. 6.8. Then shall the truth of that which the Psalmist speaks, be fulfilled in us, Psal. 106.11. The waters covered their enemies (the Egypti∣ans) there was not one of them left. Then believed they his words, they sang his praise. Thou in thy mercy hast led forth thy people.Exod. 15. Ver. 13. Thou hast guided them in thy strength to the habitation of thy holiness.] The words are  This people, . The Translators have quite left out the demonstrative  this. The LXX read  for they so here expresse it, , This thy people. So likewise the Chald. Par. The word  is very often spoken of Israel; though very often also they be called , as Jos. 3.17. & 4.1. Zeph. 2.1. But when  a nation is opposed to the people of God, then it signifies the Gen∣tiles, as Psal. 115.2. and 126.2. And there is the like reason of  people, often spoken of the Jews; and  most what un∣derstood of the Heathen. Howbeit because the Jewes, as many Christians also, rather affect names and titles of Gods people, then the reality and being of such; and put off from themselves what names might diminish their honour, and lay them on other peo∣ple; (as they call Abimelech, though but one person, by the name , Gen. 20.4.) therefore God justly brands them with that infamous name (if there be any infamy in it,) and multiplyes it upon them for their sin, Ezech. 2.3. I send thee to  nations; because a divided and a factious people: As, for like reason, they
are spoken of in the plural number, Acts 4.27. Against thy holy childe Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, , and the peo∣ples of Israel, &c. For a disobedient people are not owned by the Lord for a people, as Deut. 32.21. They have provoked me to jealousie by that which is not God, and I will provoke them to jealousie  with those who are not a people. Who are they but all nations who walk in their own wayes? So the Apostle applies that Scripture, Rom. 10.19. and 11.11, 12. Otherwise  and  is a title honourable to the obedient people of God: And  [This] increaseth that honour which S. Paul expresseth, Acts 13.17. The God  of this people Israel. Would God that they and we, who boast our selves to be Gods people would seriously endeavour to be such; that it may be truly said of us, what the Apostle speaks, Ye are a chosen gene∣ration, a royal Priesthood, a peculiar people, that ye should shew forth the praises of him, who hath called us out of darkness to his marvellous light: who in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God, 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. But let us proceed to the later part of the verse. Thou hast guided them in thy strength to the habitation of thy holi∣ness.] The words are metaphorical, as the former; and bor∣rowed either from a Shepherd in regard of his Flock, or a Father in respect of his Childe, or a King in reference to his Subjects. All which relations suppose, or require; as love and tenderness, so likewise power and strength in the Shepherd, Father, and King, in every one toward his respective charge. And the Lord takes upon him, out of wonderful condescent, all these and other en∣deering names; of a Shepherd, Psal. 80.1. Of a Father, Deut. 32.6. Of a King, Esay 43.15. Now as the Lord shewed his mercy and love in the former part of this verse, Thou in thy mercy hast led forth this people, whom thou hast redeemed: so in the later part of this verse before us, he declares his strength; for so I would render these words, Thou hast born them in thy strength; for in this and other verses of like nature, the later part adds somewhat to the former. Since therefore in the former part of the verse Gods goodness is declared in leading forth his people; so in this la∣ter, his power and strength is manifested in bearing his weak and fee∣ble flock, children and people. For though guiding in our English, adds nothing to leading, yet  imports more then . For  signifies not onely to lead or guide, but also to bear and support in guiding or leading. And so the Chald. Par. hath here  Portâsti eum, thou hast born them. So likewise the Vulg. Lat. and Symmachus hath , thou hast carried them. Martin Luther also and Pisca∣tor,
and three Low Dutch Translations, as also five of our old English Translations have the word [carry,] but (whom ever they followed,) they misappy it to the former Verb, which belongs to the later. O Israel! know thy Shepherd, thy Father, thy King. They are all mutually winning titles of our God, and signifie his good∣ness and power in guiding us and bearing us. Whence  a Prince has his name from Bearing. And  a King is  the foundation of his people. And Kings are called , the Shepherds of their people. Such a King, such a Shep∣herd, such a Father is our God unto us, who bears us as a Father bears his childe, Deut. 1.31. O let us not abuse his love and patience to∣ward us; let not us cause him to complain, as he hath done of old; I am the Lord your holy one, the Creator of Israel and your King. I have not caused thee to serve with an Offering, &c. but thou hast made me to serve with thy sins; thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities, Esay 43.15, 23, 24. If the Lord be our King, and so patient toward us, let us suffer with him, even to the death of every sin: so shall we reign with him, 2 Tim. 2.12. If we call him Father, let us honour him, Mal. 1.6. If he be our Shepherd, let us hear his voice and follow him, John 10. So will he bear us with his strength unto the habitation of his holiness. Behold,Exod. 16. Ver. 4. I will rain bread from heaven for you; and the people shall go out, and gather a certain rate every day; that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law or no.] Our Saviours words, John 6.32.—63. are a clear Commentary on this Text, which this Translation obscures. For in these words, its evident, the Spirit or finger of God points at a mystical understanding of the Bread from heaven, when presently the Bread is called the Word: For so, what is turn'd a certain rate every day, is , Verbum dici in die suo, The Word of the day in its day. For what is more ordinary in Scripture then the Word of God to be compared to Bread? Man doth not live by Bread only, but by every Word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord, doth man live, Deut. 8.3. which our Saviour citeth Matth. 4.4. Jer. 3.15. and 15.16. Thy Words were found, and I did eat them: and thy Word was unto me the joy and rejoycing of my heart. Whence it is, that according to this Metaphor, this Lord threatens a famine of this Bread, Amos 8.11. I will send a famine in the Land; not a famine of Bread, nor a thirst for Water, but for hearing the Words of the Lord, &c. Beside, the word , however it be of a very large significa∣tion, yet it reacheth not to what is imposed upon it here, a cer∣tain rate; nor does the margent help it, the portion of a day.
Nor will the end which the Lord here aims at, appear from that Translation; which yet will be evident, if we render here  the Word. The Word of the day in its day, that I may prove them whether they will walk in my law or no. Which, the speech of Job, Chap. 23.12. makes manifest, Neither have I gone back from the Commandement of his lips: I have esteemed the words of his mouth more then my appointed portion. By the words thus ren∣dred we also understand our daily portion of heavenly food; the word of the day in its day, is our daily bread, which we are taught to pray for, Give us this day our daily Bread. See more of this on Verse 16. This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded.Exod. 16. Ver. 16.] The word is ; which Arias Montanus and Vatablus turn, Hoc est verbum, This is the Word. So the Vulg. Lat. Hic est Sermo: and the Greek , and the Chald. Par.  the Word. Moses speaks of Manna, and calls it the Word, or that Word; and in the verse before, he calls it , that Bread. S. Paul warrants this translation, when speaking of the same Manna he calls it , spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10.3. Of this, the true He∣brews must gather every man according to his eating, an Omer for every man, according to the number of their souls. An Omer is Cibus diurnus hominis, the daily bread which every soul prayes for, and feeds upon: even the bread of God which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the word. So our Lord having interpreted the Manna here spoken of, John 6.33. &c. they who heard him, said, (and let us say with them,) Lord evermore give us this Bread! Thou shalt have no other Gods before me.Exod. 20. Ver. 3.] The word  is here taken equivocally for that which is the true God blessed for ever; and for that which the imagination feigns to it self to be a god, and ascribes a Deity, or something proper unto the true God, thereunto; as fear, faith, hope, love, &c. What the man feigns to be a god, is either some created thing, or a mans own meer imagination; it matters not whether. For be it a creature, or be it a fiction and invention of man, the deity of that creature and fiction, wholly depends upon the man, and is indeed an Idol; so that unless the man think it to be a god, and have it for a god, Animo non cogitante, if he think it not so, it is no god. According to which sense, the Apostle saith, An idol is nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8.4. The word  which by our Translators is turnd other, is ren∣dred by the LXX sometime , one of two; sometime , alius, one of many; sometime , alienus, strange, and belonging to another. Here they render  other gods.
But whereas the proper signification of  is Posterior fuit, tardavit, moram fecit, to be after, to delay, to be slow. Since also the Lord the only true God justly claims all priority, all precedency, Esay 41.4. I the Lord the first; and 43.10. Before me there was no god formed, neither shall there be after me. And 44.6. I am the first, and I am the last, and beside me, there is no god. And the like, chap. 48.12. Revel. 1.8. and 22.13. Since also all the reputed other gods are noted in Scripture for their novelty; as Deut. 32.17. They sacrificed to Devils, not to God, to gods whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, Judges 5.8. They chose new gods, &c. Whence they are called gods made with hands, molten gods, gods of silver and gold, &c. I conceive  properly to be rendred, after-gods, though I deny not but that they may be turn'd other also. What is further added, , Thou shalt have no after-gods before my face, is diversly rendred, as Coram me, before me; so Hierom, Munster, the French, and Spanish Translations, , beside me, so the LXX, and the Chald. Par. Martin Luther, Piscator, and the Low Dutch Translations, as also Castellio. But is any thing more clear in the Hebrew then that  signifies Super facies meas, upon my face? so Arias Montanus turns the words. Nor do I doubt but others would so have rendred them, but that they thought fit rather to give the sense then the proper meaning of the words; which seems somewhat harsh. But if we consider what is the face of God, and how the after-gods may be said to be upon Gods face, the text will be clear to all who are spiritually minded. And what is the face of God but his Christ? Exod. 33.14, 15. Moses desires to see Gods face, that I may see or know thee, as a man is known by his face. And the Lord said, , My face shall go before thee; which the Chald. Par. turns  my Shekinah the in-dwelling Deity, which is the Christ of God, shall go before thee. Thus what we have, Mal. 3.1. before me, is, before thy face, Matth. 11.10. And what do all the after-gods, but cover and obscure the face of God, even his Christ in us? What other was Ashtoreth, 1 Kings 11.5? Is not that Goddess of the Zidonians worshipped as much at this day, as ever? What is Ashtereth but wealth and riches? And what else is Chemosh, the abomination of Moab, viz. the god of junketing after suppers of old, what is he but  surfetting and drunkenness, Rom. 13.13. of later times worshipped day and night? Ye read of Tammuz, that is, Adonis, for which the women wept, Ezech. 8.14. which is no other then , pleasure and voluptu∣ousness. The many Baalim which the Church confesses, Esay 26.13. what are they but the Lording and ruling lusts, which have had dominion over us? What is the inward Antichrist, that after-god, but the contrary unction, which teacheth lies, and opposeth the
true Anointing, the Christ of God, which leadeth into all truth, John 16.13. So that the Lord complains, that these false gods, and such as these, have made a separation between us and our God; and our iniquities have hidden his face from us, Esay 59.2. And well may he complain, when he is pressed under them as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheavs, Amos 2.13. When he is troden un∣der foot, Hebr. 10.29. Let us now look into our selves impartially, who ever we are, whether none of these after-gods be in us; whether they be not upon the Lords face, and hide it from us, yea or no. Surely that, what ever it is, whereon the heart is fastened, and whereunto it cleaves without the Lord and his righteousness, that is an after-god; because the Lord alone is to be loved with all our heart, and with all our soul, and with all our strength, and with all our minde, Luke 10.27. It is much to be feared, that some of these after-gods interpose between us and the only true God, who is the first and the last; since many there have been who have set up their Idols in their hearts, and put the stumbling-block of their iniquity before their face, yet have presented themselves before the face of God, Ezech. 14.1.2. and the like we read, Hos. 7.1, 2. If therefore any of these after-gods be found in us, that good God who is the first, and the last, he hath prescribed us a method, what in this case we ought to do, and hath promised what he will do for us, 2 Chron. 7.14. If my people, upon whom my Name is called, shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their evil wayes; then will I hear from hea∣ven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land. Then will the Lord utterly abolish all the after-gods, and consume An∣tichrist with the Spirit of his mouth, and destroy him with the brightness of his coming, 2 Thess. 2.8. Then shall we behold his face in righteousness: we shall be satisfied in the awaking of his image, Psal. 17.15. Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain:Exod. 20. Ver. 7. For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his Name in vain.] The Name of the Lord is generally understood to be either God him∣self, as Deut. 28.58. This glorious and fearful Name, The Lord thy God. Or what other appellation, the Lord hath given to him∣self in Scripture, Exod. 33.19. and 34.5, 6, 7. Psal. 9.10. What here is rendred, Thou shalt not take the Name, is , which may be better turn'd, Thou shalt not bear the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. For , though a very large word, yet generally signifies either to lift up somewhat, as a Banner, Esay 5.26. So to take Gods Name: as here, & Deut. 5.11. having taken up, to bear or carry: so to bear the Name of God and Christ. Thus the Lord saith of Paul, he is a chosen vessel to bear my Name, Acts 9.15. 1 Cor. 6.20. Glorificate & portate Deum in corpore vestro,
& in spiritu vestro: so the Vulg. Lat. Glorifie and bear God, in your body, and in your Spirit: and so we shall bear the image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.49. Thus Arias Montanus renders the words before us, Non feres Nomen Domini, &c. Thou shalt not bear the Name of the Lord, &c. This bearing of Gods. Name must not be in vain, : which is commonly conceived to be the naming of God, whe∣ther in swearing, or otherwise, without necessity, without due reverence, without just cause, lightly, slightly, vainly. So the LXX , which S. Cyprian renders in vanum, vainly; and Aquila , rashly. All which is true; but far from the full meaning of these words. For , God is his Name, and his Name is himself, as hath been shewen. And to bear that Name  is not only vainly and rashly, but also falsly, lyingly, and contrarily to the truth. For  rendred [in vain] by our Translators in the third Commandement, is turned by them [false] in the ninth Chmmandement, which Exod. 20.16. is  false, or lying, Exod. 20.7. Deut. 5.20. So that what is commonly understood by taking Gods Name in vain, a light, rash, and unadvised kinde of swearing, it is much more; and the signification of , which our Translators render, in vain, is to be inlarged to falshood and lying; and so to perjury, false swearing, and forswearing. Yea, the Greek Inter∣preters very often render  by  false and lying, Ezech. 12.24. a vain vision  by  a lying vision; and the like, Chap. 13.6, 7, 8, 9. Hos. 12.9. and often elsewhere. Yea, where the Lord forbids the bearing of his Name falsly, we are to understand all false pretences and shews of goodness, pie∣ty, God, and godliness, all false, feined, and counterfeit holiness, (which especially in these dregs of time have been practised, ac∣cording to that damnable art of Seeming) to be prohibited in the third Commandement. And this the Sanction and establish∣ment of this law, proves evidently by the following, just, and proper penalty. For what is further added, that the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse, is in the Hebrew , that is, Non mundificabit he will not cleanse him who bears his Name falsly or vain∣ly. For whereas this Commandement is directed against hypo∣crisie; and the end of the Law and Gospel is to render men pure as God is pure, holy as he is holy, the Lord here threatneth, that he will not purifie him, who pretends Gods Name and being, in shews of holi∣nesse, but hath not that purity nor desires to have it, that he will not purifie or cleanse such an one. A due reward of hypocrites, who do all they do, by the art of seeming holy; and thereunto in∣tend all their endeavours,Mat. 23.5. do all their works to be seen of men; and therein rest themselves, as if to be reputed pure and holy were in-indeed to be the people of Gods holiness; its just with the most holy
God not to purge and cleanse these from their sins, since they desire not real and true purity; and withal to render unto them, what they desire, a reputation and esteem among men as if they were pure and holy. Such is that generation, Prov. 30.12. pure in their own eyes, yet not cleansed from their own dung. And of such our Lord saith, They have their Reward. O that all the people of God well considered this! That the proper Name of God,  signifies Being, and he requires of all who bear his Name, Being, sincerity, reality and truth: That his Name is holy, and therefore he requires of us like holiness; and that we purge our selves from all pollution of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of God. So will he purifie us and cleanse us from all our iniquities, 1 John 1.9. and we shall be pure as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. and as he is holy, so shall we be holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Peter 1.15. The Lord strengthen us hereunto! Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.Exod. 20. Ver. 16.] These words  and verbatim sound thus; Thou shalt not answer [] or speak against thy friend, neighbour, or companion, a false witness, or a witness of falshood. Where by witness, we understand not only the testimony or thing witnessed, as the Chaldy Paraphrast and the LXX here render it; but also the person who bears witness, as Levit. 5.1. If a soul sin and hear the voice of swearing, and is  a witness. So Deut. 19.18. If  the witness be a false witness, &c. where the words following are the same with these before us of the ninth Commandement, If the  witness  mendatium respondit in fratrem suum, hath testified or answered fals∣hood against his brother. So that  is here personally understood and in rectio; thus: Thou a witness of falshood, or a false witness, shalt not answer against thy neighbour; because witnesses were wont to be adjured, and to answer to interrogatories. But the Law is spiritual. Christ is God Amen, Esay 65.16. The Truth, and he that is true, 1 John 5.20. And we who believe and love him, are in him who is true, and he in us, and he speaks in us and witnesseth unto us what is true: and we answer by our assent and consent unto him, the true and faithful witness, Rev. 1.5. and from that testimony of truth, we speak the truth to our neighbour. And so our yea is yea: if we say yea, it answers unto the witness in our minde and heart: and so  and  (the minde and speech) anagrammati∣cally answer one to the other. It answers also to the thing testi∣fied, Pronuntiat uti res est; and so likewise our yea is yea. And so on the contrary our nay is nay. O how far is the present falsly called Christendom, from that which all pretend unto, the Christian life, conversation, and com∣munication! Doth not the Prophet foretel what manner of peo∣ple
we ought to be? The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies; nor shall a deceitfull tongue be found in their mouth, Zeph. 3.13. Where shall we finde this necessary chara∣cter of a Christian? Take away lying, take away a deceitful tongue, and take away withal many a mans trade and his whole live∣lyhood, who get their treasure by a lying tongue, Prov. 21.8. The just man lives by his faith; these live by deceit and fraud. But I hope there is such a remnant in the world, of whom the world is not worthy. Such as the Lord owns for his people, Children that will not lie; upon which terms he is their Saviour, Esay 63.8. Such as the sons of Jacob said they were, True men, Gen. 42.11. O that we all, who call our selves Christians, were of that number! For there is a word which is clothed about with death: God grant it be not found in the heritage of Jacob! Ecclus. 23.12. It is the word of Belial, Psal. 101.3. that is, the Devil and Satan, (according to the Syrlac, 2 Cor. 6.15.) He is a lyar, &c. and the fa∣ther of lyes and lyars, John 8.44. and unto these he dictates and teacheth his lyes, and they become his lying children, by answering and consenting thereunto, and not hearing the Law of the Lord, Esay 30.9. And out of that evil treasure of their heart, they speak lyes unto their neighbour. But we have not so learned Christ, if we have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus, that we put off, concerning the former conversation the old man which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of our minds, and that we put on the new man, who, after God, is created in righteousness and true boliness. There∣fore putting away lying, let every one speak truth to his neighbour. Lord deliver our souls from lying lips and a deceitful tongue! If the thief be not found,Exod. 22. Ver. 8. then the master of the house shall be brought unto the Judges, to see whether he have put his hand unto his neigh∣bours goods.] The sense of this Scripture is obscured by a mistake of our. Translators, who have added to the text a superfluous supplement [to see.] For they well knew, (how ever they neg∣lected it,) that  is not only a conditional and interrogative, which is wont to be expressed by Si and an, if and whether, as they here turn it: But its also a particle of swearing, affirmatively, if alone, Gen. 26.28. Let us make a covenant with thee, , if thou wilt hurt us, that is, as the LXX render it, that thou wilt do us no hurt. If  be added, negatively, 1 Kings 1.51. Adonijah saith, Let King Solomon swear to me this day,  that he will not slay his servant with the sword. So the Chald. Par.  and the LXX,  that he will not kill me. Thus our Lord, Matth. 16.4. A signe, saith he, shall not be given unto it; which words
S. Mark reports thus with an oath; : Verily I say unto you, if a sign be given to this generation; which the Syriac expresseth, verily I say unto you, that a signe shall not be given unto this generation: and so our Translators rightly turn the words there, there shall no signe be given to this generation. So the servants of the King of Syria swear  that they shall prevail over Israel, 1 Kings 20.23. and other like examples we may adde, as that more no∣table, Psal. 95.11. To whom I sweare in my wrath, , If they shall enter into my rest; that is, that they shall not enter into my rest; as the Apostle explains those words, Hebr. 3.11. compared with ver. 18. , that they shall not enter. So in this place before us,  is a note of swearing; and the Scripture should be so expressed; The Master of the house shall be brought unto the Judges, That he hath not put his hand to his neighbours goods. If this seem harsh, we must know, that an oath is wont to be un∣derstood by an Elipsis and defective speech, as in the former ex∣amples may appear. But if any supplement here be thought needful, it should not be that or any such as that which our Tran∣slators adde, [to see,] but rather [to swear,] for so the Greek In∣terpreters here have expressed the words; the Master of the house shall come  before God (so they render , which we more rightly turn Judges) , and shall swear that he hath not dealt wic∣kedly in all the pledge of his neighbour, So Hierom also, & jura∣bit, and he shall swear. The Chald. Par. retains the genuine defect common with the Hebrew, , Si non. The Syriac also, and the Arabic, and Samaritan translations express the words in form of an oath. Vatablus also and the Tigurin Bible, and Castellie, as also Tremellius, who hath this supplement, Jura∣mento se purgaturus, he shall be brought before the Judges, to purge himself by an Oath, &c. The like supplement hath the French, the Italian, and Spanish Translations, and two Low Dutch. The other was mislead by Luthers translation, as also Munster and Piscator, and one of our old English translations, which our last followed. But Coverdale and all the rest under∣stood the words as an Oath. And it is much that ours were so mistaken: For, in the 11 verse following we have the very same words with those before us in the form of an oath, as they there translate them. Whence we may take notice, with what fear and reverence we ought to take an Oath; for the Scripture here prescribes a de∣fective speech in expressing an Oath, as they who speak, out of fear, are wont in speaking to lose some word or other. And the Scripture omits especially such words as bode evil, as execrati∣ons and curses, which are commonly understood in Oathes. And
it may teach us in like case to forbear all imprecations and evil wishes to our selves or others, and to suppresse them under an Euphemismus or to use some circumlocution rather then plainly to pronounce them. Thus much even the Heathen may teach us, as in that known broken speech, Quos ego, sed motos praestat compo∣nere fluctûs. How much more may we learn this of David? Psal. 132.3. , If I come into the tabernacle of my house, and the like, ver. 4. that is, surely I will not, &c. How much yet more may we learn this of God himself? who swearing useth an ab∣rupt and imperfect speech which is , an antece∣dent without a consequent, If they enter into my rest, Psal. 95.11. what remains is understood. Let us be followers of God and be taught by him, as his dear children, Ephes. 5.1. and forbear swear∣ing, and cursing, (yea, and lying, and stealing, and committing adul∣tery, &c.) for which the land mourneth, Hos. 4.2, 3. Therefore now put off thine ornaments from thee,Exod. 33. Ver. 6. that I may know, what to do unto thee. And the children of Israel stript themselves of their ornaments by the Mount Horeb.] The people had not put on their ornaments, as appears ver. 4. which is spoken by anticipa∣tion: otherwise the Lord had not here commanded them to put them off. The words contain the Lords precept with the end of it, and the peoples obedience thereunto. But whether that obe∣dience be set forth by the place where it was performed, or from the cause moving them thereunto, there's the question. For  does not signifie [by] as it is here turn'd, but [from,] as it is rendred in the Chald. Par. , in the Samaritan, the Syriac, and Arabic Versions; also in the Vulg. Lat. A Monte; LXX , from the Mount Horeb. So Castellio and one Low Dutch Bible. Vatablus and Munster render the word juxta and ad; yet they confesse, that its à Monte in the Hebrew. Tremellius and Diodati adde a supplement far from the Mount Horeb. Another tells us that here is Enallage praepositionis, an enallage or change of one preposition for another, viz. à for ad or juxta, from for at or nigh: But if we admit of such changes, we shall soon elude and lose that sense which the Spirit of God aims at. Only one of our old English translations hath from, but with an unreasonable supplement, viz. After Moses came down from the Mount Horeb. The rest of our translations have by, or under or before, as others have at or neer. Its evident from this variety of translations, and all differing among themselves, and from the Original, that there must be something amiss: they saw not how the word would yield a good meaning if rendred from. But suppose, that  be turn'd from, as from the Mount Horeb, what sense shall we make of it? The Mount (whether Sinai or
Horeb, two tops of the same Mountain, where the Law was gi∣ven) signifies the Law there given by a Metonymie, Hebr. 12.18. Ye are not come to the Mount that could be touched, that is the Law given in Mount Sinai or Horeb, opposed to the Gospel figured by Mount Sion, ver. 22. whence it went forth, Esay 2.3. Com∣pare also Gal. 4.21. with 24. As for , it doth not only note a distance, but implies a cause, as Hos. 12.9. I am the Lord thy God  from the land of Egypt; that is, from my bringing thee out of the Land of Egypt. It is the Lords argu∣ment whereby he claims his people as peculiar to himself, Exod. 20.2, 3. And that indeed it is so to be understood here, the Pro∣phet more fully expresseth himself, Hos. 13.4. I am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt, and thou shalt not know a god be∣sides me. Let us then lay these together. Moses saith that from the Mount Horeb, or the Law, the people stript themselves of their ornament, (the word  is singular.) For from the work of the Law upon men, they begin to put off their own ornament, their own righteousness, their own holiness. The people had adorned themselves as a Bride, to enter covenant of mariage with their God, Exod. 19.10, 11. Which done, their first national sin was spiritual adultery with the Egyptian Apis an Ox (, the most powerful god to the Egyptians, saith Aelian,) or a Calf, which they made in Horeb, and worshipped the molten Image, Exod. 32.4, 5, 6. Psal. 106.19. Whence, by me∣taphor taken from an Ox, which being head-strong shakes off the yoke, the Lord first calls this people stiff-necked, from their wor∣ship of the Egyptian Ox, Exod. 32.9. and 33.3. And often he af∣terward mindes them of this idolatry, by calling them stiff-necked, and by metaphor from an unthankful Calf kicking the Dam, Je∣shurun waxed fat and kicked, Deut. 32.15. According to a like metaphor, Plato said that his ingrateful Scholar Aristotle was  a Fole. Notwithstanding this great sin, the people were yet in their Holyday-clothes, Tanquam re bene gestâ, as if they had kept a Feast to the Lord; as Aaron caused it to be proclaimed, Exod. 32.5. And the Priests oftentimes have made Calves, even of them∣selves, to please the people, Populo ut placerent, quas fecissent fabu∣las. And at this day too many think, by their forms of godli∣ness, their bravery of Religion, to serve God and Apis, God and Mammon, God and the Devil and their own lusts together; as the Apostle makes application of this example, Be not ye Idola∣ters, as were some of them, as it is written, The people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play, 1 Cor. 10.7. In this case the Lord, though he knowes all his own works and ours, and the events of them, yet he would seem not to know
what to do with such a people, but utterly to consume them. Unless from the work of the Law upon them, they strip them∣selves of their ornament, their own righteousness which they have taken on. Consider this, who ever thou art, spiritually minded Reader! Omnia in figura contingebant illis, all things befel that people in figure, and were written for our admonition, especially this sto∣ry, as hath been shewen. Would we that the good spirit of our God should be with us, and destroy our spiritual enemies, and lead us into the land of Righteousness? (which was in figure here mainly desired, as appears v. 3.4.12.—16.) Let us then not pride our selves in a robe of righteousness, or pompous ostenta∣tion of holiness, which we have either chosen and clothed our selves withal, or such as hath been imposed upon us by others, while our Idols are yet erected and set up in our hearts; lest the Lord consume us, ver. 5. But knowing the terrour of the Lord, let us begin from Mount Horeb, even from the holy Law, and the ho∣ly fear wrought in us thereby, Exod. 20.20. to devest our selves of our false righteousness, whereof the Spirit at this day reproves the World, John 16.10. And let us lay our selves low before our God and put on Sackcloth, that is, be clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. See the good effect of such humiliation from legal terrour, in that loose debaucht Heathen King of Nineveh, and how it won upon his favour: He arose from his Throne and laid his robe from him, and covered him with Sackcloth, & sat in Ashes, Jonah 3.8. See it in a foolish King Rehoboam and his people, 2 Chron. 12.7. See it in an idolatrous and a bloody King Ahab, 1 Kings 21.29. the good God spared them all. And if thou be∣gin from Mount Horeb, from the work of the Law humbling thee, and put off the rags of thine imaginary righteousness, thou shalt see the like effect in thy self. Let us hear S. Peters counsel; Hum∣ble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time. So will he be with us, and go with us, and sub∣due our enemies in us; and his good Spirit will lead us into the land of righteousness. O that this were come to pass in every one of our souls! Thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and the spoons thereof.] It is true,Exod. 25. Ver. 19. that , in the latitude of it, may signifie a Spoon, as from  which signifies what is crooked or hollow; and so Pag∣nin here renders the word Coclearia, Spoons. As also Numb. 7.14. the Princes of Israel offered , which our Translators turn Spoons: and Jer. 52.18, 19. Whether the word be rightly rendred or not, will appear, if we enquire, to what end and use these Spoons were made: sure∣ly
to hold the Frankincense which was to be put upon the Table of Shew-bread, as appears Levit. 24.7. And therefore everyone of the twelve Princes offered his Spoon full of incense. This can∣not be the meaning of  in these and other places, as may appear by these reasons. 1. A Spoon was no proper vessel for the Incense, but that which the Latins, saith Festus, call Acerra, vel dicunt arculam esse thurariam, scilicet ubi thus reponehant; a little vessel wherein they put Franckincense. Vatablus having rendred the word Coclearia, Spoons, he explains it by thuriala, in quibus ponebatur thus, Boxes wherein Incense was put. So likewise the old Greek Glossary hath  for , acerra, thuribulum, a receptacle for Franckincense. 2. Moses having mentioned , the vessels for Franckin∣cense, he addes the covers thereof. Now it is not likely, surely it is not usual that Spoons have their covers made for them. If they be not Spoons, what are they? The Italian hath (as also Hieron) cups, but in the margent incense-vessels. And the French Bible having Spoons in the Tet, explains the word by vessels of incense, in the margent. Piscator turns  Ranchpfenlin, which he explains A vessel wherein men put incense. As for an En∣glish word to answer to , its easier to shew what they are not then properly and in one English word, what they are. We may, till we can express the word better, be content with In∣cense-vessels. The Lord hath his Table in the Holy, and hath furnished it richly and plenteously with dishes of shew-bread, the figure of the living bread, or, the bread which is the living Word that came down from heaven, John 6.32, 33. and with bowls for wine, that we may drink into one spirit, 1 Cor. 12, 13. with Incense-vessels also; that partaking of the plenteousness of Gods house, and so shewing forth the death of the Lord Jesus, the incense of our prayer may, with∣out seeking applause of men, Matth. 6.5. or wandring of the minde, by right and single intention, be directed unto God, un∣til Christ come to be our life, 2 Cor. 11.26. For therefore we alwayes bear about in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be made manifest in our body. For we who live are alway delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the life also of Jesus may ap∣pear in our mortal flesh. The Lord vouchsafe so great grace unto every one of our souls!
Keeping mercy for thousands,Exod. 34. Ver. 7. forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin.] The words contain a part of Gods Name revealed unto Moses. The first word  hath the first letter extraordinary great; whereby the Lord shews wherein and in whom he shews mercy; viz. in the  in that springet, that sprout of righteous∣ness, by whom  he saveth us. Of whom the Prophet speaks, Esay 11.1. There shall come forth a Rod out of Stem of the Jesse, & a Shoot  (wch is ill turnd by our Translators a Branch: Do we call that a Branch which growes out of the Root of a Tree, or rather a Shoot or Sprout?) shall grow out of his roots; that is Christ, as the Chald. Par. turns it. Behold  a King shall come forth of the sons of Jesse , and Christ shall be anointed of his sons sons. What is here rendred [Forgiving,] is , that is, properly 1. Bearing, and 2. Bearing away. 1. Bearing; So the Prophet Esay. 53.12.  bare the sins of many: As indeed he doth in us, and that with great patience and long-suffering, saith the Apostle, 2 Peter 3.9. , the Lord is long-suffering toward us. 2.  signifies also bearing away. So Vatablus confesseth in his marginal notes, that it is in the Hebrew, Auferens, though he puts Condonans in the text. Hierom also hath Aufers, thou takest away. So likewise the French Bible, and the Spanish. Munster also, and one Low Dutch translation. And so the LXX render the words,  taking away sins and iniquities. And the LXX translation is constant herein. For where Moses be∣seecheth God to make good this his Name unto his people, Num. 14.17, 18. the same words are repeated both in the Hebrew and in the LXX. And great reason there is for this translation. For it is more glorious unto God to take away sin, then only to forgive it; both in regard of the act: because to cleanse is a greater work then to pardon only, 1 John 1.9. He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all our unrighteousness. And also in re∣gard of the Agent. For it is God alone who can take away sin, whereas a man can forgive sin against himself, and is bound so to do, Matth. 6.14, 15. and 18.32, 33. Mark 11.25, 26. Besides, Forgiveness of sin doth not enter us into eternal life; but the taking of it away, and cleansing us from it, Hos. 14.2. Take away iniquity, and receive us graciously: The former must be done before the later. Otherwise there should some unclean thing en∣ter into the holy City; which is everlastingly excluded, Rev. 21.27. Consider these reasons well, who ever thou art; for they are of moment and of nearest concernment to thine immortal soul, that it be cleansed from all pollution.
Consider also who bears thy sins in thee, and would bear them away from thee, didst thou not hold them fast, and refuse to part with them, Jer. 8.5. Take heed that thou abuse not this Name of God so full of clemency, goodness, and long-suffering remember, Laesa patientia fit furor, patience overcharg'd becomes fury. Thou art now under the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, R. 1.9. And thou hast long known the meekness and gentleness of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.1. Beware of their resolution, who harden themselves against him, that they may know his meekness, and prove his pati∣ence, Wisd, 2.19. lest that come to pass unto thee, which befals all such as neglect the present pretious and blessed opportunity of grace offered them, lest thou abuse the patience and meekness of the Lamb, and be made sensible, when it will be too late to pre∣vent it, and be forced to feel the wrath of the Lamb, Revel. 6.15, 16, 17. Take notice also, as of this part of Gods Name, that be bears and bears away iniquity, transgression, and sin; so of that other part of his Name also, which next followes, that he will by no means cleanse the guilty, that he will visit the iniquity of the fa∣thers upon the children to the third and fourth generation, Learn also to pray not only for pardon and forgiveness of sin, (while yet thou livest in sin, and thinkest it impossible to live otherwise) but also for the purifying and cleansing of thy sin. So the Prophet instructs Israel to pray; O Israel, return unto the Lord; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity. Take with you words; turn to the Lord, say unto him, , Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, &c. Hos. 14.1. &c. So will the good God heal our backsliding and love us freely, and his anger shall be turned away from us; and he will make good his Name of grace unto us, and the Lamb of God shall bear and take away all our sins, O that that were come to pass!
Leviticus. IF his offering be a burnt Sacrifice of the herd,Levit. 1. Ver. 3. let him offer a male without blemish, he shall offer it of his own voluntary will, &c.] I deny not but what is here turn'd, without blemish, answers to  in the LXX. But since the Hebrew  here used signifies not only privatively, without blemish, but positively also perfect, and having all inward and outward accomplishments without defect, without redundancy. Since also  (whence ,) is from , Macula, a spot or blemish; whereas no blemish or spot in the skin of the beast to be sacrificed, made it un∣fit for the service, but some other default or superfluity, such as we finde, Levit. 22.22. Lastly, since Christ himself was hereby ty∣pified, according to Hebr. 9.13, 14. The Translators might have afforded a type of Christ, this epithet of perfect, though they hard∣ly afford it, unto any of those who are Christs, without some al∣lay or other in the margent. What is here rendred, of his own voluntary will, is , which may be as well, for his favour, that is, for the obtaining favour to himself from the Lord. For the office may be referred as well to the Lord, to whom the burnt Sacrifice is offered, as to the person who offereth it. He shall offer it for grace or favour to himself from the Lord. And accordingly the Lord makes pro∣mise of acceptance, verse 4. On the contrary, the Prophet tells the Jews in the same expression, Your whole burnt-offerings  are not to acceptation, Jer. 6.20. This hath been the most ancient translation of this Scripture. So the LXX , He shall bring it acceptable. So the Chald. Par. the Syriac, Arabic, and Samaritan versions: the Vulg. Lat. Mar∣tin Luther, three Low Dutch translations, the Tigurin Bible, and Castellio, and of our old English, Coverdale and another. And to this I rather encline; because the whole burnt Sacrifice offered to the honour of God, prefigured the body of sin to be destroyed; and that service accepted through Jesus Christ, of the Lord. But because the Lord loves a cheerful giver, saith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 9.7. I dare not reject that other translation. Yea, why may we not, according to that admirable fulness of the holy Word, admit of both? Namely so that the mortifying Spirit of God excites the Good will of him who offereth  according to his
own will; that the Son (through whom we offer up all our Sacrifi∣ces, Hebr. 13.15.) meets him who offers willingly. That the Father, through the mediation of the Son, accepts of him who so willingly offereth, and his offering , to his grace and savour. Thus is the service of God pourtrayed in the ceremonies of the Old Testament, especially in this mystical Book ½ and lively represented in the New. Since the Lord promiseth so gracious acceptation, let us be en∣couraged willingly to come, and bring our whole burnt offering [the dally mortification of our sin] through the mediation of the High Priest; so shall we and our Oblation finde acceptance in the Beloved, Ephes. 1.6. If thy oblation be a meat offering baken in a pan,Levit. 2. Ver. 5. it shall be of fine flower unleavened, mingled with oyl.] Its much doubted, what  is; whether a Pan, as its here turn'd, or a flat plate, or a slice, as it is in the margent, or a Platter, or a Gridiron. For all these have their Authors: and we are left to conjecture, what it is, or which of all these it is: or whether none of all these. I know, all, or most Expositors have herein followed the judg∣ment of a learned Jew. Howbeit, since in doubtful things, every man hath liberty to conjecture, I believe, that this vessel was nei∣ther slice, nor flat plate, much Iess a Gridiron; but rather a ba∣king; or boyling, or Frying-pan. My reasons are 1. From the original of the word , which, according to the most, is  to hide; so that it seemes a vessel of some depth; wherein the meat-offering was to be hidden. But whereas some conceive, that the word  is from , which we read, 1 Chron. 23.29. We must 2. Further en∣quire concerning the use of this vessel; which was, that therein the meat-offering was to be baked, or boyled, or fryed. Now since we read, Levit. 6.14, 15. that the meat-offering was thus offered; the Priest shall take of it, his handful of the flowre of the meat-of∣fering (and then is added,) and of the oyl thereof, its apparent; that the vessel wherein it was boyled, or baked, or fryed, could not be a smooth plate or stice, much less a Gridiron; since such it must be, that must hold the oyl as well as the meat-offering; which there∣fore could be no other then some hollow pot or baking, or boyling, or Prying-pan. Hierom renders the word by Sartago a Frying-pan. So Pagnin, Vatablus, Munster, Tremellius, and the Tigurin Bible. And whereas verse 7, we read o a meat-offering in a Frying-pan; Hierom, and the other Latin Translators there have Frix∣orium, which differs from Sartago.
But what is this to us? The  or meat-offering is rendred by the LXX sometime  a Sacrifice; which is here used, sometime  a gift, as Gen. 4.4. but that is most-what used for gifts given by Subjects to their Princes, as 1 Kings 4.21. and elsewhere: sometime , an Oblation, as Psal. 40.6. This gift is offered unto God either by Christ himself, or by those who are Christs. 1. Christ himself gave himself unto God , an Oblation and Sacrifice unto God (both which words answer to  the meat-offering) Ephes. 5.2. and thereby caused the legal Sacrifice and Oblation (prefiguring him) to cease, Dan. 9.27. 2. In vertue of Christs Sacrifice and Oblation, they who are Christs, offer up Sacrifices and Oblations unto God; ei∣ther immediately, as their prayers, so Psal. 141.2. Let my prayer be directed unto thee as the incense, and the lifting up of mine hands as the Evening Sacrifice. Or mediately when men do good works unto men, which God accepteth as done unto himself, Phil. 4.18. Hebr. 13.15. Yea, the converted Gentiles, as the Prophet foretold, Esay 66.20. were to be offered up as a meat-offering in a clean vessel, which the Apostle, as the Priest, offered up, Rom. 15.16. But whereof did the meat-offering consist? Surely of fine flowre, as appears, Levit. 2.1. The flowre of that wheat, which fell into the ground and died, and brings forth much fruit, John 12.24. which our Lord understood of himself, and so decipher'd himself unto the Greeks who came to Jesus, ver. 20.21. They came to see his person, and he shews the mystery of himself, that he is the increase of God growing up in us; even the pretious fruit of the earth, James 5.7, 8. which must be grownd or beaten, so that the husk and bran must be purged from it. For so Christ growes up in us, according to the flesh and letter, until we have been dead with him and risen with him; we then attain unto some maturity and ripe∣ness; when, as unto the flesh, he disappears, and we then begin to know him according to the Spirit, 2 Cor. 5.17. and become new creatures. Upon this unleavened, sincere, fine flowre, the oyl is powred, Levit. 2.1. That oyl is a figure of the holy Spirit and love of God, that perfect gift which descends from the Father of lights, James 1. For when Truth thus springs out of the earth, Righteousness looks down from heaven. Psal. 85.11. This meat-offering must have Frankin∣cense upon it, even the incense of our prayers, Psal. 141.2. This meat-offering, no doubt, is a pretious gift; and it requires a clean vessel, which may hold it, even a pure and clean heart, Esay 66.20. The Lord is good unto such an Israel, Psal. 73.1. who are of a clean heart. Such as these shall see God, Mat. 5.8. Such a meat-offering, such a clean vessel, with all our persons, de∣votions, and prayers, shall be accepted of God being sanctified by the holy Ghost, Rom. 15.16.
If a soul shall sin through ignorance against any of the Commande∣ments of the Lord (concerning things which ought not to be done,Levit. 4. Ver. 2.13.22.) and shall do against any of them.] I have three exceptions against the translation of this second verse; whereof two are common to verse 13. & 22. 1. What is here rendred, against any of the Com∣mandements, is,  Ex omnibus praeceptis, of all the Commandements. 2. What they put in a Parenthesis, concern∣ing things which ought not to be done, is, , which should not be done. 3. What is turn'd, against any of them, is, , from one of them. 1. What a difference is here in the first? , among all the significations reckoned up by Grammarians, doth not signifie, against: nor doth  signifie any, unless joyn'd with a negative, as Exod. 20.10. , Non facies omne opus, i.e. ullum; that is, (as our Translators turn that place well,) thou shalt not do any work. 2. What reason had they to put those words in a Parenthesis? concerning things which ought not to be done. And what need was there of that supplement? concerning things. I suppose, (to make the best of it,) it might be this pious consideration; whereas these words [the Commandements of the Lord,] come immediately before, if these words, [which ought not to be done,] shold so follow, there might be an ill inference made, viz. That some of the Commandements ought not to be done. But they well knew, that as  signifies, as well a negative precept, as an affirma∣tive, as the Rabbins call  a precept-do, an affirma∣tive precept; and  a precept-thou shall not do, a negative precept; so that , a precept or Commandement is common unto both. Yea, themselves elsew where so render the words without scruple, as Psal. 15. wherein there are more ne∣gatives then affirmatives, yet they conclude the Psalm, he that doth these things, shall never fall, Zach. 8.16, 17. These are the things which ye shall do, &c. where there are things to be left un∣done, which the Lord saith, he hateth. Yea, although the Deca∣logue or Ten Commandements are more of them negative then affirmative, yet how ordinary is it with the Lord to enjoyn us to do his Commandements. For to do them, is to obey them, whether af∣firmative or negative. 3. What they turn, against any of them, is, from one of them. And ver. 13. If they have done some what against any of the Com∣mandements, whereas the Hebrew words are, if they have done  one of all, &c. And again, verse 22. If the Ru∣ler hath done somewhat—against any of the Commandements, &c. the words are to be rendred as before, if he hath done one of all, &c. In these places the note of universality, all the Commande∣ments,
and the singularity of the breach and violation of one of them, are both slur'd, and vanish in conceptum confusum, into an obscure indefinite. How much better hath the Tigurin Bible expressed both? in ver. 2. If a soul shall sin through errour, in cunctis prohibitionibus Domini, quae fieri non debebant, ipse verò unum ex illis fecerit, &c. In all the prohibitions of the Lord, wch ought not to be done, but he hath done one of them, &c. So Vatablus. So Luther also men∣tions one of the Commandements; and two Low Dutch Tran∣slations. Pagnin also and Tremellius, Piscator, and the French Bible. I note this the rather, because of that almost general neglect of Gods Commandements, held by some not to belong to a Christian man; by others, to be impossible to be kept through the grace of God by any man: and this opinion amounts to the same in effect with the former; whereas these three verses, beside ma∣nifold other Scriptures, forcibly prove, that, as the Lord requires both of the Priest and the People, of the Ruler, and all and every one under his power, an universal regard to be had to all and every one of his Commandements; so he supposeth, that all and every one of these, have respect unto all the Commandements of God, and to every one of them; in that he prescribes an offering, in case any one of them hath broken one Commandement, and that out of ignorance and errour. And certainly the like care and observation, yea, greater ought to be had by us Christians, in respect of all & every Com∣mandement of God. For although it be now almost common∣ly believed, that there is something to be remitted and abated of the strictness and rigour of the Law in our Evangelical obedi∣ence, in regard of that which was required of them who lived under the Law, that assertion is altogether groundless and un∣true; which yet therefore hath obtained belief and approbation amongst most men, because it is easie: For they love an easie reli∣gion a-life, Proclives à labore ad libidinem, men by corrupt nature hate what is hard and difficult, & love their ease. But the Gospel indeed requires more obedience of us then the Law; which may appear, as by that which our Lord affirms, Except your righte∣ousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, (which yet was , the most strict Heresie, as the Apostle calls it, Acts 26.5.) ye shall by no means enter into the kingdom of heaven, Matth. 5.20. As also by our Lords exposition of the Law, that the obligation of it reacheth to the soul and spirit, Matth. 5.21, &c. Yea, the penalty of disobedience to the Gospel, is more grievous then that for the breach of the Law: For if the word spoken by Angels was stedfast, and every transgression and dis∣obedience received a just recompence of reward, how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? Hebr. 2.2, 3. and 10.28, 29.
He who despised Moses Law, died without mercy under two or three witnesses: How much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy of, who hath troden under foot the Son of God? &c. And great reason there is: For where the Lord hath given more grace, he may justly expect more obedience and duty from us, according to our Lords rule of equity, Luke 12.48. Let us well consider this O Reader, who ever thou art, and let us conscientiously regard every one of Gods Commande∣ments, and take great heed, lest we break any one of them; since he who breaks but one Commandement, is guilty of all, James 2.10. As in a copulate Axiom, saith the Logician, one false part renders the whole Axiom false. And a Chrystal Glass or Mirrour, though broken but in one part, yet the whole Glass is said to be broken: And one breach made in the Glass of righteousness, the holy Word of God, renders the whole broken. Thus divers books of Scripture are knit together by copulatives, in their be∣ginnings; as the books of Moses, Exodus, with Genesis, ; and these, &c. So Leviticus with Exodus, Numbers to Leviticus. The book of Joshua to Deuteronomy, Judges to Joshua, Ruth to Judges, Samuel to Ruth, and divers other; making the whole Scripture as it were but one large copulate. And so many of the Ten Com∣mandements are knit together, as, Thou shalt not kill: neither shalt thou commit adultery: neither shalt thou steal: neither shalt thou bear false witness against thy neighbour: neither shalt thou covet thy neighbours wife, &c. Deut. 5.17.—21. And thus the multitudes of Gods law,  Hos. 8.12. are united as with manifold links; whereof if one be broken, the whole will and law of God is infringed and violated. And the authority of the Law-giver is slighted, (which is the Apostles reason) for he who said, Thou shalt not commit adultery, said also, Thou shalt not kill, James 2.11. O how careful of these things were the Ancient Doctors of the Jewes Church! They accurately summ'd up the numbers of Gods Lawes, and divided them into affirmative and negative. The af∣firmative precepts they found to be two hundred forty eight, cor∣respondent unto the same number of bones in a mans body. Which, as they are the strength of the mans body; so are the spiritual Commandements and Lawes of God, the strength of the inward man. As David acknowledgeth, Psal. 138.3. Thou hast fortified me with strength in my soul. And therefore when the Lord was now about to change Abrams name to Abraham, he comman∣ded him, Walk before me and be perfect, Gen. 17.1.—5. And then called him Abraham, which name contains the same number in it; . 1. . 2. . 200. . 5. . 40. total 248. Whence the Lord testifies of Abraham that he had kept his Charge, his Commandements, his statutes, and his Lawes; Gen. 26.5. The negative
precepts are 365, answerable to the number of Nerves and Liga∣tures in mans body, as the Anatomists have observed. By these are united the forees and powers and strengths of the inward and spiritual man, which must be knit together, that the Spirit may come and dwell in it. So we read, Ezech. 37.1.—10. that the sinews joyned bone to his bone, and then the spirit entred into the whole body. And our obedience hereunto must be perpetual, as figured by the dayes of the year, of the same number, 365. Of all these, ten only were written in the Tables which God gave to Moses, Exod. 34.28. as being the radical and principal Commandements unto which, all the other may be reduced. And these are fitted to the number of our fingers, the instruments of our work. And hence all Nations reckon by the number of Ten, as the most determinate and full number, and then begin again. The reason why the Lawes of God were thus multiplyed, appears from the necessity of man to whom these Lawes were given; and the great goodness and mercy of God the Lawgiver. Mans necessity was great; he had a grievous fall, even from Heaven to the Earth; even from an heavenly minde and affections, unto both earthly; from wisdom to foolishness, ignorance, and errour; from rectitude and uprightness, to obliquity and crookedness; from one to many, from the Creator to the creatures. When therefore the man hath lost his happiness in the one and only God, he seeks and hunts for it, among the many creatures. Ac∣cording to what the Wiseman saith generally of all men, Eccles. 7.19. God made man , the word is appellative, not proper,] God made thee, and me, and every person upright; as appears by the opposition following; but they have found out many inventions. He is said to have forsaken the fountain of living waters, Jer. 2.13. There must therefore have been some time when he enjoyed it and had union with it. He is said to be aliena∣ted from the life of God, Ephes. 4.18. Sometime therefore he li∣ved that life. He is said to have fallen, and therefore sometime he had stood. Now being fallen from unity and uniformity, to multiplicity, divi∣sion, partiality, distraction, discord, disagreement of minde, fansie, thoughts, understanding, heart, will, affections, all these divisions and partialities both one from other and in our selves; hence appears the great necessity of a manifold law, which might pursue the man in his manifold aberrations and strayings from his God; which might follow him in every thought, will, desire, affection, and ferret him out of every hole. So that these many lawes are a certain badge and evidence of that manifold misery, whereinto we are fallen. For, as Plato reasons, Where there are many Physitians, it followes that the people must have many dis∣eases.
And where there are many Lawyers, there must be many strifes and divisions: so we may reason, That where there are many Lawes, there are many breaches of Lawes; and where there are many remedies, many healing doctrines (as the Law is called , curing or healing doctrine, 1 Tim. 1.9.) there must also be many spiritual maladies. 2. Other reason there is from that , Ephes. 3.10. that manifold wisdom, grace, and goodness of God, who proportions unto the mans manifold sins and miseries, a manifold law: So that there's not any good work the man can do, but, a∣mong the manifold affirmative precepts there's a law and a rule for it. Nor is there any sin that the man commits, but, among the manifold negative Commandements, there is a prohibition of it. These Commandements of God are sometime delivered in full decalogue; sometime contracted into a lesse number, as Deut. 10.12. Sometime to a less then that, Zach. 8.16. and yet to a less number, Mich. 6.8. The same, upon the matter, with what we read, Matth. 23.23. Yea, our Lord reduces them to two, Matth. 22.36.—40. Can they yet be brought to a less number? Rom. 13.9, 10. Love is the fulfilling of the Law. All the Com∣mandements affirmative and negative are contracted into one. O consider this, who ever love God and his righteousness, who have been long busied about the multitudes of Gods Lawes. Let us have respect unto all the Commandements, Psal. 119.6. And sure∣ly as Gods righteousness thrives in us, he will abbreviate and make short his Commandements, Rom. 9.28. The end of the Commandement, is love out of a pure heart, and a good consci∣ence, and faith unfained, 1 Tim. 1.5. that most excellent way, 1 Cor. 12.31. which is violently broken from the 13th Chapter. Wherein S. Paul tells us, what that most excellent way is, even Charity; greater then Faith and Hope, ver. 13. That bond of perfection, Col. 3.14. that new and old Commandment, Love; that we walk after his Commandements, 2 John 6. the new and old way; wherein if we walk, we shall finde rest unto our souls, Jer. 6.16. Let us hasten to that unity, that one Commandement, that day of love. Let us hasten the coming of that day, that one day, Zach. 14.7, 8, 9. Its a strange exhortation, but its the Apostles, 2 Pet. 3.12. We rather say, Phosphore redde diem—we wish for the day, Acts. 27. That the day would hasten to come to us; not that we should hasten to the coming of the day. But such is the goodness of the Sun of Righteousness that he shines alone in his Saints; (as Apollo and Sol, the Sun, have their names from shining alone, saith Macro∣bius) when his day-light appears. He then contracts all that multi∣plicity of starlight into himself. For as the multitude of Stars were
made in the firmament of heaven, and every one of these contri∣buted its share of light unto the World, before the Sun was made: Even so the multitude of Lawes, and every respective Com∣mandement gives light unto the man, until the day begins to dawn; and as the day-light appears, one Star after another dis∣appears; and still they become fewer and fewer, until the Day∣star, (that is the Sun, according to the Syriac,) ariseth in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. If the Priest,Levit. 4. Ver. 3. that is anointed, do sin, according to the sin of the people.] The words rendred as they are, make a good sense; ac∣cording to that of Hos. 4.9. , as the people, so the Priest: But it is not here  but ; whereas  is more frequently used in Scripture for the expression of similitudes.  most-what rather notes a motion toward some end; as Judges 8.27. Gideon made it  for an Ephod, 2 Sam. 2.4. They anointed David , which the Chal. Par. turns , that he should be King. And of like nature is this Scripture: If the high Priest (so the Chaldy Paraphrast and the LXX here understand him) , sin to the guilt of the people, or, to the sin of the people, to make them sinful and guilty. So the Chald. Par. If the great Priest  sin to the sin of the people; and the LXX clearly render the words so, , if the high Priest being anointed sin to cause the people to sin, or, that the people sin. Which must not be understood not on set purpose; for then it could not be a sin of ignorance, (which, in this Chapter, is principally inten∣ded,) but a sin of malitious wilfulness, which admits of no Sacrifi∣ces, Hebr. 10.26. but deserves outting off, Num. 15.30. So Hierom also turns the words, Delinquere faciens populum, ma∣king the people sin. So Vatablus, and the Tigurin Bible, Piscator also both in his High Dutch, and Latin Translation, turns the words thus, If the Priest so sin that he brings a guilt upon the people. So likewise Diodati; if the chief Priest so sin, that the people is made culpable. To the same purpose, Luther & three Low Dutch Translations. There are also two of our old English Translati∣ons, that of Coverdale and another, which so render the words. Tremellius speaks home to this purpose. If the Priest, who is a∣nointed, sin ad reatum populi, to make the people guilty; which he explains by leading them into guilt, giving them matter of offen∣ding, either by doctrine or example: And he confirms this Tran∣slation with a parallel Scripture, 1 Chron. 21.3. where Joab saith thus to David, urging him to number the people, why shall it be  for a guilt unto Israel. And Castellio having turn'd the words, si deliquerit in noxiam populi, if the Priest shall sin to the offence of the people; he explains it in his Annotations; Cujus delicto, &c. by whose fault, the people may be made guilty; as the
disease of the head or other member, reacheth to the whole bo∣dy: and as Achats and Davids sin hurt all the people. And this translation may be confirmed by the constant tenor of the Scriptures; which blame not the people for the sinnes of the Priests or of the Prophets, as the other translation doth; but the Priests and Prophets, for the sinnes of the people. Thus, for the sin of Eli's sons the Priests, the people abhorred the offering of the Lord, 1 Sam. 2.17. as he tels them ver. 24. Ye make the Lords people to transgress. And the Prophet, out of compassion toward the people, he tels them, O my people! they who lead thee, cause thee to erre, Esay 3.12. and the like, Chap. 9.16. And Jer. 23.15. From the Prophets of Jerusalem is prophaneness gone forth into all the Land; and 9, 10, 11. The adultery, swearing, or cur∣sing, and violence of the people, is laid to the Prophets and the Priests charge. And the Prophets and Priests are said to have shed the blood of the just in the midst of Jerusalem, Lam. 4.13. that is, by their sins, they occasioned them to be slain; as Ezech. 13.19. they are said to slay the souls that should not die. Yea, that whole Chapter is on this argument. And very often elsewhere the Lord takes up the same complaint against the Priests and Prophets. Whence it appears, that their sin is peccatum peccans, a brooding sin, which makes the people sin, and becomes exceeding sinful. Let them sadly consider this, who, I hope, out of ignorance, (as being themselves deceived by their Authors, whom they follow,) teach the people such doctrine, as, not accidentally and occasionally, but directly and per se, causeth them to sin; such is that catechetical doctrine, That no man is able either of himself, or by any grace recei∣ved in this life, perfectly to keep the Commandements of God, but doth daily break them in thought, word, and deed. Surely the people, to whom the Law was given first, thought themselves able to keep it, as appears, Exod. 24.3.7, 8. Nor did Moses blame them for promising so to do; but he directs them how to keep it, Deut. 30.6, 7, 8.—14. Other Scriptures sound the same thing, Psal. 119.1, 2, 3.6.10.32. &c. and 130.8. and 138.8. Prov. 2.7. beside ma∣nifold more Scriptures. It is true, that no man is able of himself, either to think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. or repel an evil: But is not this a disparagement unto the Spirit of God, that no man should be able by any grace received in this life, perfectly to keep the Commandements of God, but doth daily break them in thought, word, and deed? I shall instance but in one Scrip∣ture. If what is there delivered be true, what then is meant by the Apostle, Rom. 8.3, 4. God sent his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit?
Is God the Father and Son utterly frustrate of their end, so that the Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in no man? It is a glo∣rious testimony, that the Scripture gives to Josiah, that he turn'd to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses, 2 Kings 23.25. I can hardly be perswaded that he brake the Law daily in thought word, and deed, no, though he lived in the time of the Law. The Apo∣stle professeth himself to be one in whom the end which God the Father and Son aimed at, is obtained, where he saith, I am able to do all things , through Christ who in∣wardly enables me; Phil. 4.13. And I hope there are some such in the world. Whether now, this, and other such doctrine do not immedi∣ately tend to make the people sin, let any indifferent man judge. For whereas they are taught, that no man is able, no not by any grace received in this life, perfectly to keep the Commande∣ments of God, but doth daily break them in thought, word, and deed, who will go about to do that, which, as he is taught, no man can do, nor is it possible to be done? Surely, if the Teachers and people lived exactly according to this and some other like doctrine, they would be the very worst Christians in the world; whereas truly I think there are of both, very vertuous and good men; and of the Teachers, many very learned also, and that in the truth, which is according to godliness, Tit. 1.1. which is the best kinde of learning. But I doubt not to say, that nither that life nor learning proceeds from their opini∣ons; but as Tully writes of some Philosophers whose principles were corrupt, naturae bonitate vincuntur, they are better then their principles. Now I beseech my Brethren, who are Teachers of the people, impartially to consider what befel ten of the twelve Spies who taught the same doctrine; and the people who were perswaded by them, that their enemies were too strong for them; that they were not able to overcome them, and so to enter into the holy Land: Which is the sum of Numbers 13. and 14. where verse 11. the Lord complains of the people, that they believed him not; How long, saith he, will it be yer they believe me, for all the signes that I have shewed among them? He had promised them the holy Land, and he had evidenced by many signes and wonders that he was able to effectuat what he promised; yet they believed not. For whereas there is in Faith a Duplex formale objecti, verum, & po∣tens, our faith looks at two things in God whom we believe, His Truth, and His Power, Rom. 4.20, 21. And if the testimony con∣cerning these, be of things practicable, things to be done, or left undone, belief is a confidence 1. in Gods Truth, that, what he saith, is firm and sure; 2. And in Gods power, who commands,
forbids, promiseth, or threatneth, that God is able to do, and enable the believer to do what he commands, and to shun what he forbids; able to fulfil what he promiseth, and what he threat∣neth, &c. Now, whereas neither the ten Spies, nor the people, believed the Lords truth and power, the Lord sware that they should not enter into his rest; and accordingly the ten Spies died, Numb. 14.36, 37. and the carkases of the people fell in the Wilderness. David applies this story spiritually to the men of his age, Psal. 95. And the Apostle, Hebr. 3.7.—19. to the Chri∣stian Church. Where verse 18. to whom sware he, that they should not enter into his rest, , but to them who obeyed not, (which ours turn, who believed not,) so we see, they could not enter in because of unbelief; which unbelief is the same with disobedience, as appears by comparing with it the former verse. The Spirit of God leaves this consideration upon our spirits. We know, the Lord promised to them a good land, and to us the Land of uprightness, Psalm 143.10. He promised them to be with them, to the subduing of the inhabitants of the land, Exod. 34.10. and had given good proof of this, and a ground to believe this, by destruction of the Egyptians. Nor is there any believer who hath made any progress in the faith, but he hath had some experience of what God hath promised, that the Lord will not leave us nor forsake us, Hebr. 13.5. Whence he may gather-in upon our good God, and believe that he will fi∣nish his work; as David reasoned, 1 Sam. 17.32.—37. And S. Paul touching the Philipians, Phil. 1.6. and himself, 2 Tim. 4.18. I was delivered from the mouth of the Lion; and the Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his everlasting kingdom. That people believed not the Lord, notwithstanding their knowledge of his power, that he was able to subdue their enemies: nor do many of the spiritual Spies or Teachers them∣selves believe. Whereupon neither that people, nor many of ours can enter into Gods eternal rest, because of unbelief. O my Brethren! doth not this come to pass by reason of this doctrine of unbelief and impossibility of obeying the law and will of God? And how great then must our sin be, if we positively and directly teach this doctrine? We may esteem the hainousness of the sin by the offering enjoyned for the expiation of it: which is greater then any private mans, ver. 28. yea, greater then that pre∣scribed to be offered by the Ruler, ver. 22. Yea no less then that which was commanded to be offered for and by the whole con∣gregation. ve. 13. Consider, I beseech you, the many miseries and calamities which have befallen thousands both of Teachers and people in these late years; and the Teachers signally, their ejections and want of, livelyhood, being disabled from teaching the people.
I meddle not with reason of State. But when Isee so heavy a judgement befal one profession of men, and the most of them) I say not all: for I know some better minded) I fear, ingaged in the same doctrine of impossibility and unbelief, (as I have had it confessed by many of them.) I cannot but apply what the Lord hath threatned the Priests; The Priests lips should keep know∣ledge, and men should seek the Law at his mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. But Corruptio optimi est pessima. But ye are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble (take offence, or fall) in the Law; ye have corrupted the co∣venant of Levi, saith the Lord of hosts. Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people, accord∣ing as ye have not kept my wayes, but have been partial in the Law, Mal. 2.7, 8, 9. And shall we think, that these who suffer these miseries, are the only men who have caused the people to sin by their false doctrine and scandalous life? Let them who think so, read Luke 13.1.—9. and with sadness consider that Parable, which our Lord there delivers, and fear, lest the like or a worse judge∣ment remains for themselves. My Brethren! The hand of the same Lord of Hosts is stretched out still: And if we shall in life or doctrine, especially this do∣ctrine of unbelief and impossibility, cause the people of God to sin, let us fear the like, yea, heavier judgement upon our selves, because we have not taken warning by the heavie hand of God upon them, Quorum facta imitamur, cur non & illorum exitûs exhorrescamus? If we be like them in the sin, why should we not fear, that we shall be involved with them in the same judgement? 1. We, who call our selves, and would be reputed Ministers of the Gospel, are supposed to know more then other men do; and to be more strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, then others are; and so to be more able to resist the Tempter and his motions unto sin. 2. We are thought to have received more grace from God; and therefore if we sin against our God, we are more ingrateful then others are. 3. Impiety in us, is in a spe∣cial manner repugnant unto our profession, who, more then o∣ther men, pretend to piety and holiness. 4. The example of our sin, extends more to scandal then other mens, because being reputed learned, we may be supposed to sin by the Book. O let us bring our sin-offering, even repentance, a broken spi∣rit, and a contrite heart, Psal. 51.17. Let us confess, forsake, and mortifie our sin, that, by the blood and spirit of Christ, we may be sprinkled from an evil conscience, Hebr. 10.22. and the blood and spirit of Jesus Christ shall cleanse us from all our sins, 1 John 1.7. Then will our sober, chaste, temperate, honest, just, godly conversation win the people to sobriety, chastity, temperance, justice, honesty, and piety; and every grace which they shall see
in us, they will copie out into themselves. Then shall we be pre∣tious men indeed, not in the vain opinion of ignorant men; then shall wee bee powerful Preachers, when we preach powerfully Christ to be the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. by whom the righte∣ousness of the law may be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, Rom. 8. So that we warn every man, and teach every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Jesus Christ, Col. 1.28. Then shall we boldly propound our selves ex∣amples unto the flock: And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, we shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away, 1 Peter 4.2, 3. If a soul sin and hear the voice of swearing, and is a witness,Levit. 5. Ver. 1. whe∣ther he hath seen or known of it, if he do not utter it, then he shall bear his iniquity.] The word , which is here turn'd swearing, is not to be understood in the latitude of it; but more proper to the business here treated of by Moses, it signifies an Adju∣ration, which is that kinde of Oath, or Execration, whereby a man hearing, is obliged to say or do something, as in controver∣sies among men an oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife, Hebr. 6.16. Thus also in mens private affairs and extrajudiciall matters: As Abraham adjured his servant, or caused him to swear, imposing an oath upon him, Gen. 24.3. And examples of both kindes we have many in Scriptures, Exod. 13.19. Numb. 5.19. 1 Sam. 14.27, 28. 1 Kings 2.43. Ezra 10.5. Cant. 5.8, 9. and elsewhere. This Adjuration is understood in this Scripture here before us. For the Jews in their Courts admitted an Adjuration to be laid upon all persons present, for the eliciting and drawing forth the truth in question. Insomuch as, although a man were not personal∣ly cited and adjured to confess his knowledge, yet if he heard the adjuration or execration, and concealed the truth, he rendred him∣self guilty, according to this Law. Much more, if any man were personally adjured to speak his knowledge, and yet held his peace. In which case he was obliged to answer the adjuration, although possibly what he uttered, might prove disadvantageous unto himself. So vain is that assertion, which yet is vulgar and com∣mon, that no man is bound to accuse himself. This very Law bindes a man to speak his knowledge, although summoned thereunto ge∣nerally only and in common with all who hear the adjuration, however his own personal interest may be concerned thereby. Otherwise this Law makes him guilty. How much yet more, if the Judge himself adjure him to declare the truth? In which case it is very observable, that, when the High Priest had questioned our Lord, Luke 22.67, 68. and the false witnesses had bin produ∣ced
against him, Matth. 26.61, 62. which yet could prove no∣thing, and Jesus himself held his peace; so that they were all at a loss, the high Priest made use of the last expedient which, in this case, could be used, and adjured him by the living God, that he should tell them, whether he were the Christ the Son of God. This Adjuration drew from our Lord that Confession, that he was the Son of God, Matth. 26.59.—64. For so, what there we read, , thou hast said, S. Mark reports to be, , I am. So sacred a thing is an Oath, that he who submitted him∣self to be a Servant of Rulers, as he is called, Esay 49.7. when he had stood dumb and opened not his mouth, the Adjuration caused him to make that glorious confession of the truth. This sense Arias Montanus, Vatablus, Munster, and Castellio give of these words. Tremellius and some of the Jews understand this Law to be a∣gainst him who hath heard one blaspheme God, and conceals his knowledge. And he refers this Law to the precept of brotherly correction and reproof, Levit. 19.17. And it is possible that our Translators may have been of the same judgement. But  is not any where used to signified blasphemy in that sense, so far as I yet can finde. Nor was swearing wholly forbidden the Jewes either judicially, or extra-judicially, but onely vain and false swearing, Levit. 19.12. Jer. 7.9. And of this swearing, Hos. 4.2. is to be understood, and Zach. 5.3. Every one that sweareth shall be cut off. What kinde of swearing is that? It followes in the next verse, every one that sweareth falsly by my Name. So Mal. 3.5. For the merciful God graciously connived for a time at the Jewes swearing, so they sware not falsly nor vainly by his Name. And therefore our Lord in his exposition of that Commande∣ment, saith not, Thou shalt not swear, but thou shalt not for∣swear thy self. And the reason may be. The people of God lived among the Nations, who walked every one in the name of his god, Mich. 4.5. Wherefore the Lord condescended for a time to be accounted as it were, a Topical God, as if he had been the God of Israel only; as may appear by Jephta's reasoning, Judges 11.12.—28. lest his people being mingled among the Nations, should learn their works, and swear by other gods. See the truth of this, Jer. 12.14, 15, 16. Thus saith the Lord against all mine evil neighbours, &c. it shall come to pass if they shall diligently learn all the wayes of my people, to swear by my Name, The Lord liveth, as they have taught my people to swear by Baal, then they shall be built up in the midst of my people. And we now live mixt one with another good and bad together, and every one endeavours to assimilate and render another like unto himself. O that every one of us, so far as we have attained, would endeavour to render another like unto God!
Now although swearing by the Name of God, rashly, vainly, and falsly, and without just cause, hath alwayes been a sin, and so ac∣counted, Ecclus. 23.9.—13. Yet the universal prohibition hereof was reserved until the time of Reformation, Matth. 5.33.—37. Howbeit that this kinde of swearing ought not here to be un∣derstood, but Adjuration only, and to put an end to controver∣sies among men, as hath been said, will appear to be true, if we lay to the words now questioned and compare with them, what Solomon saith, Prov. 29.24. He that is partner with a thief, ha∣teth his own soul; , he heareth adjuration, and uttereth it not. Where we have these very words of the Law, Levit. 5.1. and an exemplification of it. In this case the Arabic Proverb is not to be understood, Repentance for silence is bet∣ter then repentance for speech. And that of Cato hath no place here, Nam nulli tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum: For silence in this case argues a consent unto evil. Take notice here, Christian Reader, how strict the Lord is in requiring a discovery of sin, and that the truth should be brought to light and judgement, and that under a ceremonial dispensati∣on; so that he who concealed his knowledge, rendred himself guilty. And shall we who ought to depart from, and hate every evil way, and every iniquity, and loathe it in our selves, shall we hide and keep anothers sin as sweet under our tongue? In this case it will well beseem our Christian prudence and charity, to enquire what will be more profitable for our bro∣thers reformation; whether to accuse him and discover his sin, as Joseph did his brethrens, Gen. 37.2. or at least for a time, with lenity and pious long-suffering to bear his weakness. But if we wink at, and dissemble our brothers sin, as if we favoured it, and waited not for a fit time for reproof of it, we make our brothers sin and guilt our own; and our tenderness and clemency to∣ward our brother, will be interpreted no less then contumacy and disobedience toward God. Remember how Solomon con∣cludes his Ecclesiastes, and with it I shall conclude this Essay, God will bring every work into judgement, and every secret thing whether it be good, or whether it be evil. And the Priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his sin.]Levit. 5. Ver. 6. This sense is imposed upon these words beside their genuin and proper meaning, which is this; And the Priest shall expiate (or purge) him from his sin. The only difficulty (if any there be) is in , whether it be referred to the person purged from his sin: and so  to purge or expiate is construed with , Or whether it have reference to the Sacrifice as Arias Montanus un∣derstood it. Both have their Authors and their meanings good. As for Atonement, what is meant by it but union with God or oneness, as when God and man are at one? And how can that be
wrought while the sin intervenes and keeps man at a distance from his God? Esay 59.2. It is true indeed that the Spirit of God hath couch'd two actions under one word  1. to cover, and 2. to purge, cleanse or expiate. But although  signifie to co∣ver, yet not so as , 1 Pet. 2.16. as a cloak to cover knavery, not so as to hide the sin, but as a playster is apply∣ed to cover and so to cure and heal a wound: and so the first sig∣nification will fall into the second. Thus the Tigurin Bible renders the words verbatim, Et expia∣bit eum sacerdos à peccato suo. And the Priest shall purge or expiate him from his sin. And the Chald. Par. saith the very same, though somewhat otherwise translated. So Munster, so Vata∣blus, so Tremellius, so Diodati. And although the Spanish Bible hath reconcilierà in the text, yet it hath expiarà the Priest shall ex∣piate, in the margent. If meantime the sin remain, how can the atonement or reconcilia∣tion be made? since sin is the only make-bate Quod turbat omnia, which therefore if it remain and be not really and truly remo∣ved and taken away, the wrath and the condemnation and guilt and obligation unto death must remain with it. What is wont in this case to be said, that there is no condemna∣tion to them that are in Christ Jesus (which words are usually cited alone, and the following words suppressed) it is true of them who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit; whom the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, makes free from the law of sin and death; in whom the righteousness of the law is fulfilled, Rom. 8.1.—4. It is true, these actions are all of them ceremonial, poor and beggarly rudiments; yet by them are figured out the pretious truths of God touching atonement with God and expiation from sin, as gold is weighed out by brass or leaden weights. The real purging from our sins by Christ is meant by the ceremonial expi∣ation wrought by the Priest and the sacrifice. And therefore the Apostle so reasons: if the blood of Bulls and Goats and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh (so far then it did sanctifie,) how much more shall the blood of Christ, who, through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, Purge your consciences from dead works, to serve the living God? Let us well consider this (Christian Reader) lest in a matter of so great concernment unto our immortal souls, we suffer our selves to be deceived by [concerning] a word of very large signi∣fication: which if it mean any thing but expiating the sin, take heed of it: Dolosus versatur in generalibus, if we be deceived in the figure, we shall also be deceived in the Truth it self, which is con∣veyed by it.
But suppose the sin only covered, (which is that which many contend for) if it yet remain in us, what singular benefit is the Reconciliation or Atonement unto us? only that the putrid and loathsom ulcer is skin'd over: that the remorse and clamour of the guilty conscience is quiet and stilled for a time; that the malefa∣ctor is reprieved, and his punishment only delayed a while. The palliated sore will break-out again. Judgement and vengeance will follow the sinner unless the sin be taken away: and it will appear at length, when it will be too late to remedy it, that such as Job calls Physitians of no value, Job 13.4. have cured the bruise of Gods people slightly, saying peace, peace, when there is no peace, Jer 6.14. The ancient Jewes called the Messias or Christ , a man of expiation; as he who should finish transgression and make an end of sinnes, and make reconciliati∣on for [or expiation of] iniquity, and bring in the everlasting righte∣ousness, &c. Dan. 9.24. Which, if it be done in all the world, and not done in thee and me, what is that greatest of God and Christs works unto us! O let us therefore now while we have time, endeavour after such an Atonement and Reconciliation which will most certainly follow upon precedent expiation and purging of sin. Wicked men, out of self-love and fear of punishment, pray for pardon of sin and peace of conscience: But let us out of hatred of sin and love of righte∣ousness, repent, turn to God, mortifie our sin, and pray that the Lord would expiate and take away iniquity. This, I am sure, is most suitable with the end of Christs coming, described, Dan. 9.24. and by the Evangelist, to dissolve the work of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. and to take away the sins of the world, John 1.29. O that that work were wrought in every one of our souls! As the sin-offering is, so is the trespass-offering:Levit. 7. Ver. 7. there is one law for them; the Priest that maketh atonement therewith, shall have it.] What the Translators here turn the sin-offering and the tres∣pass-offering, is in the Hebrew only  and , sin and trespass: and howsoever our and other translations in this place and often elsewhere, understand and adde an oblation or offering, its more then they have any warrant to do from the holy Text. Which they together with other Transsators acknowledge when sometimes they leave out the word oblation or offering, yet under∣stand the same thing. Thus Hos. 4.8. the Lord saith that the Priests eat up the sin of his people; that is, that which here they call the sin-offering; as all agree, the word is to be understood: For which, the Lord blames them not; for it was their own, Levit. 10.14. but for other sins; as, if the Lord will, I shall hereafter shew. Thus 2 Cor. 5.24. God made him to be sin for us, who knew
no sin. Where, by sin first named, we understand that which they call a sacrifice for sin, or sin-offering. And accordingly Ari∣as Montanus and Castellio, both in this place and elsewhere, what ours and others turn the sin-offering and trespass-offering, they ren∣der peccatum or noxa and delictum, the sin and trespass. There hath been, and yet is great difference of judgements concerning these two words  and , whether they differ one from other, or not; and if so, how. That they do not differ one from other, there are who stiffely affirm. But the place before us, proves undeniably a difference between them: yet how they differ, its hard to discern. One of the pious Antients puts the difference herein; that  peccatum, sin, is the com∣mission of evil;  delictum, the trespass or transgression is the forsaking of the good: and indeed the Spirit of God makes them two evils, Jer. 2.13. Another makes  a sinne of knowledge; , a sin of ignorance, wherewith a man is surprized, Gal. 6.1. Divers other distinctions there are brought, by others of the An∣cients. What if we adde one more? That  is that sinne whereinto a man fals of himself, but , that sin wherein he falls by offence and occasion of another. There are examples of this distinction, Genesis 26.10. Abimelech blames Isaac, Thou mightest, saith he, have brought  guiltiness upon us, Levit. 4.3. If the Priest  sin to the guilt of the people. 1 Chron. 21.3. Joab dehorts David from numbring the people, Why, saith he, should it be  for guiltiness unto Israel? Prov. 30.10. Accuse not a servant to his master, lest he curse thee  and thou be guilty: and many the like. Yet I will not be too confident of this distinction; because I know, there may be some examples found where  hath the like use. However, its clear from the words before us, that there is a difference between them. Let us learn from this distinction of sin and trespass, as also from the various names of them, not to content our selves in our confessions unto God, with a general acknowledgement, as, that we are sinners; but, as particular ob∣lations were offered for them, so to make a more particular enu∣meration of our sins. The Hebrew tongue, though it be very scanty and penurious of words, in comparison of other langua∣ges, yet hath it very many words to express sin and wickedness, as , be∣side many words signifying more special sins; importing sins to be so many and manifold, that they cannot easily be expressed. The vain thoughts are dangerous in-mates, Jer. 4.14. And there is no word so secret that shall go for nought, saith the Wiseman, Wisd. 1.11. And we shall give an account of idle words in the day of judgement, saith the Wisdom: Matth. 12. How much more of sinful actions? Nor are all known unto us; for who
can understand his errours? Cleanse thou me from secret faults, as David prayes, and may teach us to pray. But blessed be the Lord, that, though our sins be numerous, yea, innumerable, yet he hath given us who believe and obey him, an High Priest, whose blood and spirit cleanseth us from all our sins, 1 John 1.7. Yea, this King of Saints, and High Priest makes his believers and lovers, Kings (ruling over their own wils, affections, and lusts,) and Priests to sanctifie and purifie others. That Priest, who makes the expiation, to him belongs the sin and trespass. That's an hard saying; how belongs the sin and trespass unto him? Levit. 6.26. The Priest who expiates the sin shall eat it. And ver. 29. Every male among the Priests, shall eat thereof. And wherefore hath the Lord given this to the the Priests? Moses tells Eleazar and Ithamar the sons of Aaron, that the Lord had given it them to eat, that they might bear the iniquity of the congregation, Levit. 10.17. So we read, that the Priests were to bear the iniquity of the Sanctuary, Numb. 18.1, 2. It was the Priests duty to eat up the sins of the people, as was shewen before, Hos. 4.8. as by sympathy bearing their sins, as their own, suffering with them, praying for them, thearning, exhorting, en∣treating, and beseeching them to offer up their bodies as a living sacrifice; using all means to consume, mortifie, and destroy the whole body of sin. Thus to eat up the sin, is to consume it, Gen. 31.41. what is turn'd confaine, is  to eat. And to consume it and destroy it, is by our sympathy and hearing them, to help them to consume and destroy the body of sin. For so what Psalm 41.9. we read, he that did eat my bread; John 13.18, our Lord saith, he that eateth bread with me. So to consume and destroy sinners, is to eat them, Numb. 14.9. Joshu and Caleb say, the people of the land are bread for them; compare herewith Numb. 22.4. Deut. 7.16. This language is uncouth and strange; and the duty of bearing and forbearing one another, hath been so long out of fashion, espe∣cially these times of violence and bloodshed, that its hardly known to be the law of Christ to bear one anothers burdens, Gal. 6.2. And very few there are who are known to be his Disciples or servants, by his Livery, John 13.34. A new Commandement do I give you, that ye love one another, as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. And why does our Lord repeat that duty? was it not enough to say, love one another as I have loved you, but he must inculcate the same again, that ye also love one ano∣ther? He the great High Priest loved us with an heroical love, with a love strong as, yea, stronger then death; He eat up and consumed, he bare and bears the sins of many, Esay 53.11. So he loves us, and his Commandement is, that we so love one another. And
that indeed such an intense love is required of his Disciples, ap∣pears by his Apostles exhortation unto it, Ephes. 5.1. Walk in love: how? As Christ loved us; And how was that? and gave himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God. This indeed is a new Commandement, and never before heard of; a Livery where∣by all men may know who are the Disciples of Christ, there are so few who wear it. But lest I be thought to urge this comparison intensis gradibus to the extent of it, and beyond our Lords and his Apostles drift, whereas our Lord and his Apostle meant it only in remissis; so that some small measure of love might serve the turn, read what his best beloved Disciple adviseth touching this very argument. Hereby, saith he, perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us; and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. If this be well understood, that of Philo Judaeus will not seem strange, , a vertuous man is an ex∣piation and atonement for a wicked man; Thus Ezechiel, Chap. 4.4.5. must bear the iniquity of the house of Israel. O my Brethren! whom the High Priest of our profession Christ Jesus hath made Priests of the holy, of the royal Priest∣hood, 1 Pet. 2.5.9. Let us consider our office, and what reward the Lord gives us for discharge of our office. Ye have both in the words before us, The Priest that makes expiation of the sin, it shall be his; or, it shall be to him: If thus we bear our brothers sins, instruct, exhort, dehort, admonish, sympathize, and suffer with him, and by all means endeavour the consuming and abolishing his sin, the Wiseman hath assured us that we shall be satisfied by the fruit of our mouth, Prov. 12.14. He who thus with great patience and long-suffering waits at Gods Altar, he shall be partaker with the Altar, 1 Corinth. 9.13. S. James assures us, that he who converts a sinner from the errour of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sinnes, James 5.20.
He put his breast-plate upon him; and he put in the breast-plate,Levit. 8. Ver. 8. the Urim and the Thummim.] The words contain a part of Moses investiture of the High Priest. Having put upon him his breast-plate, he put into the breast-plate, the Urim and the Thummim. What these were, great enquiry hath been made both by anti∣ent and modern Writers. The Translators leave them without translation: only they are left in the Hebrew with much em∣phasis: He put into the breast-plate  the Urim and the Thummim. But why were not these words turned into English? It is true, there are many names and words, some proper, others appellative, which, by the holy Spirit and venerable an∣tiquity, according to the dictate of the Spirit, hath left without translation, in their own native language; as Hosanna, Hallelu∣jah, Maranatha, and many other appellatives, beside many pro∣per names. The words before us are none of those, but we finde them rendred by Translators, as the LXX , he put upon the brest-plate manifesiation and truth. The Vulg. Lat. Aptavit rationali in quo erat doctrina & veritas, in which was Doctrine and Truth. It is true the Chald. Par. hath  Ʋrim and Thummim, but in the Chaldee tongue, not in the Hebrew. The Syriac turns the words Knowledge and Truth, and the Arabic, Declarations and Truths. Castellio, Claritas & integritas, clearness and integrity. Luther Liecht and Recht, Light and Right, that is, Justice or Righte∣ousness. One Low Duch copy followes Luther herein; that of Cullen renders the words according to the Vulg. Lat. a third hath Light and Fulness. Coverdale turns the words Light and Per∣fectness. And so many testimonies and warrants we have to translate these words: And I would render Urim and Thummim, Lights or Illuminations, and Perfections or Consummations. I have done with the words; but what shall we say to the things themselves? To define, what these were, its none of my business; nor indeed dare I attempt that, which hath puzzled all the learned men in the World. Only I shall relate what hath been delivered by diverse men in their generations. Some to make good the V. Latin translation of these words, would deduce Ʋrim from , which is to teach: that's Doctrine, doctrine; and Thummim from , that is Credidit, to believe, there's Veritas Truth, the object of belief. But their originals are better known to be  light and  or  Perfecit to perfect.
Some would have these to be the Nomen Tetragrammaton, which they say includes the mystery of the Trinity, and the incarnation of Christ. Others say, they were certain letters, which being shuf∣fled together made up the Answer of the Oracle to what was ask∣ed of God. Others affirm, that they were two bright shining Stones immediately made by God, which gave a lustre accord∣ing to the Answer of God to the question of the High Priest. O∣thers, that these were an Adamant which changed the colour ac∣cording as the people were qualified, and God pleased or dis∣pleased with them. Others, that they were no other then the twelve precious Stones which the High Priest wore in his Breast-plate. Others (and I shall name no more for shame) would have the Ʋrim & Thummim to be the same with the Teraphim; which, they affirm to have been two little Idols, whereby God gave an∣swers to the High Priest. I might name many more. But these last have-spoken out, and declared for themselves and for all the rest the Idols of their own imaginations. Good God! whither will the wicked imagination, (as the Wiseman calls it, Ecclus. 37.3.) whither will it not wander, if left to it self? even to make God himself give forth his Oracles by Idols, which he extream∣ly hateth; and that to the people, who of themselves are too prone to idolatry. To such interpreters as these, God hath made good what he threatens Ezech. 14.4. that they, who come with such idols in their hearts, the Lord will answer them according to their idols. These are truly Commentaria, inventions, fictions and imaginations of men. For how can men speak of God and the things of God, without the Word of God? Plato might have taught them better, That nothing can be known of Gods minde, with∣out his Oracle. None of these Authors alleage any Scripture at all to prove their assertions. Which therefore are to pass upon the account of guesses and conjectures, which may be as easily denied as affirmed. But hence we learn, that, what these were its hard to say. They judge more probably, who think, that, as  written on a plate, was put on the fore-hed of Aa∣ron; so Ʋrim & Thummim were written on a plate and put in the breast-plate, which was double, Exod. 28.16. But neither have they any ground for this in Scripture more then the other. This we may undoubtedly say of them; that certain instruments or means they were, whereby the Lord was pleased to manifest his Answer to the enquiry of the High Priest. Whence the Greek In∣terpreters called Ʋrim , that is, manifestation; which, that it might be believed, they rendred Thummim  truth. That they were wont to make inquiry of the Lord and receive Answers by these, divers Scriptures witness, as Numb. 27.21. 1 Sam. 23.9.—12. where we read two questions moved by David, and the Lords respective Answers to them by Ʋrim.
These were wanting at the peoples return out of the Babylo∣nian captivity, as appears Ezra 2.63. And whereas there were three usual wayes, whereby the Lord revealed his will unto men, 2 Sam. 28.6, 7. Dreams, Vrim, and Prophets, who spake as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. The Prophets ceased with Haggy, Zachary, and Malachy, and the Vrim failed, and divine dreams also, Joel 2.28. For whereas the Lord promi∣ses the Spirit of prophesie, divine dreams and visions in the dayes of the Messiah, its probable at least, that he had withdrawn them all before. Nor was there left any other divine manifesta∣tion, but  a small voice, or the daughter of a voice, that is, an Echo or reflection of a voice; such as that which came from heaven in Answer to our Lords Prayer to his Father, John 12.28, 29. when the people said, some, that it thundred, others, that an Angel spake unto him. But why look we on these things at so great a distance? surely they either are, or may be, no doubt they ought to be neer unto us, even in our own Bosomes. The illuminations and perfections were in the Breast-plate, and must be on the heart of Aaron, Exod. 28.30. There are some pious and good men who affirm, that these Vrim and Thummim figured the perfections of all graces which are in Christ, who is the High Priest of our profession, Hebr. 3.1. And there is no doubt but these speak truth; for they are in Christ. But when they consider Christ only in his temporal dispensation, as Gregory calls the dayes of his flesh; or as he arose from the dead and ascended into heaven and sits personally at the right hand of God: if Christ and his illuminations, and his perfectious, be at so great a distance from us, how can he be Immanuel God with us? How could he make good his promise to us, under that name, that he will be with us unto the end of the world? Matth. 28.20. Yea, how then shall we understand the Apostle when he tels us, that Christ is in us? Gal. 3.1. Col. 1.27. and that unless Christ be in us, we are castawayes? 2 Cor. 13.5. Surely therefore if Christ be in us, as according to this Scrip∣ture, he is, if we be in the faith, and not castawayes, that also which is in Christ, is analogically and according to our proportion of faith, in us also. And he is said to make his Believers and Lovers Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, Revel. 1.6. Kings to rule upon the earth, Revel. 5.10. and Priests who should offer spiri∣tual Sacrifices unto God, 1 Pet. 2.5. And upon condition of obe∣dience, the whole Israel of God, hath promise to be a King∣dom of Priests, Exod. 19.6. And although ver. 22. we read of Priests; they are the first-born of their respective Tribes, whom the Lord challenged to himself, Exod. 13.2. Numb. 3.4, 5. And after the revolt of Israel by their idolatry, Exod. 32. the tribe of
Levi retained their integrity, and obtained the Priesthood, Numb. 8.13.—22. Yet, nor that, nor any after constitution of Priests hindred the obedient from being Kings and Priests unto God. Let them, who are the holy Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.5. know the things which are freely given to them of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. For these Lights and perfections are Gods gifts: And therefore we read not that God appointed them to be made where the Pontificalia or High Priests vestments and ornaments are either commanded to be made, Exod. 28. or reported to have been made, Exod. 39. But only a command to Moses, to put them in the breast-plate, Exod. 28.30. and the obedience of Moses thereunto, in this place, Le∣vit. 8.8. For indeed how could any woman spin, or Weaver make Doctrine or Truth, saith Origen, and as we may say, Lights or perfections? Sapientia ergo est quae utrun{que} facit. It is the divine wisdom which makes them both, as that Father goes on. And whereas Moses is said to put them into the breast-plate of Aaron, do we not read, that Moses was to be to Aaron for a god? Exod. 4.16. What is turn'd, he put them, is , he gave them; they are his gifts. They are both plural, as the greatness and excellency of things is expressed by plurals, Prov. 1.20.  Wisdomes.  the mercies of the Lord, Lam. 3.22. according to which S. Paul beseecheth the Romans , by the mercies of God, &c. Rom. 12.1. And for the excellency of these, they are both plural Lights and perfections. Both the Vrim, the illuminations or manifestations (according to the LXX) whereby God reveales and declares his will, and the Thummim the perfections or consummations of that will in us, when we serve him, as Joshua exhorts Israel, Josh. 24.14. in perfection and in truth (as the Greek and Vulg. Latin turn Thummim) in in∣tegrity. These are the gifts of God; according to what S. James saith, Every good giving, and every perfect gift, (there's one of them) is from above and cometh down from the Father of Lights, there's the other. And of all other, they are the most perfect gifts, as we may esteem them by the receivers of them, the most prin∣cipal parts of man, his minde and will. And what accomplishes and beautifies the minde but the divine wisdom? that's Vrim, il∣luminations. And what rectifies and fortifies the will in good purposes, intentions, and actions, but rectitude and integrity? That's Thummim, perfections. Happy, thrice happy they to whom the Lord gives these di∣vine illuminations or doctrines whereby they know the counsel of his will; and the perfections and consummations of it, whereby they are conformable unto the will of God! These are to be received by faith; by which we receive every good giving and every perfect gift, from the Father of Lights. And therefore Moses first put on the breast-plate, that's
or , which the vulg. Latin turns Rationale, the In∣former and Director of the judgement; and therefore its called , the breast-plate of judgement, Exod. 28.30. In∣deed the Directory of Judgement and Counsel, being a figure of Him who is , the divine Word and Reason, whole name is Counseller, Esay 9.6. And therefore good reason there is that in Him should be the Illuminations and Perfections. And there∣fore Moses put into the breast-plate, illumination and perfection. For the breast-plate as it signifies Christ himself, so faith in him, whereby we receive these things which are freely given to us of God: for so S. Paul cals it the breast-plate of faith and love, 1 Thes. 5.8. And because the Righteousness is obtained by faith, its cal∣led also the breast-plate of righteousness. This breast-plate of faith was to be fastned unto the Ephod, Exod. 28.28. which the LXX ren∣der , superhumerale, the ornament of the shoulder, whereon we bear burdens: and what is that but Patience, which there∣fore is to be joyned unto the breast-plate of faith, that so through faith and patience we may inherit the promises, Hebr. 6.12. and 10.35, 36. But alas! the Vrim and Thummim was lost at the Babylonian captivity, Ezra 2.65. And the Church in Babylon, 1 Pet. 5.13. lo∣seth her light and perfection by Babylonian confusions, debates and strifes; for the truth is lost by contending for it, 2 Esdr. 5.8, 9. 1 Tim. 1.5, 6, 7. whence it is, that the god of this world blindes the mindes of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious Go∣spel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4. And because men depart not from iniquity, they un∣derstand not the trnth, Dan. 9.13. Yea, the Thummim or perfecti∣ons are so lost, that its almost a sin to say, there is a possibility left of finding them. But Nehemiah, when the Vrim and Thummmim were missing, he put the people in hope, that there would be a time, when a Priest should stand up with Vrim and Thummim, Nehem. 7.65. And the Lord hath left such a consolation unto his people (so Nehemiah sounds a Comforter of the Lord,) that, if they make use of such means as the Lord hath vouchsafed unto his church, the illumina∣tions and perfections may be recovered. The Prophet, in order hereunto, puts us in a method and way of obtaining them, Mal. 4.4. Remember the Law of Moses my servant which I commanded unto him in Horeb, with the Statutes and Judgements. Then the Lord promiseth to send Eliah the Pro∣phet, before the coming of the great and terrible day of the Lord, and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, &c. This Eliah is not to be understood of John Baptist only; for he did not accomplish that work which Eliah was to do, viz. to restore all things, as our Lord foretels, Matth. 17.11, 12. where speaking
of one Eliah, he saith, he shall come and restore all things; and then addes, concerning John Baptist, that he was already come. So that, by the doctrine of the Law, and the doctrine of Repentance and conversion, we are brought unto an holy fear of God; and upon such as fear Gods name, the Sun of Righteousness, Even that true and greater Light, (which comes after the less, John 1.8, 9.) ari∣seth, and is indeed the High Priest who stands up with the Vrim and illuminations, inlightning our mindes with the understanding of Gods will, that we may be light in the Lord, Ephes. 5.8. The LXX Nehem. 7.65. have the word , he shall rise, import∣ing Christs Resurrection, that he should arise from the dead, and shew light unto the people, and to the Gentiles, Acts 26.23. And he hath the healing under his wings, whereby he cureth all our backslidings, Jer. 3.22. rectifies and strengthens our wills to per∣fect and consummate the Lords will, and to make us perfect and com∣pleat in all the will of God, Col. 4.12. For the influences of the Stars and heavenly bodies are conveyed by the Moon into this lower world: But the powers, vertues and influences of God and his divine nature are communicated unto us by the Sun, even by Je∣sus Christ the Sun of Righteousness; he brings with him the hea∣venly light and healing power (the truth of that Apollo, whereof the Poets have made a Fable) and all perfection and all the fulness of God, Ephes. 3.19. I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people,Levit. 10. Ver. 3. I will be glorified.] These words, In them that come nigh me, answer to , which the Translators, though they express in many words, yet they give not the full meaning of it. For  are not onely such as come nigh unto God, and make ad∣dress to him by offering sacrifices, as Levit. 1.2. but they especial∣ly who in relation are neer unto him, as his Priests are in a pe∣culiar manner. And so  is usually rendred by the LXX , Exod. 13.17. 1 Kings 8.46. neer in place, neer in dignity and honour, as Esther 1.14. as the seven Princes to Ahasuerus. Yea  signifies such a relative neerness as of consanguinity, blood, and kindred, Exod. 32.26. Levit. 21, 2, 3. as of friendship, Job 19.14.  my kinsfolk, which the LXX turn , my friends. In such a neer relation are the Lords Priests unto him; who are here called by the same name  my neer ones, mine intimate ones. Thus  a Minister either of State, as unto the Prince, is neer unto him in place and relation; so the sons of David were , 2 Sam. 8.18. Chief Rulers or Princes: for which, we read 1 Chron. 18.17.  at the hand of the King; and so expressed in the mar∣gent of our translation. Or  is a Minister of God neer unto God,
in a typical place and relation; as Ezech. 42.13. They are holy chambers, where the Priests  (which our Tran∣slators turn which approach unto the Lord. The words signifie) neer unto the Lord. The separate place there is the Holy and Most∣holy; and therefore Chambers neer it are holy Chambers; where∣in holy persons the Priests must eat the most holy things. And there∣fore Arias Montanus both in the place before us, and in this place of Ezechiel, turns the word in question, Propinqui, neer ones; neer unto the Lord in typical place, and neer in relation. So likewise Tremellius. So Luther, Piscator, and three Low Dutch translati∣ons. So likewise the Spanish: Castellio indeed hath accederent, who should come neer: but he explains himself in the margent, ut liba∣rent, that they might facrifice. Secondly, although the people of God also are said to be neer unto him, Psal. 148.14. , as our Translators render it, a people neer unto him; yet is the Priest by his office more neer un∣to God, as he who causeth the people to come neer unto God; so very often the Priest brings neer him that offereth, and his oblati∣on; and Moses brings neer Aaron and his sons. For the Priest is he, whose duty it is to be a middle man between God and the peo∣ple, saith Chrysostom; and to make intercession for the people: as Moses and Aaron often did. And because the Priests are such as intervene and make inter∣cession for the people, they ought, in reason, to be more eminent∣ly pious and holy then the people for whom they intercede, and in some measure, like unto the great High Priest and Intercessor, the Lord Jesus, Hebr. 7.26. Such intercessors were Noe, Samuel, Da∣niel, Job, and others, who were all neer unto God. For it is not the office alone, but the sobriety and temperance, the righteousn∣ness, holiness, and piety of him who bears it, which ingratiates the Intercessor with our God. Otherwise, they who by office are neer, for want of due qualification befitting their office, they may be far off. And this was the case of these two Priests, Nadab and Abihu. For, since ex malis moribus ortaesunt bonae leges, good lawes are occa∣sioned by ill manners, its much to be suspected, and some of the Jews Doctors doubt not to affirm it, that Nadab and Abihu had erred through wine and strong drink, which made them forward in offering their strange fire. Whence it was, that presently after the burial of these two Priests, the Lord gives this charge to Aaron, Vers. 9. Do not drink wine nor strong drink thou nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tabernacle of the Congregation, lest ye die. It shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations: And the Lord addes reasons for this Law, ver. 10.11. This sin disposed them to commit another. Their Intemperancy inclined them to impiety. One sin is not long alone. They kindle a
fire of their own and worshipped God with their own assumed and pretended holiness. There is, and hath been much of that, which the Apostle calls , Col. 2.23. Will-worship, in the Church of Christ; for which they are most zelotical, who are of a lower dispensation, and under the discipline of the father. For, what they are not able by Scripture, and reason out of Scripture, to commend unto the con∣sciences of men, they commonly enforce upon their belief, by an hot, heady, and ignorant zeal. These things were ill boded in the names of these two young Priests: Whereof Nadab signifies vo∣luntary, implying his own will and choise in the worship of God. The other Abihu the father himself; as he who was under the dispensation of the Fathers law. And such as these commonly obtrude their own Electa sacra, their own chosen holiness, and what Hierom calls Boni opinio, what they think good, upon the service and worship of God. Which is evil in the people, but much worse in the Priest. When iniquity thus burns like a fire, Esay 9.18. it kindles Gods wrath, which is also a fire, Deut. 32.22. This sin cannot seem little, when the punishment of it is so great; even fire by fire; and a strange fire by a strange act of God. For so he calls his Judgement, Esay 28.21. This proceeding of God was most just and necessary. For the first trangressors of any law new made, are exemplary in their sin, and therefore must be exemplary in the punishment also of their sin. Whence it was that the Lord ratified his lawes by signal punishments of those who first brake them. Thus after the delivery of the moral law, though the greatest part of the people sinned, by committing idolatry, Exad. 32. Yet the Lord punished them for that sin, by the death of many thousands. That rule which holds among men, Quod multis peccatur, multum est, avails not with the Judge of all the world. In the example here mentioned, the ceremonial Lawes having been newly given in most Chapters foregoing in this book of Le∣viticus, these lrwes first violated by the Priests, who, of all other, ought to have observed them, the wise and just God punished these in that wherein they offended. If we descend to the times of the Gospel, we shall finde, that when , that way and manner of Christian community and living in common, was first instituted; two religious pretenders, Hypocrites and Lyars violating that institution, suffered condigne punishment and exemplary for their exemplary sin, Acts 5.1.—10. After the institution of the holy Supper, when some in the Church of Corinth Invitâssent se plusculum, had eaten and drunk more then was convenient for those who should communicate at the Lords table, for that cause, many were weak and sickly among them, and many slept, 1 Cor. 11.30. For, by the punishment of
some few, the most wise and merciful Lawgiver and Judge pre∣vented like transgression by the multitude; ut terror ad omnes, poena ad paucos veniret, that all Israel might hear and fear and do no more such wickedness; which is the end of punishment, Deut. 13.11. and 17.13. and 19.20. and 21.21. This business concerns you, O ye Priests! Nor ought ye to think it any disparagement, (as vain men conceive, when they so call us) but indeed an honour if worthily so called. For howsoever the word Priest, as the office, is corrupted, a Priest is no other then , one grown up to the spiritual old age of Christ, unto that glorious mark set before us all, Priests and people, Ephes. 4.13. A perfect man, the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ. Ye are, by your place and profession, neer unto God, his friends, and intimate ones, whose duty it is to be middle men be∣tween God and his people; who are also a people neer unto him, Psal. 148.14. Whose office it is to burn incense to our God, to make prayers and intercessions for the people. It is therefore ex∣pected of us, that we should be more holy, more sober, more righte∣ous, more godly then other people are. This is necessary, if we consider the end of our prayer. For it is the prayer of a righteous man that avails much, James 5.10. And intercession is such a kinde of prayer as must avail very much, since it is made for the Priest himself, and for the whole congregation. Its meet therefore that he be an eminently righteous man and zealous, such an one as Phi∣neas, who stood up and prayed, and so the plague ceased, Psalm 106.30. the words are, he executed judgement; nor is there any mention made of prayer in the story, Numb. 25. though the words will bear both senses, and imply that an intercessors prayer must be operative, and the mediator himself a righteous man zealously exe∣cuting justice and judgement. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord, no, not when he is best pleased. And shall we think, that some remiss degree of holiness will suffice a Priest an Inter∣cessor for Gods people, and their Agent with God, to see God, obtain grace, and mercy from God for himself and the people, and that when God is most displeased with them? when as the people are, so is the Priest, then where is that Shepherd that will stand before me? saith the Lord, Jer. 49.19. All the sons of Levi were holy and zealous in Gods cause, Exod. 32. yet all of them could not hold Gods hand. It was to Moses only that God said, Let me alone. Nor can we be so uncharitable as to imagine, that all men were wicked in Jerusalem, when God sought for a man that should stand in the gap, and could finde none, Ezech. 22.30. No, no; he sought some excellent man, some Moses, some Samuel, some Daniel, to stand before him. Its well if an ordina∣ry just man can obtain his own pardon in a common Judgement. Lot was a righteous man, 2 Pet. 2.7. but he was delivered out of
Sodom at the instance and intercession of a more eminently righteous man than he. And therefore we read, that when God destroyed the Cities of the Plain, that God remembred Abraham and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the Cities in wch Lot dwelt, Gen. 19.29. As for profane men they are as unser∣viceable intercessors in the gap, as a dry bush to keep out a flame of fire from devouring the stubble—. These are far from righteousness, Esay 46.12. and far off from God. We are neer unto God, and intercessors for other men; where∣fore far be it from us, that we should be like other men: that it should be true of us, Like people, like Priest, Hos. 4.9. Or that we draw neer unto God with our mouth, and honour him with our lips, but our heart should be far from him! Matth. 15.8. Far be it from us that it should be truly spoken of us, which yet some of the people say, that there is much Lording and Domineering over one another, and over the people, although we be brethren, although we be not Bishops. If it be so, that we can be prowd without a title, how neer to God soever we imagine our selves to be, he beholds us afar off. Or what some say, that some of us are neer men, covetous; if so, we are neerer Mammon than we are to the true God. That we are as passionate and have as little rule of our affections, yea, some of us less then other men have. If so, how can we be said to be neer unto God, or neerer then other men? It is true what Hierom writes, Vehementer Ecclesiam Dei destruit, meliores esse Lai∣cos quàm Clericos; Its very destructive to the Church that the people should be better men then the Priests. Howbeit I hope, none of the people can say of any of us, that we have erred through wine; that we have gone out of the way through strong drink, as those Levitical Priests are thought to have done. I hope, there is no such Beast that toucheth the mountain of the Lord. We well know the Apostles admonition; Be not drunk with wine, wherein there is excess, but be filled with (that wine, wherein there can be no excess) the Spirit of God. I know, there are among us some, I hope many mortified men, who need Pauls exhortation to Timothy, drink no more water, but use a little wine, for thy stomacks sake, and thine often infirmities, 1 Tim. 5.23. But if any such intemperate men there be among us (as some say there are) I shall direct the Apostles exhortation unto them with some little change, Drink more water, and use but little wine. Let the Potitii and Pinarii the drinking Priests, and hungry glutte∣nous Priests, as the old Priests of Hcrcules were called, saith Festus, let such be Priests to them who are no gods, 2 Chron. 13.9. In the mystical Temple of the true God, the sons of Zadoc [every way righteous men] must be neer unto him to minister unto him, Ezech. 44.15.
But there is a drunkenness and not with wine, Esay 29.9. a sur∣feting with the giddy spirit of opinion kindled in our own imaginati∣ons, or borrowed of our neighbours neer home; such a drunken∣ness, I fear, there is too much among us, and that such boutefeus and incendiaries there are, who bring their own strange wilde fire into the Church of God, and zealously offer up their own , their own will-worship unto God. Shall such escape the just judgement of God? Our God hath his spiritual judgments under the Gospel, figured by those under the Law, but more dread∣ful then those. Such was the judgement on these two Priests. The fire burnt their bodies, not their clothes. There is a kinde of thun∣der which burns not the Chest, but melts the money in it; hurts not the flesh, but consumes the bones. And such are Gods spiri∣tual judgements, they touch not mens bodies, but seiz upon their souls. Non quoties peccant homines, sua fulmina mittit, God sends not thunder and lightning alwayes to destroy ungodly men; but such judgements as are much heavier, as hardness of heart, impenitency, treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, contempt of Gods Word and Commandement, from which good Lord deliver us! Let these Boutefeus who kindle their own fire, and compass themselves a∣bout with sparks, walk in the light of their fire, and in the sparks which they have kindled: but this shall they have of Gods hand, they shall lie down in sorrow, Esay 50.11. O my brethren! Let us, I beseech you, sadly consider the pu∣nishment of these men; and let us, from their example, Discere justitiam moniti—Learn righteousness; and remember that the Lord will be sanctified either upon those who are neer unto him, Ezech. 38.22, 23. Or by those who are neer unto him, 1 Pet. 3.15. Let us be sober, righteous, and godly, that we may put difference between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean; that we may teach the children of Israel, the people of God, all the sta∣tutes which the Lord hath spoken unto them, by the hand of Moses, Levit. 10.10, 11. that they may be a people also neer unto God: For the Lord hath said, that he will be sanctified in his nigh ones [such as are neer unto him, and intimate with him,] and before all the people, he will be glorified. Yea, let Priests and people who are neer unto God, consider, that their Body is the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in us, which we have of God, and are not our own: For we are bought with a price; therefore let us glo∣rifie God in our Body and in our Spirit, which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
The Swan,Levit. 11. Ver. 18. the Pellican, and the Gier-Eagle.] I believe these three fowls are all mistaken. Our Translators render the word  a Swan, following herein S. Hieroms authority. But if we may believe that most diligent and accurate searcher of Nature, Ʋlysses Androvandus, one who was extream well seen in most languages; he tells us, that the Hebrews have no word that simply and properly signifies a Swan. And most Translators that I have yet seen, are of his judgement. For the Greek Inter∣preters turn the word ; but what special Bird that is, we have no English word that I know, to signifie it, unless, with Ainsworth, we turn it a Redshank. Its said to have the name, , because it hath a purple coloured beak; its agreed by them to be a water fowl. Pagnin herein fol∣lowes the LXX; so doth the Spanish Translation and Vatablus: but Tremellius will have  to be Monedula, a Chough or a Daw: and thats a land fowl. The Jews side with neither. One of the learned Rabbins de∣rives  from  which signifies attonitum esse, obstu∣pescere, to be astonished; because he who looks upon , will be astonished, in that it is of such a strange shape, and so un∣like to other creatures. Another of them saith, that this  is a Mouse that flies in the night, or, a flying Mouse, that is, vesper∣tilio a Bat; which the Naturallists doubt whether they may count it among the fourfooted beasts, or among the birds; as it is described negatively—Ʋespertilio ne{que} in muribus planè neque in volucribus—Its neither altogether a Mouse, nor altogether a Bird, but mixt of them both. Howbeit, because it flies, though with membranous wings, and scarce useth its feet, though four, in going, therefore its reckoned by the Naturalists, among the night-birds, according to the Poets description of it, Nocte volans sero{que} tenens à vespere nomen. This seems to be the more probable, because verse 30 of this Chapter, we finde , the creature now in question, for∣bidden among the creeping things, and interpreted a Mole. For there are many words and names among the Jewes, common both to fowles and beasts of the earth, saith Ʋlysses Androvandus. Yea, many living creatures disparat one from other, yet may have the same name common to them. Nor ought this to seem strange to us; since very frequently one kinde of creature hath been taken for another. As from  Leo the Lion, Aries was mistaken. And from the Greek  Aper a Bore, is the Latin Caper which signifies a Goat. And whereas  Anser signifies a Goose, thence is our English word Hen Gallina. And from the Latin Vulpes a Fox, is our En∣glish word Wolf, Lupus; and many the like.
But because the Bat hath in its shape a kinde of loathsomness, and may suppose in men a natural abhorrency from eating it, (though Strabo lib. 16. reports, that the inhabitants of Borsippa, and Scal. Exer. 236.3. that the Islanders of Catigan, feed on Bats,) and whereas the people of God were brought up in all principles of neatness and cleanliness, especially in regard of their food, as may appear out of many places of this book; as also Ezech. 4.14. Acts 10.14. they seem not to need such a prohibition. Also because Moses here reckons up all such as are unquestionably fowles, ex∣cept the Bat which he puts last; by occasion of which, he addes ver. 20. all fowls that creep going upon all four, shall be an a∣bomination unto you. Hitherto we have heard what  is not. Now what is it? I conceive  signifies an Owl. So Castellio renders the word. And Arias Montanus, because mention is made of other kinds of Owles, ver. 16, 17. he borrowes an Ita∣lian word Civetta, which Ʋlys. Androvandus useth, which also sig∣nifies an Owl. As for the Swan, the same author thinks some injury to be done to her, that she should, either under this name, or any other, be reckoned among the unclean fowles, and such as are not to be eaten; since the Romans of old, saith Plutarch, were wont to put up their Swans and fat them, and eat them as a very rare dish, as the Cygnets are accounted at this day. Although it cannot be denied but that the prohibition of eat∣ing the flesh of certain beasts, fowles, and fishes, imported unto If∣rael according to the flesh, an abstaining from communion with the Heathen; by reason of divers analogies and proportions be∣tween them: as was darkly intimated, Levit. 20. Where the Lord having prohibited the Heathenish manners practised by the nations whom the Lord cast out of the Land, I am, saith he, Jehovah your God who have separated you from the Nations, ver. 24. and then adds, ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and unclean, and between unclean fowls and clean; implying, that by these, the other were intended. Also the vision to S. Peter, Acts 10. and the same occasioned to be recited by him, Chap. 11. for greater confirmation, makes it clear and evi∣dent. Yet can we think, that, when now this distinction between the Jewes and Gentiles, is taken away, this Scripture is become useless, and like a Letter long since dated, which hath done its errand? Surely no; for I know, saith the Wise man, that what∣soever God doth, shall be for ever.Eccles. 3.14. And all holy Scripture is profi∣table for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, &c. 2 Tim. 3.16, 17. It remains therefore, that this Scripture, as well as o∣thers, have its spiritual use, that the man of God may be perfected unto every good work.
Besides, although the wall of separation, as to carnal ordinances, between the Jewes and Gentiles, be broken down, Ephes. 2.14. is not the heathenish life yet whole in many both Jewes and Gentiles, who walk in the vanity of their minde, having their understanding darkned, being alienated from the life of God, &c. Ephes. 4.18, 19. Do not many work the will of the Gentiles, when they walk in lascivi∣ousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings, and abo∣minable idolatries? Surely the Gentiles life makes the true Hea∣thenism; and, in this respect it stands firm as a wall between the Israel of God who walk according to his rule, Gal. 6.16. and the Gen∣tiles: yea, it is the wall of separation between God and man, Esay 59.2. Besides, there is other reason why that Scripture should be of use unto us. Est enim Deo charior homo quàm sibi. At{que} ipse, cui Anima nostra curae est, idem etiam, uti corpori bene sit, haud negligit; —ut sit mens sana in corpore sano. Caeterùm nollem esse scandalo imperitis rerum; atque ideò super hoc argumento lubentiùs paucis, quod sentio cum doctis communicabo. Nullus dubito quin hisce prohibitorum animantium carnibus insit aliqua cum corpore nostro ; unde etiam  oritur, & quae sequuntur ipsam, innumera, us{que} ad internecionem, incommo∣da non corrigenda. Quam uti{que} naturarum contrarietatem, Bonus Deus, (qui & hac etiam de causa Dominus Deus universae carnis ap∣pellari potest, Jer. 32.27.) ipse carnes, & nostram & animantium re∣liquorum facile omnium, quippe qui sit earundem omnium Plastes, inter∣noscit, ammonét{que} suos, illos imprimis qui dicto sunt ipsi obedientes, quae fuerint ipsis usui ac salutares, quae contrà ipsorum valetudini ob∣futurae; quibus, ne comederint, interdixit. Enimverò quorsum aliàs hoc praeceptum haud rarò legitur? neque sanguinem neque adipem omninò comedetis, Levit. 3.15, 16, 17. Quid est in causa porrò quod interanea passim, jubente Deo, super altare comburenda? Nisi quod haec omnia pessimi nutrimenti sint; unde & sibi benignè offerri mandat adolenda in odorem suavitatis: nempe ne nostro cum nocu∣mento iis vescamur, at sibi potiùs eadem offerenda. Hoc est, uti no∣bis ab eduliis hujusmodi temperemus. Vult enim jubet{que} Deus hanc si∣bi, nostro cum bono, abstinentiam ab iisdem largiamur. Nec est in aliis aliorum animantium carnibus diversa ratio. Ex∣emplo, pro reliquis omnibus, esto suilla caro; quae vel sola comesa, vel cum aliis alimentis inhibere dicitur interspirationem. Quod expe∣rimento frequenti se probâsse autumat Sanctorius de medicina sta∣tica. Sed manum de tabula. Orandi medici, si quis in haec inciderit, uti veniàm indulgeant, quòd ipsorum fundum aliquantò audacius ac prolixiùs araverim. But whether  be a Bat, as some conceive, or an Owl, as others render it, though herein they differ; yet in this they agree, that it is no Swan, nor do they reckon the Swan among
the unclean fowls. Yea hetein they accord, that  is a night-bird whether Owl or Bat. They both love darkness and shun the light. No marvel therefore, O Israel, that the Lord thy God forbids thee to eat of these night-birds, or have communion with them. Thy God would, that thou shouldst be like unto himself; which is the principal end of thy pure religion and undefiled. He is light, and in him is no darkness at all, 1 John 1.5. The Devil is darkness or the Prince of it; and to Proserpina whom the Poets make the wife of Pluto or the Devil, they have consecrated the Bat. And therefore S. Basil on Esay 2. compares the Bat unto the Devil, which loves darkness and hates the light. Though the Blacks of Mexico worship the Bat for their god, (as Gyraldus reports, Hist. Ind. lib. 3.) worship thou the Lord thy God, and serve him only; as our Lord answered the Devil when he tempted him to fall down and worship him. And as our Lord said con∣cerning him, the Prince of this world (the same Prince of dark∣ness) cometh and hath nothing in me; John 14.30. So take thou heed lest when he comes, he may finde somewhat of his own in thee; lest he finde his lusts now made thine by thy consent, living in thee; lest he take them and thee, who wilt not part with them, both alike away together. Take in time the Apostles counsel before that dismal day come; cast off the works of dark∣ness; cast all the idols of thine own dark imagination to the Bats, Esay 2.20. and put on the armour of light, Rom. 13.12, 13. Ye Brethren are not in Darkness, that that day should overtake you as a Thief: Ye are all  Sons of light and Sons of the day: ye are not of the night or of darkness, 1 Thes. 5.4, 5. Wherefore be not like the Owls, [even the Wisemen of this world] who have eyes and see not, who are sharp-sighted and can well judge of the hid∣den things of darkness and dishonesty; but have no sight, no discern∣ing at all of the clear day light of life, the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. the Day-star which riseth in the hearts of those who are the sons of light, 2 Pet. 1.19. They have wings of contemplation, where∣by they would be thought to sore and mount up to heaven, but their whole speculation is only about earthly, worldly, and temporal things; as the Bats have wings yet cannot raise themselves much above the earth. Mirum in modum illuminatus obscuritate, luce cae∣catur, after a wonderful manner, they are enlightned with obscu∣rity, and blinded with the light, saith S. Ambrose. O Israel, who art of the day, 1 Thes. 5.8. take the counsel of thy God by Moses, Levit. 11.20. Let these night-birds be an abomination unto thee. 2. The next Bird also is mistaken by the Translators. The He∣brew word is , which they render a Pelican, following herein the LXX, and Pagnin. But the Jews understand by  what in English we call a Cuckow; which they prove out of the
Talmud wherein it is called . And Arias Montanus so renders it. That which moved our Translators and others to turn  a Pelican, was, because they took it to be derived from  to vomit, as the Pelican doth. Whence the French Bible, for the same reason, hath a Cormorant, which is wont so to do also. But the Cuckow, say the Naturalists, is wont also to vomit, and cast up her meat. For which reason the Germans abstain from eating the flesh of the Cuckow as unclean and excrementitious; though the Italians feed on the young ones especially, as a rare meat com∣mended unto them by Aristotle and Pliny: Its well if good for any thing when she is dead; for they cannot commend her for any good quality while she lives. She is of all other birds the most timorous and fearful; yet feared by all the less birds extream∣ly, because very like unto the Hawk. Whereupon a Fable is grounded which Plutarch relates, That the Cuckow asked the less birds why they fled from her and shunned her, whereas she had no signe of cruelty in her. Because, say they, we fear, you will be an Hawk in time. Its wisdom to foresee danger by times. Howbeit, the Cuckow is cruel also, as I shall shew anon, even as all fearful creatures are when they get mastery. Yea, the less birds getting advantage of the Cuckow, rend, tear, and kill her, saith Albertus, as moved thereto by her likeness to the Hawk. According to a story of a Gentleman, who meeting one exceed∣ingly resembling another, with whom he had a fuid, he drew upon him and wounded him. The person wounded complain∣ing, and asking his reason for that affront; Art not thou, saith he, such an one? whom he named; the other answering, no; take that, saith he, for being like him. O that we were as wary, that we did , that we did abstain from every appearance of evil! Or as Castellio renders the words, Ab omni maleficii genere, that we abstained from every kinde of evil, 1 Thes. 5.22. as unthankfulness, pride, and vainglory, which this Bird also signifies unto us. The Israel of God is forbidden to eat of this bird, not without cause; on which the Naturalists have set a brand of ingratitude. For they say, that its hatcht, fed, and brought up by other birds, into whose nests the Dam had conveyed her eggs; (whence the Proverb, Cuculus semper in alieno nido parit, the Cuckow layes al∣wayes in another birds nest) and that being now grown strong, she kills all the young ones brought up with her, and her suppo∣sed Dam and Nurse: as the Ram puts and pushes, and the Colt and Calf kick their Dams. An ill requital of careful and tender education. Which unthankfulness, pardonable in the unreasona∣ble creatures, many men basely imitate. So ingrateful were the
Israelites unto Moses who carried them in his bosom as a nursing father, Numb. 11.11. The Apostle found like measure from his children the Corinthians whom he had begotten unto God, 1 Cor. 4.15. for whose souls he would very gladly spend and be spent: though, saith he, the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved, 2 Cor. 12.15. Which may also be suspected, that the Apostle may imply, when he tells the Thessalonians, we were Gentle a∣mong you even as a Nurse cherisbeth her children, so being affe∣ctionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us, 1 Thes. 2.7, 8. Commemoratio beneficii quaedam quasi exprobratio est: wherefore doth the Apostle remem∣ber them of this, unless he intimate hereby some fail in them unanswerable hereunto? And truly it may be almost of gene∣ral observation: Tanti cris aliis, quanti tibi fueris. People com∣monly esteem their Teachers, as the Teachers account of them∣selves, if lowly & humbly, they will soon abase them. If the Teacher be proud and arrogant, the people will account highly of him. Ye suffer fools gladly: ye suffer if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devoure you, if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face, saith S. Paul to his unthankful Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11.20. The Cuckow is called  from  to perbreak; because she gluts her self, and then casts up her meat; thereby prefigu∣ring the like ill quality in many, who have been nourished up in the words of faith and good doctrine, 1 Tim. 4.6. but afterward yielding to their wanton fansie, loathe and cast up the principles of their education. The Cuckow has but one tune, whence she has got a name in most languages; and therewith names her self again and again, and many agains. And thereby represents vain boasters, who in all their discourses weave-in themselves and their own praise. This was their doing. Thus they said, they did; not remembring, that—Proprio laus sordet in ore, a mans own praise is loathsom in his own mouth. They quite forget that of the Wiseman, Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, a stranger, and not thine own lips, Prov. 27.2. Pride and vain-glory, unthankfulness, fearfulness, and cruelty; these and such as these, are the ill qua∣lities of the Cuckow. O Israel! let them be an abomination unto thee. 3. The third Bird in this verse is also mistaken: For what they render the Gier-Eagle, is indeed rather the Vulture-Eagle or the Ossifrage. But its very doubtful whether this be here so to be understood; as will appear upon further enquiry. The word is  from , which signifies to love dearly and tenderly, to be merciful, and to have compassion upon one; as when the bowels are moved; to which answers ,
to be moved with the bowels of mercy, Matth. 9.36. for one ex∣plains the other; , if there be any bowels and mercies, Phil. 2.1. A natural affection is hereby imply∣ed, such as is between parents and their children. So God our heavenly Father gives the knowledge of salvation unto his chil∣dren by the remission of [and taking away] their sin, , through the bowels of the mercy of our God, Luke 1.78. From this word  the fowl here in question hath her name. We read of no such reciprocal tender affection in the Gier-Eagle between the Dam and her young, any more then is ordinary and common with other birds, but indeed rather on the contrary, so ravenous is the whole kinde of Eagles, that they prey one upon another, and destroy one another, saith Aelian lib. 2. de Anima∣libus cap. 39.  therefore is no Gier-Eagle. What is it then? Some say, a Vulture; others a Pelican, as Vatablus; Castellio, and the Spanish Bible. Pierius reports out of the Egyptian Monuments, which their Priests, and especially Orus hath left; that the Vulture is so tenderly affected to her young, that she wounds her self, that thereby she may nourish them with her blood. And the like, if not greater ardency of affection is said to be in the Peli∣can toward her young ones; that when the Fowler, in order to taking her, hath kindled a fire round about her nest where she sits upon her young ones, she, some say, out of folly, others, out of render love to her young, beats the flames with her wings, as thinking thereby to extinguish them; but she thereby increasing them the more, stands in defence of her self and her brood, until she perish in the flames, or render her self unable further to re∣sist. And right-well doth this fervency of love, both in the Vulture and in the Pelican, deserve the name , dear and tender love. But unto whether of the twain, its proper, I know not: It seems, Arias Montanus was in the like doubt when he rendred  by a word common to both, Philostorgus: which imports the natu∣ral, intense, and intimate love and bowels of affection in parents to∣ward their children, and the same reciprocal affection of children also toward their parents. Such as the Naturalists report also to be between the old and young Stork. Which is the next bird na∣med, ver. 19. called  Piety, , natural love; whence is the English and Dutch word Stork. I shall not adde to these, what monstrous & incredible things, divers of the Antient Fathers (whom for honours sake I will not here name) tell of the Polican, unworthy of their authority. Wherefore Franzius adviseth Students, that if they mention them, to adde, Sicut patres scripserunt, as the Fathers have written, or the like clause; lest they should confirm men in belief of
prodigious fables. Which I will not believe, though any one should swear it, faith lysses Androvandus. But why are these reckoned among the unclean foles? Its an∣swered: their flesh is hard, unsavoury, excrementitious; and so unwholsom to be eaten; though Athenaeus report, that, among other fowles, the Pelican was one dish served up to the table of Cotys King of Thrace. But here it may be inquired in special concerning the Pelican and the Stork, why they should be reputed impure, since so much good is recorded of both, by Aristotle and Pliny, and other Natu∣ralists; especially since the figurative immorality of the fowles, fourfooted beasts, and fishes, render them unclean to Israel; because thereby they represented the immoral and vitious conversation of the Heathen; according to which, they were to be separated from the Israel of God, and accounted abominable. Beside the descending and ascending love of these fowls, as hath been shewen in part; there is likewise a kinde of conjugal af∣fection observed between the male and semale, and mutual love and chastity one towards the other, in the tor; and the breach of that bond of love by the one, is severely revenged by the other, as Oppian and Aelian report. As the Stork, Jer. 8.7. so the Pelican depart before the Winter, and return and bring glad tydings of the Spring approaching. The Stork is very thankful for benefits received of men, espe∣cially in whose houses wherein she builds and lodges; for there∣about she kills all the Toads and Snakes which might annoy the house, saith Platarch; and when she departs, she leaves one of her young ones to the Master of the house, as a reward of his hospitality. Others report other examples of the Storks gra∣titude. These and the like (may I not say, vertues?) observed by Wifemen in the Pelican and Stork, they have therefore prohi∣bited the killing of them, especially of the Stork in Thessaly, and that under pain of death; because that fowl defends the countrey from Serpents which would otherwise so multiply, that they would drive out the inhabitants. Surely the Lord would not that  and  that mercy and piety should be consumed, but that they should be preserved for ever; and that there should be living examples and testimo∣nies of them in the birds of the air; unto which the Lord sends his non-proficients among men, to School, Jer. 8.7. So that when that mutual love between parents and their children falleth, they may learn it of the Stork and Pelican. Whence  is what S. Paul cals , to requite the parents, 1 Tim. 5.4. Yea, Budaeus tells us of Pelargicos omos, a law from the example of the Stork, to requite our parents. Yea, hereby the
Lord teacheth us to know our time and to foresee and prevent judgement, as Jer. 8.7. Yea, hereby he forbids , unnatural affection, Rom. 1.31. 2 Tim. 3.3. Yea, hereby the Lord holds forth unto us, how and by what means he will take away our sins; as when the Angel shews to the Prophet the two women who carry away the Ephah loaden with wickedness, into the land of Shi∣nar; the two women had wings as the wings of a Stork, and the Spirit was in their wings; even the Spirit of love toward God and our neighbour, that takes away the sins of the world, Zach. 5.5.—11. even the Son of God, who is his love, Col. 1.13. , the Son who is his love. These fowls therefore and such as these, the Lord would not that they should be destroyed, eaten, or consumed: no, it is an abomination to eat and consume them. The Lord would, that they should shew forth his vertues and be perpetual and lasting moni∣tors unto men, to minde them of their duties. And therefore these fowles live long. Ulysses Androvandus reports concerning the Pelican wch he had seen in Brabant, that it had lived in Maxi∣milian the Emperours time, and gone before his Armies when they went forth and shewen them where they should encamp; that the like the same Pelican had done in his father Philips dayes; that when he saw it, it lived as a tame fowl in the Court of the Empress; and by the testimony of men worthy to be believed (saith my Author) that Pelican had lived in and about that place four-score years. The Pelican and Stork are the most vertuous of birds; yet nei∣ther hath the Pelican nor the Stork any tongue wherewith to chat∣ter or chant out their own praise. Nor do we read, that the most eminent Saints of God, have spoken much, beside what monuments they have left behinde them, which are the Oracles of God. They all passed thorow this world with great stilness and silence, declaring the praise of God in their life and actions, Psal. 63.4. not their own praise in their words. All that Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, & Jacob are recorded to have spoken, may be written in a little room. As for Abel, he spake not one word, that we read of, all the dayes of his life: yet was Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, all faithful, Hebr. 11. all righteous persons. Who shall we set by them in this prating age? when most men proclaim every one  his own goodness (as if he were  like  the Stork) but a faith∣ful man (or man of truths, as the words are,) who shall finde? Prov. 20.6. For indeed how can they be faithful, how can they believe, who receive honour one of another, and seek not the ho∣nour that comes of God onely? who seek the praise of men, more then the praise of God, John 5.44. and 12.43.
Yet it might seem strange, that these fowles should be counted among the unclean birds, yet should have no ill qualities which might make them worthy of that Classis. I have sometime heard good fellowes complain of the Preachers, that they inveigh bitterly against excessive drinking, but say nothing of the like excesse in eating; perhaps obliquely intimating, as if they spared them∣selves. For satisfaction therefore of those Club-men, they may know, that the Vulture and Pelican are extreamly ravenous birds: and that the Pelican hath a double craw or crop, whereof one like the end of a Neat; both which she fills, and yet is soon again empty. Pliny calls her inexplebile animal, that's never satisfied. Ʋlysses Androvandus relates a story out of Franciscus Sanctius, of a Pelican or Onocratalus (which hath this name from her voice like the braying of an Asse) that being born-down to the ground by her weight, and so taken, an Ethiop or little black childe was found in her crop. Yet is she alwayes lean, whether from her speedy concoction, or because all her inwards are velut unum si∣ne diverticulo intestinum rectum; or hath no retentive faculty; or that she hath a kinde of  or greedy appetite: like too ma∣ny who resort to our Churches who are insatiable and glutto∣nous hearers, yet thrive not by their spiritual food: so that, when they have consumed many a laborious Ox (1 Cor. 9.9, 10.) they are altogether as lean and meager as they were before, Genesis 41.21. So great an Eater is the Pelican, and so little a Drinker, if we believe Turnerus, who saith, that the Pelican drinks but twice in a year. 'Tis hard to believe this of a bird that's alwayes in the wa∣ter; and how could Turnerus observe this? unless some Pelican carried him alwayes in her crop like the black boy. How other∣wise was it possible? Let our , the slow-bellies, the Apicii, the belly∣gods and insatiable Gluttons of this age, take notice of this, whose Pinguis aqualiculus propenso sesquipede extat, saith the Sa∣tyrist, who bear before them a Paunch a foot and-half thick, like the craw or gorge of the Onocratalus; I want Sequipedatia verba, words fit and of like measure to their odious unreasona∣bleness and unsatiableness. The Son of Sirach gives excellent counsel, Ecclus. 31.12. If thou sit at a bountiful table, , open not thy weazon-pipe (that's  properly, not the throat, as ours turn it in the margent; that's ) open not thy gullet, thy weazon-pipe, indeed thine appetite upon it. And v. 16. , eat as becomes a man, not like a brute beast, like a Vulture or Onocratalus. Read from ver. 12. to the end of that Chapter: its a seasonable lesson and proper for the Table. Whereby also the Drunkard may know, that no one sin excu∣seth
another; nor is the Drunkard therefore justified, because he is not a Glutton. O Israel! They are both unclean fowls. Away with them! So∣lomon gives thee good advice; Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way. Be not among wine-bibbers, a∣mong riotous eaters of their flesh: For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags, Prov. 23.19, 20, 21. What they turn the Heron,Levit. 11. Ver. 19. is indeed the Bittaur, as will ap∣pear upon due examination. It is true that R. Salomon turns  the word here used,  Milvus irritabilis, an angry Kite; and then addes, It seems to me, that it is the same which they call  Hairon. Howbeit, others by  understand the wrathful Pie; o∣thers, the Vulture rather. And Mercer tells us, that the same  is by diverse diversly rendred, as by the names of four se∣veral other birds, beside those already named; as the Ring-dove, the Chough, the Bustard, and the Dunghil Cock. So that we are left in great doubt what to make of . Arias Montanus, that he might be sure not to erre, interprets  according to the sig∣nification of the word, Avis furibunda, a furious bird. But since there may be many such, he leaves us to conjecture which. R. Sa∣lomon is of greatest authority to prove it an Heron; whose words being interpreted a Kite, Hairon, Pye, and Vulture, and he himself understanding the Hairon, let us enquire into the nature of this fowl, which he calls  and our Translators render an Heron, whether it may probably be judged to be , yea, or not. The Heron, which in the Greek is called , in Latin Ardea, is of divers kindes. I shall speak the more fitly to our purpose if I mention only what is delivered by the Naturalists in common to them all, as the Scripture here speaks, , the Heron according to her kinde. And so they report her one of the most vertuous of all the Birds. The most notable ver∣tues in the Heron, are continency, piety, wisdom and providence. The continency and temperance of the Heron is highly commended by Michael Glyca, lib. 1. Animal. who saith (I must leave this up∣on his credit, though the continency of this fowl may be more ea∣sily proved by him, then the sobriety of the Pelican by Turnerus,) that the male Heron perceiving a necessity of copulation, before he hath company with the female, he mourns forty dayes; as if he would signifie a business that must be done, which yet is most unpleasant and irksom to him: so that Pliny saith, in treading, that he weeps bloody tears; though this later be denied by Al∣bertus Magnus, upon his own frequent ocular observation. How∣beit Aristotle and he agree, that the like temperance is observable also in the female. Some things come to pass by violence and
even against nature, saith Theophrastus, , as the Heron couples with the female, with much pain, and she brings forth with sorrow, saith Aristotle. No less commendable is the piety of the Heron toward her young, and the reciprocal love of the young ones toward their Dams. And although  [to shew such natural affecti∣on] hath gotten the name from  the Stork, yet is this mutual descending and ascending love as vigorously exercised by the Herons as by the Storks and Pelicans, saith Aelian lib. 3. cap. 23. But whereas its commonly said, Difficile est amare simul & sapere; Its hard to love and to be wise together, The wisdom and prudence of the Heron is most remarkable, and that above all other Birds: For although the most of them can foresee the change of weather, yet few or none know how to escape a storm when it comes; none that I have yet read of, so wisely and providently as the Heron; which foreseeing the rain and other incommodious weather, mounts up above the clouds, and so avoids it: to which purpose, Ʋlysses Androvandus (to whom I owe much of this discourse concerning Birds) cites Virgil, (and affirms that the same is testified by divers grave au∣thors also,) —notas{que} paludes Deserit, at{que} altam supra volat ardea nubem. The Heron also is as witty in purveying for her food: she loves Oysters extream well; but knowing no other way to get the fish, swallows it in the shell; as well knowing, that the shell will be opened by the heat of her stomack: which done, she casts it up again and separates the fish from the shell. The same art is used also by the Pelican. Now who will say that these are qualities of unclean fowles? Who therefore will think that by  can be meant the Heron? We must therefore enquire fur∣ther, and we shall finde that by , another manner of bird is to be understood, which in English we corruptly call a Bittern, which more properly should be named a Bitaur, as I shall shew anon. The Bitaur is reckond among the Ardeae or Herons, by reason of some similitude in their outward form and shape: But as for their inward disposition, they have little other agreement then that they are both Birds. Nor are they Birds of one feather: For the Bitaur is called  in the Greek, and in the Latin Stellaris, starry, by reason of the variety of spots like Stars; as, for the same reason, a certain kinde of Hawk is called Asterius. Which yet makes nothing at all for the credit of this fowl, if we believe the Poets; who say, that a certain lazy servant having been often scourged and stigmatized, and to no purpose, he was at length turn'd into this Bird called , that is, Piger, lazie, idle; and, to remember him of his slothfulness and his well-de∣served
punishment for it, he bears the prints and marks of his scourging. And 'tis strange what Aelian reports of this fowl, lib. 5. cap. 36. The Asterias, saith he, growes tame in Egypt, and well understands a mans voice; , if any man in disgrace call her Servant, she is angry; but if any call her , lazy, , she dis∣dains and is highly offended. If this be true, as it is not doubted, its reason sufficient, from whence we may conclude, that this fowl is meant by  in the text, namely, the Bitaur, as being  irritabilis, easily provoked to wrath and indignation. And being so moved, strikes at his eyes who so dishonours her. She utters an horrible voice like the bellowing of a Bull; whence Pliny calls her Taurus, quae Boum mugitûs imitatur, Taurus appellata. She imitates the bellowing of Bulls and is called a Bull; whence, saith Ʋlysses Androvandus, this fowl is called Botaurus; Anglus quidam Butora vocat eo quòd Tauri beatum, id est, mugitum imitari vide∣tur. A certain English Author, saith he, calls this bird a Butor; because she imitates the roaring, that is, the bellowing of a Bull. Its one of the most lazy and most ravenous fowls that flees; yea, so lazy she is, that she can hardly flee for sloth. Albertus there∣fore saith, that this Bitaur or Butaur is Buteo Accipiter a Buzzard-Hawk; or, as we may english it, Between Hawk and Buzzard. This fowl is here reckoned among the unclean fowls; and is feigned by the Poets to have been metamorphosed into this fowl from a lazy stigmatized servant. Since the Poets also (who were the Heathens Prophets, Tit. 1.12.) foretold, that there should be a Revolution of things—redeunt Saturnia regna. Alter erit Tiphys — it ought not seem strange unto us, that, if the servant were turn'd into a Bird, that bird should now again be turn'd into a servant; If  the lazy servant were changed into a lazy fowl, that the same lazy fowl should be again changed into as lazy a servant. So lazy and idle this Buzzard is, that he will not ascend in holy thoughts and affections unto heavenly things, but sits still in the nest of his old principles of idleness and broods others of his own judge∣ment, or rather want of judgement. So lazy is this Buzzard unto what is good, but too active in what is evil. For since the fowls of the air typifie the Prince of the air and his evil spirits (so, what our Lord calls the fowls of the air, Matth. 13.4. he interprets the wic∣ked or mischievous on, ver. 19.) What marvel is it, that an evil bird should be turned into an evil servant, who should smite his fellow servants, and eat and drink with the drunken, Matth. 24.48, 49. For the evil bird, from which he is changed, is as well an Hawk; as a Buzzard. The Apostle puts  evil or hurtful beasts; and , slow bellies, together, Tit. 1.12. And why should we wonder if that bird which strikes at the mans eye, being now changed into a man should still strike at the mans eye, the in∣ward
eye of faith, understanding, judgement, conscience. Indeed it might seem strange and wonderful, if the same  the same idle stigmatized servant should be changed into a stigmatizing servant, that he who was persecuted for his own con∣science, should persecute others for their conscience. S. Paul having been once a Persecutor of the faith, being now changed from a Persecutor to a Professor of that faith, he would not exercise domi∣nion over the faith of the Professors, 2 Cor. 1.24. He reports how the professors marvelled, that he who persecuted them formerly, now preached the faith which once he destroyed. But they might much more wonder if he who had preached the faith, should perse∣cute and destroy the professors of it. It would be very strange, that men should forget that they themselves had been in the same con∣demnation. O thou Israel of God who persecutest none, but art exposed as a prey to every Hawk or Buzzard, to every ravenous fowl, be∣ware and take great heed of such birds of prey; they are all for∣bidden: And let them all be an Abomination unto thee. But why should we despair even of the persecuting Roman Bitaur? though their first founders were nourished by a Wolf, and they have fulfilled S. Pauls prophesie concerning them and all like persecuting ravenous Wolves, Acts 20.29. that grievous Wolves shall not spare the flock of Christ. Though the Roman Eagle hath been metamorphosed into a persecuting Hawk and Buz∣zard, yet its possible, through the grace of our good God, that there may be so great a change, that the Wolf may dwell with the Lamb, Esay 11.6. that the Bitaur may become an Heron, that the cruel Hawk may become a loving and pious Stork. Paul who, as saith Arnobius, was figured by Benjamin, who should ravin as a Wolf, Gen. 49.27. who persecuted the flock of Christ, the same be∣came as a Lamb. And he who was  the bird in question (or indeed now out of question) that Avis furibunda, as Arias Monta∣nus renders it, a mad bird, exceedingly mad against them, persecuted them, (as he himself confesseth, Acts 26.11.) even to strange Ci∣ties; the same is now become  like the  merciful and pious like the Stork. He who was as the evil servant who smote his fellow servants, he became a faithful servant of Jesus Christ, and a servant unto all the Church of Christ, yea, as a Nurse cherishing her children, 1 Cor. 9.19. 1 Thes. 2.7. Yea, the persecuting arrogant Saul now became humble Paul the convert, the Lamb, the Stork, he also becomes a patern unto all that shall believe and turn unto Christ and his long-suffering, 1 Tim. 1.16. There may be yet hope of thee thou persecuting evil servant, ravening Wolf, and furi∣ous bird of prey, if thou yield to so blessed a change, and follow that patern and example which is set before thee. Even they whom thou hast used despitefully and persecuted, pray for thee.
But we must not forget the mistaken Heron, whom our Tran∣slators have much wronged; that chaste and continent, that pious and loving, that wise and provident Heron. O thou Israel of God! let it not trouble thee, while thou art chaste, though thou be re∣puted an unclean fowl: though thou be accounted impious and blasphe∣mous, care not, while thou art loving and pious; be content to be esteem'd a fool in this world, while thou art wise and provident for a better world. Be thou a patern and example of continency and chastity to the Triorchi, to the lascivious and incontinent Hawks and Buzzards. Reprove and instruct in love and piety, the per∣secuting birds of prey. Teach by thy wisdom all unwise and impro∣vident fowles to escape the judgements of God which are coming up∣on the earth, Jer. 8. Be a true Ardea, an Heron  (as Sca∣liger gives the etymon) flying aloft above the clouds, even to Heaven it self, even to God himself. Arise with Christ, and minde the things that are above where Christ sits at the right hand of God, Col. 3.1. So shalt thou learn and teach all, by thine holy exam∣ple, that the way of life is above to the wise that they may escape the Hell that is beneath, Prov. 15.24. So, when thou loving and merciful one, shalt flee to him unto whom thou art like, the loving and merciful God, thou shalt escape the heavie judgements of thy God, when he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, storm and horrible tempest, the portion of their cup. For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness; his countenance doth behold the upright, Psal. 11.1, 6, 7.
Thus shall ye separate the children of Israel from their unclean∣ness,Levit. 15. Ver. 31. that they die not in their uncleanness, when they desile my Taber∣nacle that is among them.] What exception I have against the translation of this verse, or a part of it, lies as well against some hundreds of places more, where  are rendred the children of Israel, which should be turn'd the Sons of Israel. This mis-translation, I confess, should have been noted long since, where it first meets us, as Gen. 32.32. Doth it seem too slight or unworthy our notice? I shall pro∣pound only two considerations, according to which, the male or son is necessarily to be understood, and not to be smothered in conceptu confuso, as here it is in the name of children. The one in regard of diqnity and authority; which argument S. Paul made use of, 1 Tim. 2.12, 13. The other in regard of strength and ability for the perform∣ance of some hard duty required; and thus also the same Apo∣stle understands it, Rom. 8.16. The Spirit gives testimony to our spirit, that we are the sons of God; which in our translation are rendred the children of God. In the former Chapter the Apo∣stle had described the spiritual child who had only a good will, which he calls a babe, 1 Cor. 3.1. So 13.11. When I was a childe I spake as a childe, &c. So likewise Gal. 4.1, 2.19. , my little children, of whom I travail in birth until Christ be formed in you; and many like places. But the oppo∣sition is clear, Rom. 8. when ver. 15. he opposeth to children un∣der the spirit of bondage (which differ not from servants, Gal. 4.1.) sons under the spirit of adoption. Such are no more chil∣dren, but sons, that is, strong and able to suffer with Christ, and so to be glorified with him; as it follows ver. 16, 17. which is the scope of the place: and hereto they are impowred and in∣abled by the Spirit of God, which makes them sons of God, ver. 14. And many convictive proofs there are, if humbly and docibly we look into the Scriptures. I shall name some few. Matth. 5. Where our Lord incourages his Disciples to the highest duty, to love their enemies, bless them that curse them, do good to them that hate them, pray for them who despitefully use them and persecute them, that ye may be  (not the chil∣dren, as our Translators render the word, but) the Sons of your Father which is in the heavens, v. 44, 45. So they who have mastered their appetites, are called the sons of God, though our Translators call them children, Luke 20.36. They are  sons of God, being  sons of the resurrection, Gal. 3.7. They who are of faith, the same are the sons of Abraham, and the sons of God, ver. 26. In both places is the word , sons, which are turn'd children.
So Gal. 4. The heir while he is  a childe, differs nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all, but is under Tutors and Governours, until the time appointed of the Father. Even so we, when we were , children, were in bondage under the elements of the world; but when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his son made of a woman, made un∣der the Law, to redeem them who were under the Law, that we might receive  the adoption of sons. And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit into your hearts crying Abba Father. Wherefore thou art no more a Servant but a son: and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ, Gal. 4.1.—7. This testimony is so full and home, that I could leave out none of it. And the Apostle speaking of the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow, unto both which estates his belie∣vers are to be conformed, it became him, saith he, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2.10. I shall adde but one Scripture more, Revel. 21.7. He that overcometh, shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son. For the dignity also of the male, it is, that  the male childe preserves the name  and memory of his father, according to what Absalom saith, 2 Sam. 18.18. I have no son  to keep my name in remembrance. And therefore the brother is commanded to raise up the name of his brother dying without issue male: , For male children are the pillars of their families. As on the contrary  women have their name from  to forget; because their name is lost, and the memory of their fathers family is swallowed up in their husbands name. The male also was required in sacrifice, as the more worthy, perfect, and acceptable, according to Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the deceiver who hath in his flock  a male, (that is, entire and perfect, as appears by the opposit,) and voweth and sacrificeth to the Lord a corrupt thing. And the reason added from the dig∣nity of him to whom the vow is payed, proves the dignity also of the male oblation: For I am a great King, saith the Lord of hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen. Howbeit this prerogative of the male in nature above the female, neither arrogates nor argues any spiritual eminency in the man; nor derogates any thing from the woman. But, because in nature the man is usually more strong and more worthy then the woman, as the Prophet implies, Esay 3.4.12. Where he threatneth to take away the honourable and able props and stayes of the Common-wealth, ver. 1.2, 3. &c. that he will substitute, in their room, children, babes and women: although so it may, by degenerate mindes,
come to pass that the male may be effeminate, and the woman more masculine and vigorous, as the Poet speaks, — . Otherwise, neither Sex as such, addeth or diminisheth any thing of their spiritual interest in regard of either. And therefore, in the place before mentioned, Gal. 4.1.7. its evident that S. Paul useth the natural state of nonage and riper age, as a protasis or proposition to a similitude, thereby to illustrate the spiritual estate of both. And cleerly to this purpose the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3.26. Ye are all  (not the children, though Ours turn it so, but) the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Which filiation or sonship compre∣hends as well the woman as the man in regard of the spiritual e∣state in Jesus Christ; as the 28 verse evidently proves, There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. By these and many other testimonies which the judicious Rea∣der may observe in the holy Scripture, it may appear, that the holy Spirit of God useth  and  as words importing dignity and strength. And therefore when Pharaoh would abase Gods people and disable them from making war upon him, he impo∣sed on them Task-masters and servile works, and made them slaves; and mischievously plotted for the future, to render them a vile and abject Nation, and utterly to enfeeble them for ever making head against him; and therefore he commanded the Midwives to kill the male children and keep the female alive, Exod. 1.10.16.22. By rendring  the children of Israel instead of sons of Israel, beside that the Translators erre from the scope inten∣ded by the holy Spirit, as appears by the former examples, they fall into inconveniencies which might be avoided, had they ren∣dred the word sons. For what difference make they between children and children? Exod. 12.37. The children of Israel jour∣neyed from Rameses. to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot that were men, beside children. Besides, the word childe imports the next age to infancy, and answers to , and , and , puer, &c. and accordingly these words are rendred by our Tran∣slators. When I was  a childe, I spake as  a childe, &c. 1 Cor. 13.11. Gal. 4.19.  my little children of whom I travail again in birth, &c. So the Apostle he exhorts , that we hence∣forth be no more children, &c. Ephes. 4.14. So they turn , Puer, a childe, Matth. 2.16. Herod slew all  the children from two years old, and under; and , behold, I and  the children which God hath given me, Hebr. 2.13. And many more examples might be given, if it were needful; whereby it
might be proved, that by children the Translators understand such as are in their non-age. Whereby they lay a ground of violent presumption, that by the children of Israel, they understand such as are in the spiritual childhood; and that proficiency and growth in Religion, is no farther then the minority of a Christian. And this is the rather to be believed, because men of the same judgement with them, understand these Scriptures which are meant of the spirituall childhood, to be spoken of the  and perfect growth of a Chri∣stian man. Thus where the Apostle saith, Now it is not I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me, &c. Rom. 7.17. One interpre∣ting that place, writes thus, Quaedicta sunt, ut à spirituali homine dicta debent accipi. The things which are here spoken, ought to be understood as spoken of a spiritual man. And again, Ʋbi de∣pravata haec natura ingenita & dum in hoc mundo vivitur perpetuò ut domesticus hostis inseparabiliter cohaerens, vi suâ inexpugnabili prae∣valet adversus spiritum. Whereas this depraved nature is inbred, while we live in this world, it is perpetually a domestick enemy cleaving inseparably by its irresistible power prevails against the Spirit. The Christian man were in a very sad condition, if it could be hoped to be no better with him then thus, while he lives in this world; as this Author writes, and much more to the same pur∣pose. Whereby its evident he understood this and like testi∣monies in that Chapter, of the ripest age of a Christian man; which indeed are to be understood only of the spiritual nonage and childhood, that mutable and inconsistent estate: as its clear, if any will compare that part of Rom. 7. with what follows Rom. 8. to which I shall speak more properly in due place, if the Lord will. Meantime the truth of this will appear, if we consider the di∣vers ages in the natural life, unto which the several degrees and ages of the spiritual life hold some proportion. There is no doubt but there are certain distinct periods of ages observable in most languages if they were taken notic of. In the Greek and Latin tongues, greater industry hath been used, unto which we may fit our English. And so the distinction of ages may be as followeth.  Infans, an Infant, until the seventh year compleat, (which is to be understood in the following a∣ges)  Puer, a childe, until fourteen years of age. , Pu∣ber, when the beard begins to grow, a yongling, from fourteen till eighteen years of age.  Adolescens a youth, from eighten until twenty five years.  Fuvenis a young man, from twenty five, till thirty five.  or , Vir, a grown man, from thirty five, until forty nine.  Se∣nex viridis, a green old man, from forty nine, till sixty years old. , Semicanus, turn'd grey, from sixty, until seventy.
, Decrepitus, a decrepit old man or capularis, one rea∣dy to be laid on the Biere, (that is capulum) from seventy years old until death. Of all these ages, they have taken the second, or as some count them the first, when they call the sons of Israel, children; which are , which the LXX turns by , yea , Gen. 33.14. and other words importing minority and non∣age. But our Translators herein erre not alone; for Luther, Pisca∣tor, all the Low Dutch, and all our old English Translations (Ainsworth only excepted) render the words as our last hath them, who ever was their leader herein: Sequimur, ut pecudes, antecedentium greges, saith Seneca; we are prone to follow ill ex∣amples. But the Translators of the French Bible have made choise of the very first age, and render the words Enfans d' Israel, the In∣fants or little ones of Israel. These, no doubt, or some of these, had but low thoughts of Gods eminent designe, as if he intended to beget, nourish, and bring up children of a span long, Lam. 2.20. Nor yet have all been so deceived: For beside these named, all the ancient Translations, as the Chaldee, LXX, Syriac, Ara∣bic and Vulg. Latin, and the later, as the Spanish, and Italian, Munster also, Pagnin, Tremellius, and Vatablus have Sons of Israel. O ye sons of Israel! Consider, ye are by this title, called to actions of honour and strength. Ye know, how reproachful it is in our language; What! alwayes a childe? Brethren! Be not  children in understanding; howbeit in malice  be chil∣dren, but in under standing be  (not men only, as ours ren∣der the word, but) perfect men, 1 Cor. 14.20. Yea, the same Apo∣stle, Ephes. 4.13, 14. Let not us propound unto our selves a mea∣sure and stature, according to our own or others cize and opinion; but let us remember that the King of Israel, even Christ, John 1.49. hath given his gifts unto men, even all the Pastors & Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come to the unity of the faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a per∣fect man to the measure of the stature (or age) of the fulness of Christ; that henceforth we be no more children tossed to & fro by every winde of doctrine, but grow up unto him in all things, who is the Head even Christ. And to this purpose the place before us, requires of the Priests a duty to be performed to the sons of Israel; The Priests must se∣parate the sons of Israel from their uncleanness; where in the sons of Israel, are comprehended the daughters of Israel also, as its clear ver. 18.—30. For then we read of the womens uncleanness and their manner of cleansing; there ver. 31. saith Moses, Thus shall ye separate the sons of Israel, from their uncltaness.
Even the Sons of Israel have their uncleanness, until they be se∣parated from it by the Priests. The Priest is said sometime to pollute,Levit. 13. Ver. 3. sometime to cleanse from pollution, and separate from uncleanness. We have diverse examples of the one and of the other. Of the former, Lev. 13.3. The Priest shall see (the Plague , and shall pollute or de∣file him; which our Translators, with others, turn, The Priest shall pronounce him unclean. So very often in that Chapter. But how can the Priest be said to pollute? some say, when he pronounceth him unclean and polluted: which also is true; but may he not be said to pollute him who is unclean, when he leaves him in his uncleanness? according to that Revel. 22.11. He that is filthy, let him be filthy still. And so the Lord is said to harden, when he mollifies not the impenitent and obstinate heart, but leaves it as he findes it, in its hardness. And when he cleanseth not the unclean, as Exod. 34.7. He may be said to pollute him. Not that he otherwise causeth any positive hardness or pollution. And herein the Priest is as the Lords mouth, Jer. 15.19. The Priest also, for like reason, is said to cleanse from pollution and separate from uncleanness, when he expiates and purgeth away the true spiritual uncleanness: as very often in this book. Which he doth typically as a figure of that High Priest who  hath and doth make the purging of our sins by himself, and so really separates the sons of Israel from their uncleanness. So that although the Priests the sons of Aaron, and the Evange∣lical Priests are said to binde and loose, absolve and excommunicate: as a sort of , Vice-Dei, as Gods Substitutes on earth; yet oftentimes these acts are done with very much ignorance and ar∣rogance. As when of old the Priest said, I absolve thee from thy sins: And some of later time more modestly pronounced and de∣clared absolution and remission of their sinnes to the penitent and be∣lieving souls: yet its possible, that both one and other might be in great errour. For althogh both alleaged authority from Christ, yet it is very much to be questioned, whether either of them were qualified as they ought; yea, its much to be doubted that either or both might mistake their Commission. I speak not this of the true , such Priests as have been or are called unto that holy Function by God, in some proportion like as Aa∣ron was, Hebr. 5.4. but of such as for a livelyhood or other by-end, and out of the suggestion of their own Spirit, have taken that honour to themselves, without the motion and call of Gods holy Spirit; let such pretend uninterrupted succession from the Apo∣stles dayes downward (which yet its very hard to prove) let them plead imposition of holy hands, whether by Bishops or Presby∣ters; let them alleage the character of Priestood which they say is
indelible; if they be persons unduly qualified, all is to no more effect then putting a Seal to a Blank. Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis; whatsoever is received, is received accor∣ding to the mode or qualification of the person receiving. And of like rate and value are all acts performed by such a Priest, whether binding or loosing, remitting or retaining sins, absolving or excommu∣nicating. What they alleage touching divine mission, let us enquire what that is, out of the Original Grant, Mat. 28.18, 19. Jesus came and spake to them saying, All power is given to me in Hea∣ven and in Earth; Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, &c. Consider to whom he spake, ver. 16. The eleven Disciples, that is Apostles. That they were Disciples, imports denial of themselves, and taking up the Cross of Christ and following him. This qualifica∣tion is common to all Disciples as such, Luke 9.23, 24. and 14.25, 26, 27. but a more eminent endowment was necessary for the eleven Apostles. And therefore, S. John relates our Lords acts af∣ter his resurrection, more particularly, Whose soever sins ye remit, saith he, they are remitted unto them; and whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained: which words are commonly cited alone, as many other Scriptures are, whereas their energy and force is in the precedent or consequent words, as here ver. 21. He ordains them Ambassadors of peace, he saith unto them, Peace be unto you. As my Father hath sent me, so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive the holy Ghost: Then followes immediately, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose sins ye retain, they are re∣tained. And therefore S. Ambrose on Psal. 37. who saith, Sacerdo∣tibus solum jus est ligandi & solvendi; it is the Priests right to binde and loose: the same Father also saith, Sacerdotis officium est mu∣nus Spiritûs Sancti, the office of the Priest is the gift of the holy Ghost. And that not transient but permanent, Dominum posside∣ant & ab eo possideantur, Let them possess the Lord and be posses∣sed by him, saith S. Hierom ad Nepot. How great an height of glory are the Disciples advanced unto, who have the principality of the highest judicatory, Ʋt vice Dei peccata retineant & relax∣ent? that instead of God, they can retain and remit sins? saith S. Gregory Homil. 26. Such Priests as these may effectually absolve and remit sins. Such Priests as these may separate the sons of Israel from their uncleanness, possessing him, and possessed by him who cleanseth us from all our unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. And this neerly concerns us, O ye Sons of Israel! lest we die in our sins and uncleanness when we defile Gods Tabernacle which is among us. Where is that? the word is  in me∣dio vestri, in the midst of you. The true Israel of God because such,
is and must be pure; God is good to Israel: who are they? E∣ven to such as are of a clean heart, Psal. 73.1. And because the most pure and holy God hath his Tabernacle and Temple in the midst of them. There he promiseth to set it, if we walk in his Statutes and keep his Commandements, and do them, Levit. 26.3.11.12.13. If we purifie our selves as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. with this proviso, let them make me  a Sanctuary, an holy place, and I will dwell in the midst of them, Exod. 25.8. O how holy, how pure must that holy place be wherein the most holy God will dwell! He cannot be toucht or approached unto by any un∣like himself. That Sanctuary, that Temple, that Tabernacle is thine heart, O Israel! For know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? He that defiles Gods Tem∣ple, him will God defile, or leave in his pollution, 1 Cor. 3.16.17. and 6.19. and the like, 2 Cor. 6.16. Ye are the Temple of the living God, as God hath said, I will dwell in them and walk in them, and I will be their God and they shall be my people. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you; and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. Having these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. and 7.1.
Aaron shall cast lots upon the two Goats, the lot for the Lord,Levit. 16. Ver. 8. and the lot for the Scape-Goat.] What is here turn'd a Scape-Goat, is retain'd in the margent without translation, Azazel; and that upon good advice. For this book of Leviticus, as indeed the whole Pentateuch, is Arcanum volumen, a very mysterious book; and that the rather in those parts of it, which, as it were datâ operâ, the Spirit of God seems to conceal, and therefore such as require our diligence, humility, and docibleness to search them out. Which if they should not be inquired into, why were they written? It is good to keep close the secret of a King; but it is honourable to reveal the works of God, saith the Angel, Tob. 12.7. Yea, its royal, saith the wise King, Prov. 25.2. It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, but the honour of Kings to search out a matter. E∣specially since we are in the last part of time, when there is no∣thing covered but shall be revealed, nor hidden, that shall not be made known, Matth. 10.26. saith the Angel of the Covenant, the wisdom, and King of Saints. The great business of this Chapter, is the anniversary expiation of sins, held forth unto us in outward and figurative expressions, which must have their truth, if ever savingly, accomplished and fulfilled in us. In that part of it before us; there are many con∣jectures concerning , Azazel. Some render it as ours do; as the Vulg. Latin, Caper emissarius, a Goat sent out; which word Emissarius answers not to that Latin word properly used, but is made to signifie what the LXX have here, , sent away. Others understand the word to be compounded of  a Goat, and  the name of a place, or specially of a Mountain, which Vatablus placeth neer Mount Sinai. I rather believe, that the place is, in Eutopia, or rather Cacotopia, or indeed rather then both, in Atopia. For I have sought this Mountain Azel, high and low, in Ptolomy, Stephan, Adrichomius and others, and hear no news of it, and therefore I must return a Non est inventus, there is no such Mountain. Others think it to be the name of the Devil, and that in re∣gard of his strength. So especially one of the Jews Doctors who hath divers followers herein. Thus Esay 40.10. Behold the Lord will come  with strong hand; where hand is supplyed. In the marg. ye finde, against the strong; that is, he whom our Lord calls the strong man, Luke 11.22. Howbeit I know not how truly diverse Learned men make Azazel the president of the Desert.
But whereas Franciscus Georgius Venetus, Cornelius Agrippa, and Reuchlin, and other Learned men have written, with great con∣fidence, concerning Angels and Spirits good and evil, and among these, of Azazel, that he is the President of the Desert, I shall leave his particular presidency and principality upon their credit; al∣though I doubt not but, as there are Hierarchies and orders of the good Angels, as I have elsewhere shewen, so are there presiden∣cies and distinctions of honours, (such as they are) among the evil Angels; as not only the sorenamed Authors aver, but also our Lord, John 12.31. and his Apostle, Ephes. 2.2. and the Jews, Mat. 12.24. Wherefore I shall so far consent with these Authors in the general, that by Azazel here we are to understand the Devil. Which word they commonly compound of  a Goat and  abiit, as it hath affinity with  and  abiit in contemptum, to be vile and contemptible. So the LXX render , to despise, to account base and viie: according to which the Prophet speaks, Thou didst debase thy self even to Hell, Esay 57.9. Beside, a Goat and the Devil have the same name  verse 7. The Priest shall take  two Goats; and so often in this Chapter. But in the Chapter following, Levit. 17.7. They shall not sacrifice any more their sacrifices  to Devils. Thus 2 Chron 11.15. Jeroboam ordained him Priests for the High places  and for the Devils. Thus also Esay 13.21.  Daemones the Devils (which our Translators turn, the Satyrs,) shall dance there; so Pagnin: and the like we have Chap. 34.14. The Devils were called by this name  Goats, be∣cause they appeared in that form, saith Kimhi. As also because  a Goat hath its name from  horruit, exhorruit, so ex∣treamly to fear, as when the hair stands on end. Whence  Hordeum Barley, and frit, in Varro; which according to him, is the top of an ear of corn which stands up like hair. Whence our En∣glish word fright, extremity of fear, into which the  the Devils drive those to whom they appear. That Azazel ought so to be left untranslated, and not to be rendred a Scape-Goat, may appear from this consideration, that where ever either of the two Goats, is named in this Chapter, its never called , whence  hath its name, but . And whereas Azazel is four times named in this Chapter, ver. 8.10. twice, and 26, the translation renders it self suspected in the last place especially, where its read, He that let go the Goat for a Scape-Goat, when there was no other but that, the former being sacrificed. Munster was aware of this; and therefore howsoever in the three other places, he translates the word as ours do, yet in the last place, he translates it not, but leaves it Azazel. Which also
the Tigurin Translators perceived, and therefore turn'd it in ver. 26. campum caprarum the field of the Goats. Others with Arias Montanus, retain Azazel in all the four places, as Tremellius, Va∣tablus, Diodati, the Spanish Bible. What therefore they render, One lot for the Lord, and the other lot for the Scape-Goat, I would turn, One lot for the Lord, and the other lot for Azazel. Otherwise instead of a distribution of the two Goats here by lot, the words will contain an equivocation; as that the one lot shall be for the Lord, as proper to him and his use: the other shall be for a Scape-Goat; that should be all one as if  for were left out; because for in this sense signifies no more then the word alone to which it is joyn'd, as I will be  for a father, &c. 1 Chron. 17.13. is no more then a father. Whereas indeed these two Goats are distributed according to their subjects or owners, the one to the Lord, the other to Azazel. But why must one Goat be for the Lord, and the other Goat  for Azazel, or the Devil? For the understanding of this, we must know, that the Lord in this Chapter ordaines  the day of Expiations, as it is called, Levit. 23.27. and the reason is given, Levit. 16.30. the Priest  shall ex∣piate for you, to cleanse you, that ye may be cleansed from all your sins before the Lord. This cleansing must be thorow, full, and ac∣curate, as appears both by the plural of the Nown, , and the conjugation of the Verb, . Now the people to be pur∣ged, are defiled with two kindes of sins; whereof the one is open and manifest, Gal. 5.19. the other hath an appearance and shew of righteousness, John 16.8. By both these we may understand the whole body of sin to be destroyed, Rom. 6.6. with both these the creature is polluted. The Body of sin to be destroyed, is figu∣red by that Goat which is to sent to Azazel, as by the Goats on the left hand in the judgement, Matth. 25. And upon the head of this Goat the Priest must lay both his hands, and confess over him all the iniquities of the sons of Israel, and all their transgres∣sions in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the Goat, and shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the Wilder∣ness, and the Goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities, into a land of separation, and he shall let go the Goat in the Wilder∣ness. Now whereas the creature of God hath been polluted with the Body of known sin and false righteousness, it is not the will of the Lord, that his creature should perish in sin; nor is it his will, nor is it possible, that his creature should be saved in his sin; which implyes a contradiction; because to be saved, is so to be, from sin, Matth. 1.21. And therefore the sinful man signified by the Goat, which is for the Lord, ver. 9. must die from the sin, he must be mortified, and the will in him unto sin must be altoge∣ther dead in him.
We may see this prefigured unto us in the creature. The seed is cast into the ground, suppose a grain of Wheat, the earthly part of it falls asunder, and some of it returns to the earth; the other part being reduced by the Quintessence or natural Balsam becomes a part of the plant. There is an earth that is the Serpents food, Esay 65.25. which is indeed the terra damnata, the damn'd earth, the disobedient know∣ledge, and the disobedient in their knowledge, who detain the truth of God in their unrighteousness: Against these the wrath of God the Judge is revealed from Heaven. There is another sort of earth which becomes a part of the heavenly plant which growes up in all things into that plant of renown, Ephes. 4. The same was figured by Moses killing the Egyptian, a type of sin and iniquity, Mich. 7.19. and hiding him in the sand, damned earth to earth. But he rebuked the Hebrew and flew him not, who wronged his brother; even the Edomique nature the animalis ho∣mo who wrongs his brother the spiritual & heavenly man. Adde yet a third representation of this mystery figured by Joseph in prison, of whom the chief Butler saith to Pharaoh, Gen 41.13. Me he restored to mine office, and him he hanged. The work of the true spiritual Joseph the perfect one, in the judgement. Which he as evidently sets forth upon the Cross: with whom were cru∣cified two Thieves; whereof one, according to an antient tra∣dition, was an Edomite, a Red man, as Edom signifies; the other an Egyptian a black thief. The Edomite the  the animalish or souly man being crucified with him, he takes with him into Paradise; the Egyptian, the sin it self and all who will by no means part with it, but become one with it, he sends away to Azazel. Let us well consider this, O ye Israel of God! Herein is pour∣trayed before us in the High Priest (whose duty alone it was to officiat on the day of Expiation) the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the true High Priest for ever. He is here brought in offering up himself without spot unto God. He is the true sin-offering figu∣red in the Bullock, and the true burnt-offering, signified by the Ram, as the Apostle shews largely, Hebr. 9.7.—28. The Lord ordains, that Aaron must take for the congregation of the sons of Israel, two Kids of the Goats. Hereby the Lord prefi∣gures his judgement: wherein two parties are principally con∣cerned; the Judge with his Assessors, and the persons to be judged. The Judge with his Assessors, of whom Enoch prophesied; Be∣hold the Lord cometh with his holy ten thousands, as the words properly signifie, Jude v. 14. The persons to be judged are of two sorts, both represented by the two Goats which must be taken for the Congregation of the
Sons of Israel, ver. 5. These must be separated as a Shepherd se∣parates the Sheep from the Goats, the Sheep on the right hand and the Goats on the left. To the Sheep shall be commemorated their works of mercy; to the Goats on the left hand, their unmercifulness. And accordingly the merciful obtain mercy, to whom it is said, Come ye blessed of my Father, &c. To the unmerciful ones, de∣part from me, &c. This  and description of the judgement is here presigured by Moses. The Judge and his Assessors are the same, the same also are the persons to be judged represented by two Goats. But how come the Goats to be Sheep? They had done away their sins by righteousness, and their iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor, Dan. 4.27. they made friends of the un∣righteous Mammon: the other keep their unrighteous Mammon, and perish with it. O ye sons of Israel! this neerly concerns us all. We all wait at Bethesda the house of Mercy; and every one merciful or unmer∣ciful, if ye ask him, will say, he hopes to be saved, he hath hope of mercy. Yet every one almost judgeth another and condemns another. Must we not all stand before the Judgement Seat of Christ? Why then do we censure and judge one another, and that concerning our final estate, who shall bee saved, who damned? Some have been very bold, in obscurities of this nature, posi∣tively to affirm, what others have as boldly denied; and both upon equal grounds, when neither party hath had authority of Scripture or sound reason whereon to build his assertion. Above twenty years since two books came out printed at Millan. The Title of the one is De Inferno. Of the other, De animabus Pa∣ganorum. The Author of the former hath so curiously described Hell, and all the parts and nooks of it, and for what uses the feveral Cels therein are, you would think, he had been there imployed as a Surveyor or a Viewer; so punctual he is in his relation and survey of the place. He having thus provided Hell, the other as a Judge, by his own cise and rule, very strictly examines those, whom we would have thought out of all question, whether sa∣ved or not, as Melchisedec, Job, and his three friends, as also E∣lihu, who, with much a-do, escaped this Authors condemnation. But as for the Philosophers, and of them, the very best, we read of, he represents them living very holy lives, and leaving to posterity very many divine sayings, but at length like et Minos, Aeacas or Rhadamanthus, he adjudges them all to Hell, all to Azazel. O were it not much better, and more safe to examine our own lives, and consider our own later end!
We have here a clear and evident demonstration, O ye sons of Israel, that we are saved by grace. We stand all before the Judgement seat of Christ, as the two Goats taken for the whole Congregation of Israel, and are presented here before the Lord, ver. 5. The distinctive and separating Lots pass upon us, one for the Lord, and the other for Azazel. Who of us knows whether Lot shall fall upon him? We all know, that we have all sinned, and have fallen short of the glory of our God, Rom. 3.23. And the wages of sin is death, Rom. 6.23. And they who are blessed, and called to inherit the kingdom of God, because they have dote works of mercy, they remember them not, Matth. 25.37, 38, 39. These things considered, why may not the Lot for Azazel fall upon us? It is the Lot which makes the distinction, John 19.24. and therefore the eternal inheritance is called , a di∣stribution by lot, Acts 20.32.  an inheritance obtained by lot, among those who are sanctified; and often elsewhere. And we are said to obtain that inheritance by lot , Ephes. 1.11. In whom also we have ob∣tained an inheritance by lot. And the means qualifying us to ob∣tain the inheritance, 2 Pet. 1.1. , to them who have obtained by lot equally precious faith with us. Which hath allusion to the Israelites receiving their inheri∣tance from Joshuah in the Land of Canaan, who divided unto them the Land by lot; and by lot the true Joshuah  as Joshuah is also called and his book after his name, , he divides the true in∣heritance of the holy land, or land of holiness, which is called his land, thy land O Immanuel, Esay 8.8. He distributes the eternal in∣heritance by lot unto his followers, his valiant and victorious souldiers, according to Revel. 21.7. , he that overcomes, shall inherit or shall obtain by Lot the inheri∣tance of all things. Now what is more doubtful then a Lot? And the lot must de∣termine who is for the Lord, that he may receive the kingdom; and who is for Azazel, that he may depart from the Lord and be sent away to Azazel. But blessed ever blessed be the Lord, who reserves the ordering of the Lot in his own power, as we read, The Lot is cast into the lap,  the whole judgement, discerning or disposing of it, is of the Lord, Prov. 16.23. Nor does this bring in any destiny, or fatal necessity. O no; he hath shewen thee, O man, what is good; to do justly, to love mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with thy God, Mich. 6.8. The Goat, upon which the Lords lot fell, must be sacrificed; & if we be of the Lords lot, we must be such as he is, mortified in the flesh, that we may be quickned in the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18. The Greek text under∣stands it of Christ; the Latin, of those who are Christs. It is
true, it is neither of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy, Rom. 9.16. And to whom doth God shew mercy? Even unto thousands of them that love him and keep his Commandements, Exod. 20.6. So that destruction O Israel is thine own; but thine help is from me, Hos. 13.9. They, on whom the Lords lot fals, are saved by mercy. They on whom Azazels lot fals, perish by justice. O that the whole Congregation of Israel (for whom these two Goats are taken,) while it is yet Res integra, while yet we have time to work out our salvation, and before the evil dayes come, that we would, Pro se quis{que} every man of us endeavour to mortifie his sin, to crucifie his flesh, with the affections and lusts, before it be too late! I have heard of a rich Citizen of London, who, toward his end, made his will, and bequeathed his soul to God, his body to the earth, and his sins to the Devil. 'Twas well if he could be rid of them so. But were it not much more safe now while we have yet time, to spend it in the daily mortifica∣tion, subduing & deading of our sins, to make it our business, that in that  that day of expiations, when there shall be an Exact separation made between the just and unjust, the righteous and the wicked, those who serve God, and those who serve him not, Mal. 3.18. we may be found so doing. Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he cometh shall finde so doing! So shall that  that fit man, that man of time, called by the LXX , that ready prepared man, ver. 21. take away the Goat with all our sins and iniquities. And who is this man of time, this ready prepared man, but that Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world? He is figured by Othniel the Judge of Israel, (that is, the due time of God, the Redeemer who came in the fulness of time, Gal. 4.4. He conquers and subdues Cushan Rishathaim, the blackness of both iniquities inward and out∣ward, Judges 3.10. and conveyes our sins into a land of separation, even so far as the East is from the West, so far he removes our transgres∣sions from us, Psal. 103.12. and delivers them to Azazel, and so gives the Devil his due. Then, when so exact separation shall be made, then shall the righteous shine in the glory of their Father. Would God that were come to pass unto every one of our souls!
For every one that curseth his Father or his Mother,Levit. 20. Ver. 9. he shall be surely put to death; he hath cursed his Father or his Mother; his blood shall be upon him.] [For] is a rational or causal; as that which renders a reason of what went before it, and answers to Nam, quia, quòd, quoniam,  and , and the like. But what has this [For] reference unto? And how doth it render a reason in the fol∣lowing words, of what goes before? In the two former verses, we read two general precepts; the one of sanctifying our selves unto the Lord; the other of keeping the Lords statutes and doing them; both which give reasons of the two former prohibitions. Sanctifie your selves unto the Lord. Sancti∣tas importat duo, separationem ab aliquo, & applicationem ad aliquid, saith Aquinas; Sanctity imports two things, 1. Separation from somewhat, as here from Molech, from Wizzards, and such as have familiar spirits. 2. Application unto the Lord, in the ob∣servation of his statutes and doing them. Why? Because he is  the holy one of Israel, sanctifies and separates his people from all other gods and their polluted services, and dedi∣cates and applies them to himself, and to his pure and holy service, that they may be holy as he is holy. So that these words ver. 9. cannot well render a reason of those fore-going; or if they do, certainly its far fetcht. There is no doubt but all divine aetiologia's, all reasons, and rendring of reason, are most rational, and like themselves, divine, as proceeding from him who is the very  it self, the summa ratio; he who teacheth man to reason, shall not he reason? to which purpose the Psalmist reasons, Psal. 94.8, 9, 10. But we must not impose a rea∣soning upon the Scripture or upon Gods Spirit speaking in it, which is none of his. The particle  here used, is mis-translated. For whereas  is either 1. Causal and rational, as 1 Chron. 13.11. David was displeased , because the Lord had made a breach upon Ʋzzah. For which we have 2 Sam. 6.8. where the same story is recited, David was displeased,  because the Lord had made a breach upon Uzzah. Or 2. Discretive, as Gen. 45.8. It was not you that sent me hither , but God. Or 3. Conditional or of time, which answers to if or when. As 2 Sam. 7.1. It came to pass  when the King sat in his house. For which we read, 1 Chron. 17.1. It came to pass  as or when as. And in this last sense its evident, the particle  is here to be understood, when or if any man curse his Father or his Mother; whence also it appears that these words are altogether incoherent with the former; and that even according to the judgement of the Translators them∣selves, who set [¶] a mark before these words in the ninth verse,
which imports the beginning of a new subject and argument. In the two former Chapters the Lord gives divers precepts; which in this Chapter he ratisies with sanctions by their respe∣ctive punishments: The words contain a denuntiation of punishment for a crime, and the confirmation of that punishment by repetition both of the crime and punishment. When any man curseth his Father or his Mother, he shall surely be put to death. Which words are repeated for aggrava∣vation: 1. The crime; he hath cursed his Father or his Mother. 2. The punishment of the crime; his blood shall be upon him. What is here turn'd Father or Mother although read copula∣tively in the Hebrew, his Father  and his Mother, yet are the words dis-junctively to be understood, his Father or his Mother; and that by the authority of the only Lawgiver who warrants the dis-junctive reading of this sentence, Matth. 15.4. He that curseth Father or Mother, let him die the death. So that he who curseth one and but one of his parents, is liable to death, otherwise the Law might have been eluded. Howbeit the word  here read, is not only to speak evil to or of, or to imprecate and so wish evil unto any one, as it is wont to be rendred by maledicere to curse or speak evil of. And so what we read, Exod. 22.27.  S. Paul Acts 23.5. renders , thou shalt not speak evil of, &c. Yet the word signifies more properly to slight and make light of, to vilifie and dishonour. And so this verb  is opposed to , which signifies to honour, as elsewhere, so 1 Sam. 2.30. , those who honour me, , I will honour; but they who despise me,  vili pendentur, they shall be light∣ly esteemed. When any man speaks evil of or to his Father or Mother, or flights either of them, he shall die the death, that is, he shall cer∣tainly die, as he is worthy to die being guilty of so great a crime. Which is explaind in the close of the verse, his blood shall be upon him. Under the notion and name of parents, we are to understand not only our Fathers that begat us, and our Mothers that bare us, Prov. 23.22. Nor only those whom the Law makes such, Ruth 3.1.5. but the name is also extended in a civil respect, unto Gover∣nours and Magistrates, as Eliakim was a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Esay 22.20, 21. And Naamans servant called him Father, 2 Kings 5.13. And Deborah was a Mother in Israel, Judges 5.7. Yea, in a spiritual sense God himself is our Father, and Je∣rusalem above is the Mother of us all, as I may shew afterward. And they are also called our Fathers who beget us unto God, Gen. 45.8. 1 Cor. 4.14, 15. And consequently honour is due unto
them, and, for slighting or cursing them, like penalty is due to those who analogically are called their children. This denuntiation of punishment, will appear to be reasonable, if we shall consider, 1. What the duty is, which is here viola∣ted, and 2. the reason of that duty; as also 3. the violation and breach of the duty; and 4. the punishment of that breach and vio∣lation. The duty violated is honour of parents. And what is it to honour? The word used in the fifth Commandement and else∣where, is  which signifies to be heavy or weighty, and that in quantity, as in bulk or number, Prov. 27.3. Or quality, as dignity, honour, glory; whence we say, that Honos est onus, Honour is a bur∣den; accordingly the Scripture speaks,  an eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. So 2 Cor. 12.16. I was not bur∣thensome unto you. In this sense the Apostle speaks, 1 Thes. 2.6. Neither of men sought we glory, neither of you, nor of others, when we might , have been burdensome; the Syriac hath, been honourable as the Apostles of Christ, that is, such as God and Christ appointed first in his Church, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephes. 4.11. and therefore ye read in the margent, we might have had au∣thority, 1 Thes. 2.6. Now the honour due to parents from their children, is a weighty business, a matter of great weight and mo∣ment, which is either inwardly performed, as an high esteem of them, love and fear of them. Or 2. outwardly expressed as a te∣stimony of that estimation, love and fear, in Reverence to their persons: Obedience to their commands: Supply of their neces∣sities. The reason why this honour is to be given to parents, will ap∣pear, whether we consider the parents themselves, or their chil∣dren who owe this duty to them. The parents deserve all honour from them, as being in eminency above them, both because Au∣thors of their being, and of their better being, by nurture and edu∣cation. Their love and care and labour and cost challenge all respect from them, for their unrequitable love: For when they have done all that possibly can be done by them, and have followed them, with all their , their utmost requital that they can make, yet being and education exceeds all gratitude, as the hinder wheels of the Charet run as fast, but can never over∣take the former. The Father hath his name  from  which signifies to will, desire, to be tenderly affected to his children; as implying, that all that influence of care and labour and cost is from love which sweetens the authority of Parents over their children. 2. In regard of the children themselves, justice and gratitude requires this duty of them. Children obey your parents in the Lord , for this is just, Ephes. 6.1. That natural love  mixt with due awe makes up Reverence, which is the first
part of that honour unto parents. And love is the strongest prin∣ciple of obedience, Exod. 20.6. that's the second. Whence will easily follow requital of parents to the utmost of their power; be∣cause to love is not only bene velle, but also bene facere. Which is the third part of honour due to parents. 3. Since the duty is so just, so reasonable, the breach and violation of that duty must needs be most unreasonable and unjust. The violation and breach of the duty, it is slighting, vilifying, dis∣esteeming, dis-honouring, whether by word as cursing, and evil speaking to parents, or of them; or by gesture, or deed, as deny∣ing them obedience to their commands, or supplying their wants, as Matth. 15.4, 5. This slighting which they call , little-accounting, is a great sin; yea, a greater injury done to him, whom men slight, then if they did some open violence unto him. Quem quis contemnit, eum non curiosiùs calcabit, him whom a man contemns, he will not take any great care how he kicks him, saith Seneca. When Paracelsus begun in Germany to make known his principles of Physick and Philosophy, much different from those received; the learned men despised him, and vilified him, as if he had been a Mountebank or Quacksalver; but when Erastus the Emperors Physitian, and a very learned man wrote against him, men then began to change their mindes concerning him, and to think he was not despicable as they had supposed, but that he had great worth in him. Whereas he who slights and neglects another, he thereby declares his opinion of him, that he has neither wis∣dom nor strength, nor any thing in him worthy of estimation. And from such a slight opinion commonly proceed sutable words, ge∣stures, and actions. 4. Such as these done by children to their parents, to whom they owe the greatest honour, deserve, according to divine justice, extream punishment, even death it self. For God who knowes the hearts of all men, sees a disposition to kill, where there is a boldness to curse. According to which justice, Traytors against their civil fathers, are to die by the laws of most Nations, as be∣ing such as go about to take away the lives of those who have gi∣ven and maintained theirs. Whence we perceive a main difference between the presci∣ence and providence of the Great Lawgiver, and all inferiour ones. The Romans made no law against Parricides, because they could not foresee, that any could so degenerate or put off a man, as to kill his father; but the only wise God foresees this, and makes lawes against those who would be murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, 1 Tim. 1.9. But what if my father be a wicked man, may I not slight him, speak evil of him, &c? Surely no; the wickedness of the parents, exempts no childe from his duty to them. Nor is it said, honour thy
good father and good mother, but honour thy father and mother. Nor is it said, when any shall curse his evil father or mother; but his father, &c. As we may reason from a less obligation; Hagar must submit her self unto her Mistris though she dealt roughly with her: For it is the Apostles rule, 1 Pet. 2, 18. Servants obey your Masters, not only if good and gentle, but also if they be froward. David honoured Saul his Father-in-law, and often preserved him from death, even at the same time when Saul sought Davids life. But obedience is a part of honour due to parents; must the chil∣dren be obedient to their parents when they command what is evil? I answer: the fifth Commandement is a part of the second Ta∣ble; or howsoever accounted by Josephus and Philo Judeus in the first Table, yet its taken out of the first and great Commande∣ment, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy minde, and with all thy strength: and therefore must obedience unto our heavenly Father be preferred before obedience to our Fathers upon earth. Here that rule is true, he that loveth Fa∣ther or Mother more then me, is unworthy of me, Matth. 10.37. Our Lord Jesus Christ was obedient unto his parents, Luke 2.51. yet he staid at Jerusalem when they departed thence. And therefore being reproved by his Mother when she found him in the Temple, saying, thy Father and I have sought thee sorrowing; how is it, saith he, that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business? Or rather, (which is a more true translation, and a more proper answer to his Mothers expostulation,) how is it that ye sought me?Luke 2. Ver. 49. wist ye not that I must be  in my fathers house, that is, in the Temple; so that ye needed not go far to seek me. The Apostle makes answer to this doubt, Chil∣dren obey your parents,  in the Lord, Ephes. 6.1. Here also lies an obligation upon Parents, by their sober and grave deportment, to preserve their authority over their children, and to be careful that a rational love, decent and becoming gravity, be such as may win upon their children, elicit & draw from them a willing love, awe, reverence, and honor: that they shew no example of light behaviour, but to be exemplary in all holy conversation. It is most reasonable, that a man behave himself as a father, if he would be honoured as a father, saith one of the pious Antients. And how equal is that precept? Ʋt ameris, amabilis esto, Be lovely, that thou mayest be loved. And by like reason, Ʋt honore∣ris, honorabilis esto: that thou maiest be honoured by thy children, de∣mean thy self as one fit to be honoured. Wouldest thou not be slighted and despised? Be not contemptible, be not despicable: That which the Apostle writes to Titus takes place here, with ana∣logy to the spiritual fatherhood. Let no man, saith he, despise thee, Titus 2.15. Alas! how could Titus, how can any man else help
it, but that he may be despifed? his meaning is, Let thy sober grave behaviour, and thy doctrine be such, as may challenge ho∣nour and due respect from thy spiritual children. Be not thou despi∣cable; so shalt thou not be despised. The words foregoing make this reason good. These things speak and exhort and rebuke  with all authority; yea, as the word  properly signifies, with all command as from divine autho∣rity,Titus 2.15. and out of the word of God. And then follows, Let no man despise thee. Which discovers the fondness of parents, who by the lightness of their example, and remissness and negligence in their government, betray their gravity and authority. This was Eli's sin, 1 Sam. 2.29. his sons should have honoured him, and he honours them, and that not only above himself, but above God also, as God himself in∣terprets it. They say, the old Ape so embraces and grasps her young ones, that by hugging them, she kills them. Such is the Apish indulgence and unreasonable love of some parents, that should they hate their children, they could do them, or themselves, no greater injury. For this fin, God left his place at Shilo and put out Eli and his house from being Priests before him; and brought that ruine upon Eli and his sons and the whole Nation, that was not recovered a long time after. What Parents are wont to say in this case; My son is now of age and discretion, he knowes how to behave himself, &c. It may be well answered by a rule known in the Civil and Canoni∣cal lawes, Jus reverentiale remitti non potest: No man can remit of that reverential right which is by the law of God and Nature due unto his place. Whence children also may learn, that there is a perpetual obli∣gation and tye upon them to honour, reverence, obey and support their parents; it is a principal Lesson, , let them learn first to shew piety at home, and requite their parents, 1 Tim. 5.4. to obey them, and have an honourable esteem of them, it is a natural impression. Should a Prince strike a Childe, hee'l com∣plain to his Father, though he the poorest and meanest subject. It is a duty that children never live to out-grow; a debt that they can ne∣ver fully pay, though they be ever paying it; as it is said of the childe, —sequitur{que} patrem non passibus aequis: The thankfull childe follows his father, but with unequal steps. Now since the Obligation is so great, the greater is their sin who 1. in opinion, or 2. practise, undervalue and slight this Commandement of God touching honour unto parents, and the Ratification of it. 1. In opinion; as they who under pretence of honouring God, slight and neglect their parents. This was that which our Lord blamed in the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 15.4.
Where, having recited the Commandement of God, and the penalty due to those who break it; but ye say, saith he, whosoever shall say to his Father or his Mother, it is Corban, a gift (given and con∣secrated unto God,) wherewithal thou mightest be holpen by me, such an one shall be free from honouring, nourishing, clothing, sup∣plying the wants of his Father or Mother. But should not Gods worship and service, you'l say, be so dear unto us, that it ought to be preferred before our father and our mother? Men are wont in this and other cases to plead for God, such as they conceive him to be. Some there are who think that God sees as man sees; and that he is much taken with beau∣tiful out-sides of Temples made with hands; and to such use was that Corban, of which our Lord speaks, for reparation of the Tem∣ple. And for this, the Scribes and Pharisees were zealous, and so zealous, that they preferred it before the Commandement of God. They knew not, nor do many know, or at least they consider not, that to do justice and judgement, is more acceptable unto the Lord then Sacrifice, Prov. 21.3. To obey is better then Sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of Rams, 1. Sam. 15.22. So that our obedience unto the Moral Law of God, our love to our neighbour, our ho∣nour unto parents, is more pleasing unto him, then all his ceremo∣nial worship and service. Because the Kingdom of God consists in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; and in these things consists our service of God and Christ, acceptable before God and men, Rom. 14.17, 18. Yea, without brotherly love, there is no love of God; For he that loves not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? 1 John 4.20. Therefore our Lord dispenseth with his own service, when the brotherly love is wanting, till it be fulfilled; leave thy gift at the Altar, and go first and be reconciled unto thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift, Matth. 5.24. 2. The more are they to blame, who by their practise violate this duty; a sin very rife among us; and to be accounted among those which have brought the wrath of God upon us in these last dayes. For the Prophet puts this sin among others, in the Cata∣logue of those, which brought the national judgement upon the people, Ezech. 22.7. In thee they have set light by father and mo∣ther; that  that weight of honour due unto them, they per∣formed not. It is a sin that is extream frequent in this City. God avert from us that judgement which he threatned and inflicted on his ancient people, for this sin! That for this and like sins he would burn them, like dross, in his Furnace, Verse 19.—22. And therefore it is a sin worthy that punishment which the Lord hath denounced, great, as the reward is great. For this is a rule con∣sonant unto sound reason, That , the weightier things of the Law, Matth. 23.23. are ratified by the heaviest pu∣nishmants.
Such is the capital punishment due to the breach of this Law, Exod. 21.15.17. And we may read the like, Deut. 21.18. —21. and 27.16. Prov. 30.17. Whence it is, that he seems to ap∣peal to our equity, whether his sentence be just or not. For having said, When any man shall curse his father or his mother, let him die the death, he presently repeats the crime; He hath cursed, or set light by his father or mother; his blood shall be upon him. The evidence of the fact, justifies the sentence of God. We finde like appeals made elsewhere, Gen. 49. Jacob now about to deprive Ru∣ben of the birth-right, Thou art my first-born, saith he, and the beginning of my strength, &c. thou shalt not excel, because thou wentest up to thy fathers bed, (thou didst dishonour and slight thy father,) then defiledst thou it. Then, as it were making an appeal to any who should judge whether his sentence were just or not, he adds, he went up to my Couch, v, 4. Thus the Lord now denoun∣cing judgement against Moab, Esay 16.7. Moab shall howl for Mo∣ab; we have heard, saith he, of the pride of Moab; then turning as it were to any one who would judge of it, he addes, he is very prowd. The like we may finde Jer. 44.9, 10. Ezech. 13.3. —6. Let the people of God be warned of this judgement, perform the duty required, and so expect the promise made; even long dayes, dayes of eternity in the land of the living. Its the first Commandement with promise: Its reckoned by the Jews in the first Table: whence the duty is called  Piety, which is pro∣per unto God; so the Apostles phrase sounds; , to shew piety at home: to be pious or godly toward ones own house, which he presently explains, , to requite the Parents, which is good and accep∣table before God, 1 Tim. 5.4. Yea great is the reward of such piety, a lasting, an everlasting reward, Jer. 35.18, 19. There shall not a man be cut off from Jonadab the son of Rechab, one who shall stand before the Lord for ever. Josephus tells us, that these Re∣chabites were a race of pious and holy men from a long time; whom he describes, Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 2. And what is become of them now? They were called Esseni and Asidaei, whereof we read mention made 1 Mac. 7.13. and elsewhere. But surely these were not, nor are to be understood only according to the flesh, no more then Israel is, but according to the Spirit. So that they who reverence, obey, and support their parents, they are the true Asidaei, the true , the pious, holy, merciful ones. And these are the true , Jer. 35.2. the Rechabites the sons of him who  rides in glory and triumph upon the word of truth, meekness, and righteousness.Psal. 45.4. Who rides-on conquering and to conquer, Revel. 6.2. and his spiritual children conquer with him, and through him, and so reign with him.
For the Law is spiritual, and the words have their spiritual meaning. For is not God thy Father who bought thee? Hath he not made thee and established thee? Deut. 32.6. Is not Christ  Pater futuri seculi, the everlasting Father, Esay 9.6. And who is thy Mother? Who but the doctrine, the wisdom of the holy Church of Christ; the Spouse of Christ? the wisdom that descends from above, James 3.17. the Lambs Wife that comes down out of heaven, Revel. 21.9, 10. Jerusalem above the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. This is the true heavenly Eve built out of the heavenly Adam, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, who is Christ himself, Ephes. 5.30, 31, 32. This is a great mystery, saith the Apostle, but I speak of Christ and the Church. This is the true pure Doctrine, spiritually the Virgin Mary; so Maria signifies, according to divers of the Ancients, the Mother of Christ conceived, formed, and born in us, and brought forth by obedience, and doing the will of our Father who is in heaven. For who is my Mother? saith the Son of God, whoso∣ever doth the will of my Father who is in heaven, he is my Mother, and Sister, and Brother, Matth. 12.49, 50. Our heavenly Father deserves all honour of his spiritual chil∣dren. For whereas earthly fathers impart unto their children essence, nourishment, education, and inheritance, the Father of spirits gives to his children his divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. he nourisheth us with the flesh and blood, the Word and Spirit of his Son. He instructs us and gives us the unction from the Holy One, whereby we know all things, 1 John 2.27. He corrects and chastens us as our loving Father, that we may be partakers of his holiness, Hebr. 12.10. He provides for us an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.4 Meantime he bears us and is patient and long suffering toward us, as a Father beareth his children, Deut. 1.31. If he be a Father, yea, such a father, where is his honour? Mal. 1.6. Where indeed? yea, where is he not dishonoured? Is it not the greatest slighting of a father to neglect his commands? What do they else who regard not the Commandements of our heavenly Father? they despise not men but God, 1 Thess. 4.8. and then is ad∣ded, Who hath also given unto us his holy Spirit; Wherefore else but to keep his Commandements? And therefore he hath given his Son unto us, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, Rom. 8.3, 4. Yet is he despised and rejected of men, Esay 53.3. and figured by Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the family of Ram. Elihu even Deus ipse, God himself, the Son of the blessed God; that's Barachel, and of the family of Ram, that is, the high One, the most high God; yet is he a Buzite, despised and contemned, yea troden un∣der foot by the Jebuzites, such as tread under foot the Son of God, and put him to an open shame, Hebr. 10.29. and lightly esteem the Rock of their salvation, Deut. 32.15.
O thou Jebusite, thou base, thou vile man! Such thou ren∣drest thy self by despising thy God, 1 Sam. 2.30. They who de∣spise me, shall be lightly esteemed. Mark how the Apostle reasons, Hebr. 2.2, 3. If the word spoken by Angels was stedfast, and eve∣ry transgression and disobedience received a just recompence of reward, how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? The Syriac Interpreter turns , neglect, by  to tread under foot; the greatest neglect and despiciency. The Apostle proves this à minori, reasoning from the lesse to the greater, Hebr. 10.28. He who despised Moses's Law, died without mercy, under two or three witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who hath troden under foot the Son of God, &c? Consider this a-right O man! Is not he the wisdom of thy God, before whom, in thy false reasoning, thou preferrest the wisdom of thy flesh? Is not he the true righteousnes of thy God, be∣fore which thou esteemest the false righteousness of thy flesh? Is not he the power of God, which thou enfeeblest under pretence of im∣potency & weakness? to slight him, what is it but lighlty to esteem the most honourable, yea, the honor it self which cometh of God only?John 5. ver. 24. with 1 Pet. 2.7. marg. To make nothing of him, who is  the very Being, and who gives to all things their Being, in whom we all live, and move, and have our Being? Yea, who himself is , All things, Col. 3.11. And this is the Buzite, he, whom by thy disobedience thou despisest and treadest under foot. The punishment denounced against those who slight their pa∣rents, is death. But what death can expiate so great despiciency of the great God? what less then the eternal death it self? What re∣paration of honour can we possibly make to him whom we have so deeply despised? The good God and our Father puts us in a way of expiation; even by dying daily unto our sins. This no doubt was one, if not the principal meaning of what our Lord said to his son Adam, Luke 3.38. upon transgression of the first Commandement of his Fa∣ther; In the day that thou eatest thereof, dying thou shalt die; for cer∣tainly Adam died no other death many hundred years after.Gen. 2. v. 17. O let us all die that precious death, through the power of the Spirit of our God, Rom. 8.13. So shall we live, yea, so shall we reign, yea, so shall we be glorified, Rom. 8.17. And what reparation of honour does the Lord require of us? What other then to restore him that life which is lost in us? that life of God from which we have been estranged, Ephes. 4.18. He that offereth praise he honoureth me; And what is he? who else but he that disposeth his way aright? Psalm 50.23. It is the life, the holy life, that life which is worthy of God, which honoureth God. For so, what our Translators turn, I will bless
thee while I live,Psal. 63. Ver. 4. is in the Hebrew,  which the LXX turn , and Vatablus, and the Vulg. Latin, In vita mea; which should be rendred, in English, In my life. Thus when the Psal∣mist had exhorted to praise the Lord, Psal. 106.1. He then in∣quires, who can do it? ver. 2. to which he answers ver. 3. Bles∣sed are they who keep judgement, and he who doth righteousness at all times; as if he should in express terms say, That's the man who truly honours God. So much our Lord saith; Herein is my Father honoured, that ye bring forth much fruit, John 15.8. name∣ly, such as are filled with the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God, Phil. 1.11. This is the honour and praise which must be given unto our Father in this world, and be continued in the world to come in everlasting Hallelujahs. Salvation, and glory, and honour, and power unto the Lord our God! Revel. 19.1.
Whatsoever man he be that hath a blemish, he shall not approach;Levit. 21. Ver. 18.19.20. a blinde man or a lame; or he that hath a flat nose, or any thing su∣perfluous; or a man that is broken footed, or broken handed; or crook-backt, or a Dwarff; or that hath a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy or scabbed, or hath his stones broken.] This Paragraph contains twelve blemishes of the Priests which unqualified them for their service. Whereof the Translators most-what give the sense, but they proceed not altogether  and verbatim; wch universally were to be wished: Other∣wise a Paraphrase it may be, not a translation. What they ren∣der, that hath a flat nose, is  flat nosed. So the Jews Doctors understand . Hierom, I know not upon what ground, turns the word, Si parvo, si grandi, si torto naso, if he have a little nose, or a great, or a wry nose. The LXX understood not the word of the Nose at all; but turn it by  Mancus, lame of an hand and  Aure truncatus, crop-eared. And so the Syriac. Nor does the Arabic Version understand  of the Nose: nor the Samaritan: but renders that and the next word , curtold in the parts or members or over-grown. So expresly also the Chald. Paraph. What they turn broken footed or bro∣ken handed, is word for word, in whom is the breaking of a foot or the breaking of an hand. What followes; Or be scurvy or scabbed.] The words in the Hebrew are , both in the abstract; which are here turn'd in the concrete. The former the Translators turn scurvy; whereof men∣tion is again made, Deut. 28.27. where Moses having mention'd , wch they there turn the Itch, he adds, whereof thou canst not be healed. Where first they are not constant to themselves; since its evident that what they call the Itch is quite another thing, and differs from  by which the LXX render . Non ita profunde scabies, quae  Graecis dicitur, penetrat & variis figuris insignitur, &c. Si verò tenues acres{que} & serosae humi∣ditates aliis crassioribus succis permiscentur, impetigines quas Graeci  nominant, suboriuntur, quae celerrimè in scabiem & lepram neglectae commigrant, saith Aegineta lib. 2. de meth. med. cap. 11. The scab, which in the Greek is called Psora, pierceth not so deeply (viz. as the Lepre whereof he spake before) but is marked with divers figures, &c. But if thin, sharpe, and serose humours be mixed with more thick matter, itches arise, which the Greeks call Leichens; which being neglected most speedily pass into a Scab and Lepre. So he. Whence its clear that the Scurvy and the Itch differ. 2. Whereas the  is said to be incurable, that cannot be meant of the Scurvy, or that which the LXX call : for which, diverse remedies are prescribed, and used with pro∣sperous success.
As for  which they turn scabbed, that rather is impetigo, the Itch; as Hierom renders the word. It hath the name from  which signifies apprehendere & adhaerere, to take or lay hold on, and then to cleave unmovably. Such is this Itch; its incurable, and said to be the Egyptian itch, which continueth where it layes hold, until death. So I would render , with Vatablus and Arias Montanus Purulenta Scabies a running or mattery Scab. But whereas Arias Montanus, turns  Scabies perpetua a perpetual Scab, because it lasts till death, it makes not so clear and specifi∣cal a distinction of this from the former, which Vatablus renders, Qui habet scabiem aridam mordicantem, who hath a dry scab which bites or tickles. Philo Judeus so renders these words , neither such a Scab as changeth the colour of the skin into a leprosie, or spread∣ing (so I would turn ) itches. This Book called Leviticus being almost wholly spent in prescribing Sacrifices of all kindes, the rite and manner of offering them, the times prescribed when, and place where; the divers kindes of expiations and pu∣rifications; in this Chapter Moses treats concerning the High Priest and inferiour Priests; by whom the fore-mentioned cere∣monial services were transacted, how they ought to be qualified, and that most-what negatively. From the 16 to the 24 verse, the Lord directs Moses, and Moses Aaron, what manner of persons of his seed in their generations should not approach near, to offer the bread of their God. There is no doubt but these prohibitions touching the persons of the Priests, concerned literally and precisely the sons of Aaron, and the Levitical Priesthood and service, so long as that lasted; as it may appear by two tacite limitations, in that he saith, Of thy seed, and in their generations, ver. 17. And because all things befel that people in figure, 1 Cor. 10.11. it may hence be inferred, that defects and superfluities and the deformities which arise from them, in those misqualified persons, import the like spiritually and inwardly in those who ought to be excluded from the service of God. Accordingly, integrity of body is required in the Priest, saith Philo; and, having recited the deformities, he addes, : These things, saith he, seem to me to be figuratively referred to the per∣fection of the soul: for if the mortal body of the Priest must be so cu∣riously looked into, that no ill accident corrupt it, how much more ought the immortal soul framed according to the image of the true God? So he. And whereas Moses told this not only to Aaron and his sons, but also to all the sons of Israel, ver. 24. It seems that this divine law concerns, as those who are in the Priests office who teach the
people, make prayers and supplications and give thanks for them, so those also of the people who are spiritually to be made Priests unto God, 1 Pet. 2.5. Howbeit although these blemishes excluded the sons of Aaron in their generations, and reach not, according to the letter, unto the Gospel Priesthood, yet so far by analogy these prohibitions may ex∣tend, as to bar deformed persons from the exercise of that holy function, and to require decent persons, if otherwise fit and quali∣fied, to be admitted thereunto; yea, since there is nothing ex∣tant in the Word of God, contrary hereunto, there is no doubt but they who are in authority, may, by Ecclesiastical constitution, exclude such as by some notable deformity vertually exclude themselves. However, the reason and equity of this Ceremonial Law may so far prevail even in these times of the Gospel, as to disable Pa∣rents from choosing and designing such of their children to the Ministry, as are blinde or lame, or crook-backt, or have some other visible biemish, for that reason, (a most unreasonable one) even because their children are so deformed. For why? they either think them fit for no other imployment: meantime they remem∣ber not that curse, Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the deceiver, who hath in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing. Or else they look at the Ministry only as a lively∣hood, like a Corrodie of so much a year to maintain an Abby-Lub∣ber with what he may eat: In the interim they consider not, that they expose their children to a curse, like that on Eli's house, who shall say, (suppose to the Patron) Put me, I pray thee, into one of the Priests offices, that I may eat a piece of bread. 1 Sam. 2.36. Doubtless such considerations as these are, base and sordid, and unworthy of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and evidently prove, that such Parents have a poor opinion of Christs Ministers; yea, very low thoughts, if any, of the most high God: who from the consideration of Gods eminency and Majesty, ought to offer un∣to Him the very best they have. It is the Lords own reasoning in the fore-named place, Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the deceiver who hath in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrificeth unto the Lord, a corrupt thing: For I am a great King, saith the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen. I deny not but it may please the only wise God to set-off his illu∣staious and glorious truth with a black Foile; as Jewels and Pretious stones are best set in a dark ground. And truly the good news of a voice and power from Heaven routing our spiritual enemies, though worthy a Quire of Angels, Luke 2.13, 14. yet its wel∣come, although they who brought it, were scabby and nasty Le∣pers, 2 Kings 7.6.—11. Accordingly Moses Gods Ambassadour
unto Pharaoh, was a man slow of speech, and of a slow tongue, Exod. 4.10. So of S. Paul, who was an Ambassadour for Christ, his enemies said, that his bodily presence was weak and his speech con∣temptible, 2 Cor. 10.10. And his friends say of him, that he was a short man, and somewhat crooked. Niceph. lib. 2.37. According to what Chrysostome calls him, a man three cubits high. And expe∣rience hath proved in these last dayes, that the dumb Asse with mans voice hath forbidden the madness of the Prophets, 2 Pet. 2.16. Yea, God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God hath chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things that are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised hath God chosen; and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. However all this be true; yet neither all this, nor any testi∣mony else in Scripture, nor any sound reason out of Scripture, can warrant that selfish and ungodly designe of Parents, though fre∣quently practised in this and our Neighbour-Nations, to set a∣part for the Ministry, their impotent, crook-backt, or otherwise deformed children, even because they are such. These men no doubt seek their own things, not the things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.21. How much more pious and honest is their purpose and endea∣vour, who intend the very best and principal of their children unto that holy Function? For although Forma virûm neglecta—feature of body in it self be neglected, as  in this business not considerable; yet may a comely body be a more serviceable instru∣ment and vehicle of towardly, noble, and vertuous dispositions; according to that of the Poet, Gratior est pulchro veniens è corpore virts. Vertue is more acceptable when it proceeds out of a graceful man∣case. Nor can I but approve of that part of a certain local sta∣ture, of a Colledge, which speaks thus, Nec caecus nec claudus, (though the words following be invidious, nec Gallus nec Wallus,) Neither let the Blinde nor the Lame be admitted into this Soci∣ety. But the inward deformities no doubt were here intended and principally prohibited by Moses, as hindring the sons of Aaron from executing the Priests office. And there are like spiritual blemishes, which, by like reason, disable men from officiating in the Evangelical Priesthood. For neither must the Gospel-Priest be blinde; And he is spiritually blinde, saith S. Gregory, who knowes not the light of heavenly contemplation, who being inveloped in the darknesse of this present life, by not loving the life to come, he sees it not, according to 2 Thess. 2.10, 11, 12. S. Peter better: He who lacks these things, saith he, (which are faith, vertue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, and charity;) he who lacketh these things, is blinde, 2 Pet. 1.5.—9.
Their office requires of them, that they should open mens eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.18. That they cause all men to see the mysteries of God: And how can he so do, if he himself be blinde? How ill put together are , blinde guides? Matth. 23.24. as our Lord calls the Scribes and Pharisees. But its more unreasonable that they be lame guides also. And who is lame? Who else but he, who, though he see the way of life, yet, through infirmity and instability of his affections, walks not in it? unto such saith the Lord, how weak is thine heart? Ezech. 16.30. How absurd a thing therefore is it for Gods Priests to be lame, who are, by profession  such as must be guides and leaders unto others in the way of life? Acts 8.31. Now if they themselves halt in that way, how can they say as S. Paul, that excellent way-guide, to his Philippians, Be ye followers together of me, and mark them who walk so as ye have us for an example, Phil. 3.17. Goodly guides, I wiss, who, like the Statue of Mercury, point Travellers to the way, while they themselves stand still; as the Pro∣phet saith of Idols, they have feet and walk not: and of the same, Noses they have and smell not, Psal. 115.6, 7. By the Nose, S. Gregory understands Discretion, Prudence, and Sagacity, according to the known use of Nasutus, and homo acutae naris. Prudence is as laudable a vertue of the soul, as the Nose is comely for the body. But I shewed before by sufficient authority that  and  note defect and excess in the parts of the body; which imply that the Priest must have a perfect body; and by analogy according to Philo, that he have a perfect soul: Because Perfectum est cui nihil deest aut superest, that is perfect to which no∣thing is wanting, nothing is superfluous. And what is the breaking of the foot, but the revolt of the heart and affections broken off from the wayes of God? whereof the Lord complains, Ezech. 6.9. I am broken with their whorish heart which hath departed from me. And we say the like of the hands. Manus sunt opera, saith S. Hierome: and therefore the breaking of the hand, is the cessation and leaving off from doing good, as many at this day do, out of fear lest they should merit by well-doing. They have left off to be wise and to do good, Psal. 36.3. Nor must the Priests be crook-backt, pressed down with the weight of worldly cares. Curvae in terras animae & coelestium inanes: Crooked souls weighed down to the earth, & void of heavenly things. Gods Priest ought to lay aside every weight that presseth down, and the sin that so easily befets him, and run with patience to the race that is set before him, Hebr. 12.1, 2. And how can he run with such an heavy load upon his soul? Nor ought the Priest to be a Dwarff, to stint his spirituall growth, and be of stature like a childe of a span long, Lam. 2.20.
Whereas we are all called to the measure of the stature of the ful∣ness of Christ, Ephes. 4.13. But what is the blemish in the eye? Surely the word Blemish is too large and general whereby to express  confusion, or suffusion; as when the white of the eye, or a white spot [albugo] hath mingled it self with the black of the eye. This spiritually comes to passe when that wisdom and holiness wherewith we see God, Hebr. 13. when that  pupilla oculi, that image of the man is obscu∣red, who came for judgement into this world that they who see not, might see, and they who see, might be made blinde. Barti∣maeus therefore, (or, according to Hierom.  which in the Syriac, is filius caecus, or caeci, a blinde son, or the son of the blinde) he acknowledgeth his blindness, and prayes the Son of Da∣vid, that he may receive his sight. He does so, and follows Jesus in the way, Mark 10.46.52. And so shall every one who is spiritu∣ally blinde, and acknowledgeth it, and prayes to the Lord to open his eyes, that he sleep not in death, Psal. 13.3. And so he must fol∣low Jesus in the way as Bartimaeus did. But some love darkness more then light, John 3.19. And therefore our Lord though he saw him blinde, yet inquires, whether he had a will to see. For some are blind & think they see, & desire no other sight. Thus when the man prides himself in the opinion of his own spiritual sight, his wisdom, and righteousness, he is indeed spiritually blinde, though he knowes it not, and therefore desires no better sight. What? Say the Pharisees, are we blinde also? What? they who know the whole word of God so exactly, that they can tell how often every letter in it is used throughout the whole Old Testament? What, are they blinde who are the Masters of Israel? John 3. Nay, come we down to our own times; for there are Scribes and Pharisees among us, and they learned ones also, men extream well seen in Tongues and Arts, History of the Church, Councils, Fathers, Schoolmen: And others there are who neglect all these, and adhere to the letter only of the Scripture: And what? are all these blinde also? It is the  the black of the eye wherewith we see: And Gods great benefit and wonderful work it is in Nature as well as in grace, that he makes the sight and light to shine out of the black∣ness and darkness. Now if the film grow over this , this hid∣den new man of the pure heart, 1 Pet. 3.4. whereby we see God, Matth. 5.8. If pride of knowledge, if an high minde, if ambiti∣on, if covetousness, (which is Aviditas, that which hinders the sight) if unholiness, if hatred and malice cover this sight: in a word, if they have not put off the old man, and learned Christ, Ephes. 4.20. be they otherwise as learned as they may, they are certainly blinde; they know not God, nor the things of God. For that darkness hath blinded their eyes, 1 John 2.11.
This blemish is called  and rendred Albugo, it hath the name from  to confound; because the albugo the white spot or the white of the eye is confounded and mixt with the black. And according to the black, the man sees and discerns somewhat of the divine light; which light is ecclipsed by the interposition and mixture of the white, even the opinion of his own wisdom and ho∣liness, which seems fair and beautiful unto him, and herein he prides himself. Hence proceeds the confusion in the mans darkned heart, and out of the abundance of it, his mouth speaks. Hence we learn what is the true Babel, according to what we read, Gen. 11.9. It was called , because the Lord  confounded the lip, tongue, or speech of the whole Earth. And the speech of the whole earth is confounded by mixture of various judgements. Every divided party hath its several tenents, and they are to them the Right judgement, the Orthodox faith. And every other divided party is to this, corrupt, hetrodox, erroneous, and heretical. And what may be said of any one, may be said of every one. In these several, partial, and divided judgements, every Sect, with greatest industry and zeal endeavours to build up it self, and unite them∣selves in some confession of faith or other, which is their City they build, Gen. 11.4. and with as great emulation and animosity it opposeth all others under the name of the world. And what one party judgeth of another, the same another party also judgeth of it. So that, although every party monopolize and appropriate the Church unto it self, yet, by their mutual and interchangeable judgements one of other, they are all of the world. In this confusion, every divided judgement plies and courts the Civil Magistrate, and mainly endeavours to get him on their side, to make him, if possibly, their Executioner. And this is their Tower, Gen. 11.4. whereby they would suppress, and oppress and bring under all who are of another minde, and will not build with them. Meantime mark wherein this great difference consists. Not who should be the most obedient unto God, the most holy, so∣ber, temperate, just, patient, &c. Tush, these are poor things, men think, whereabout they should contend; the Heathen Philo∣sophers could talk of these. The Lacedemonians enured their chil∣dren to an emulation touching matters of this kinde; when their Fathers would ask them, who of all the City had the reputation of the most sober man; who was said to be the wisest; who the most just, most valiant, &c. Alas! what are these to a form of god∣liness? which consists in some certain ceremonies either invented by every divided party, or corruptly gathered out of the word of God: and this they fence with a several and divided discipline; unto which every party would have all others lout and do ho∣mage. And for these we quarrel, and contend, vex, and torture
our selves and others; as if that curse on Zedekiah and Ahab, were upon us, which ye read, Jer. 29.22. God make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the King of Babylon roasted in the fire! And these are the Christs which the divided Babel worships. These are our Helena's, these our Diana's. Here is Christ, saith one, nay, saith another, he is here; so a third, a fourth, indeed who knowes, how many? A Nut was crackt; and one shell flies this way, another that way, a third another way; and the like may be said of many. And one followes this shell, and saith, O here is Christ, and he heads and leads a company after him. Another shell flies that way; and another followes that, and leads a company after him: and so a third, a fourth, a fifth, &c. Stultorum infinitus est numerus, Eccles. 1.13. Meantime while men run to and fro, like the Egyptians, to seek their Apis, they cry , we have found him, we have found him, they think they have found a god, and he proves no other, no better then a Calf with a white face. They hunt and search here and there for shels; and meanwhile the kernel lies in the midst negle∣cted by all, despised by all; the unity of heart, love, meekness, low∣liness of minde, patience, long-suffering, &c. that's the kernell. That lies ith' street troden under foot, and no man thinks it worth the taking up. Let no man stand at a gaze and look at this or that Church or Congregation, and call that Babel. Turn thine eyes inwardly into thine own self, O man, and see whether the same  the same Babel the same Beam be not in thine own eye. The pride of knowledge without the life of it which is obedience, whereby thou wouldest get thy self a name, to be a man of great understanding and holiness; this swels thee, and makes thee imagine that thou hast a spiritual fulness, and great riches of knowledge, and thou reflectst upon thy self and knowest that thou hast knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.1. Thou hast gotten thee an opinion and art big with it, and travel∣lest like a fool with a word, and believest, that it is Christ formed in thee, Gal. 4.19. Whereas indeed it is but a tympany, a tumour, a swelling of spiritual pride in thee. Whence thou imaginest thy self above all other men, and that they are but fools or beasts in comparison of thee. All this proceeds from that man of sin who sets him self up in thine heart as if he were God; whereas in∣deed he is the Devil himself with his mystery of iniquity; and he works iniquity in thee. And he hath his false Prophet in thee wch teacheth lies in hypocrisie. And unto all this thou hast thy beast that yields obedience unto the iniquity. And this is thy Babel, thy , thine eye-sore, thy false light, which renders thee unfit, maugre all thy knowing knowledge, to be a Priest unto the Lord. 'Tis true, this high minde is plausible, and with some so taking, that its thought to be the great power of God, Acts 8.10. However, it makes a fair shew in the flesh.
But the  the Purulenta Scabies, the moyst, the mattery Scab, is, when the corrupt and putriied blood so abounds, that it breaks out and deforms the flesh. And what's that but the open and known sin, the manifest works of the flesh? Gal. 5.19. which proceed out of the abundance of the corrupt heart, Matth. 15.19, 20. and defile the man. Of these the Prophet speaks in a corrupt age like ours, There is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and bloud toucheth blood. And this is  pu∣rulenta Scabies the putrified matter of the impostumated soul. As for , it signifies the dry scab or itch. S. Gregory ap∣plies this to covetousness, which as the itch seizeth on the body, so this on the soul; which spreads it self without pain. Avaritia capti animum, dum quasi delectat, exulcerat, &c. Covetousness while it delights the minde of him who is taken with it, it eats and wastes it, and that without sense of pain, Dum spes refulserit lucri, the grief is taken away by the tickling and flattering hope of gain. Meantime as this mangyness deforms the body, so doth covetousness stain the beauty of the soul. Whence, not without just cause, its called , turpe lucrum, sordid and filthy lucre. This itch also may proceed from a Pharisaical humour, as when men itch after praise, as our Lord saith of the Pharisees, that they did all their works to be seen of men, Matth. 23.5. and did affricare scabiem, they infected others with the same itch, so that they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God, John 12.23. This also may be referred to the desire of propagating and spreading their opinions, which is so impetuous and itching, that they compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, saith our Lord, Matth. 23.15. And the like zealous itch have the Pharisees of our time, whose main endeavour it is rather to poyson others with their contagious tenents, then to save them and win them to the life of God. And therefore  hath its original from the Chaldee  discere to learn, whence  doctus learned and , do∣ctrina learning. Which imports an impatient and itching desire that many have to be teaching others; when yet that which Tully bewayling the decay of Orators in Rome, saith, Quàm in paucis spes, quantò in paucioribus facultas, quàm in multis est audacia, the same or the like we may say of those who intrude or would in∣trude into the Evangelicall Priesthood, How few are there, whereof there is hope, how much fewer have any faculty; in how many is there audaciousness and boldness to execute the Priests office? And as these have a , an itch in their tongue, so the people have , an itch in their ears, as the Apostle saith of them, 2 Tim. 4.3. and so mulus mulum scabit, they rub one ano∣ther. And the people love to have it it so, Jer. 5.31.
But here I may take up a complaint, and cry out with the O∣rator, O tempora! O mores! Into what times! into what manners of men are we fallen? When every blinde Bayard who sees only with other mens eyes, and is learned only with other mens learning, will yet be a Seer, a Prophet, and a Priest unto the people. When such as halt between God and Satan, Christ and Belial, will yet un∣dertake to be leaders of the people, and with their broken feet walk before Criples in Gods way, and with their broken hands, in∣struct others to do Gods Commandements, which they them∣selves professe are impossible to be done. Who have eyes full at least of spiritual adultery, and cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls; an heart they have exercised with covetous practises, chil∣dren of the curse, who have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following the way of Balaam the son of Besor who lo∣ved the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.14, 15. and the residue al∣so of that Chapter belongs to such audacious unqualified persons who intrude into the Priests office. When every such scurvy fel∣low, every such paltry Scab dares, quando omnis res—Janum ad medium fracta est—repentè sic Theologus prodire, when they can thrive no more at their trade, extempore start up Divines. S. Hie∣rom heavily bemoan'd his own times: O how would he have lamented, had he lived in our times! In the holy Scripture, saith he, Nullus apex vacat mysterio, there is not a tittle without a my∣stery; yet every man thinks he understands it. Yea, though the meanest and easiest trade requires long time, perhaps seven years, to learn the mysteries contained in it, some notwithstanding en∣tertain so poor a conceit of that most mystical Art of life, that, without living the same life, yea, though they live a life contrary thereunto, and turn not from their iniquities, yet they can under∣stand Gods truth; Daniel was of another minde, Dan. 9.13. Nay, if they have been so industrious as to learn Brachygraphy, and have gathered some Short-hand notes, they doubt not then, but, when all trades fail, to step out of the shop into the pulpit, and out-preach, yea, preach-out any not so qualified Divines out of their places. And being thus initiated, with Enoch the dedicated one, the son of Cain, Gen. 4.17. they hope in due time to preach themselves into some places of trust and profit. For this is the mode, the method and fashion of the times, and the high-way unto preferment. And then they lay away their Nets, when they have caught the fish. Sed nos ab ita scabie tenemus ungues. There is yet one imperfection remains which unqualifies the legal Priest; he must not be Concussus testiculo; he must be a perfect man, and fit to beget others unto God, 1 Cor. 4.15. But let us draw toward an end of this Essay.
Such perfection in the body of the Priests, symbolically required like perfection in their souls, as I shewed before out of Philo Jdaus, But how far, alas, how far differ we in these dregs of time, from that spiritual growth, and pious endeavours of the Primitive holy Fathers, toward the perfect life! when now every Darff takes himself to be a grown perfect man, or as perfect as he need to be. Whereas in those first times, they had their Penitentes, their Catechumeni, their Constrma, their Fideles, their Sancti, their Justi, most of them distinct degrees of Christs Disciples, as appears out of Tertullian and others; according as they were ca∣pable of few or more heavenly mysteries, and were grown up in the life and obedience unto them. All which in this hudling age and confusion of all things, are but meer names, and they scarce known; when every Novice in his nonage of Christianity, thinks himself altogether as tall a grown man in Christ, as the most perfect Scribe that's taught into the kingdom of heaven, Matth. 13.52. When to believe a possibility of perfection, is judg'd to be as great an errour in the Priest, under the Gospel, as to be blinde, or tame, scabbed, or itchy, or what ever other defect was held a blemish in the Priest under the Law. When to teach perfection, renders the Priest ignorant, scandalous, and insufficient. When the doctrine of perfection frequently delivered in holy Scripture, (though indu∣striously obscured by our Translators,) held forth in all Ages, taught in the School, believed and endeavoured after by all good men from the beginning all along until aetas parentum pejor avis tulit nos nequiores, imò nequissimos & vitiosissimos; until these last and worst dayes, when to believe and teach this doctrine, That its possible, through the Spirit and power of Christ, to be a per∣fect Priest, and stand compleat in all the will of God, its held to be a reasonable, just, and sufficient crime and cause to out a Minister of living and livelyhood. O Lord! when shall thy gracious promise be fulfilled? that Faith shall flourish, and corruption be overcome, and the truth, which hath been so long without fruit, be declared? When shall that victorious Belief be made known, which subdues the World, and all that world of iniquity whatsoever is in the World, that the Truth may appear, and Mercy meet with it? When shall Righteous∣ness and Peace kiss each other? O thou Israel of God, who hopest to be made an holy Priest∣hood unto thy God! How otherwise can this come to pass but by obeying the voice of thy God, and keeping covenant with him? Exodus 19.5, 6. Let us Per viam negationis, by the negative de∣scription of the legal Priesthood, learn the positive qualifications of the Gospel-Priesthood. Let us not be blinde and unwise, but un∣derstand what the will of the Lord is, Ephes. 5.17. And when
we know the Lords will and way, let us walk in it. Let us be guides unto others, that they may walk as they have us for exam∣ples; that we cast off the burden of all unnecessary cares; that we propound not to our selves any low measure of sanctity, but perfect holiness in the fear of God. That having eyes, we may see and avoid the confusions of Babel. That we may lay aside all filthi∣ness and superfluity of naughtiness. That being perfect Priests our selves, we may beget others unto God, and present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Such Briests the Lord makes unto God his Father, to whom be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. Revel. 1.6.
SERMON VIII.SER. VIII Gods meeting with men in their own way. Leviticus 26. ver. 27, 28. And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary un∣to me, Then will I walk contrary unto you also in fury. THere are two sinewes of the Common-wealth in Heaven, whereby the great Lawgiver obligeth his people to obe∣dience (from whence also inferiour Lawgivers have ta∣ken example,) Rewards and Punishments. They are both very powerful arguments and motives; but of the twain, the will of the Lord is, that the former should rather prevail with us. Be∣hold, saith he, I have set before thee this day life and good, death and evil. He sets life and good before death and evil, Deut. 30.15. Yea, ver. 19. he gives us that counsel expresly, I call Heaven and Earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore chuse life, that both thou and seed may live. And accordingly as he instructs Israel to deal with the Canaaaites in their wars, First, to pro∣claim and invite them unto peace; which, if they embraced, well; if not, what remain'd but killing and slaying? Deut. 20.10.—13. Even so the Lord himself deals with Israel; first he displayes the white Banner of his love, Goodness and Mercy, Cant. 2.4. which if it be accepted, he graciously promiseth life and immortality; but if that be rejected, he holds forth the black Flag of defrance, death and destruction, Rom. 2.4.—10. For well he knowes the frame of our heart, who made it, that naturally we had rather be drawn with the cords of  man, even with the bonds of love, Hos. 11.4. and therefore he rather would that his goodness should gently lead us to repentance, then that we should need forcing like a beast. I will instruct thee, saith he, and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go, I will give counsel with mine eye upon thee; be ye not as the Horse or the Mule without understanding, whose mouth must be held with bit and bridle, Psal. 32.8, 9.
In the Chapter before us the Lord observes the same method: For having propounded the way of his Commandements, and ex∣horted us to walk in his statutes, and to keep his Commandements, and do them, ver. 3. He invites us first by the former kinde of mo∣tives, temporal and spiritual blessings, and the very best of them both. The temporal, (though under them also spiritual are con∣tain'd) plenty of corn and wine, with the cause of that plenty, rain in due season. And because plenty is a dangerous attractive, and oftentimes drawes enemies to share with us, and hinder our quiet injoyment of it, he secures our fears of that danger, by promise of peace and safety. And whereas our peace might possibly be di∣strub'd either by some home-bred evil, or from abroad, he promi∣seth security in regard of both, ver. 6. I will rid evil beasts out of the land; neither shall the sword go thorow your land. But in case any shall be so bold as to make an assault upon us, they shall be repulsed with notable loss; for five of you shall chase an hun∣dred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand to flight, v. 7, 8. And because when goods increase, they are increased who eat them, Eccles. 5.11. When the enemies are put to flight, and plenty, peace, and safety returns, the Lord promises the fruit of plenty, peace, and safety; I will have respect unto you, and make you fruit∣ful, and multiply you, and ye shall eat the old store, and bring forth the old because of the new, ver. 10. And these are the temporal blessings and the principal ones; which also have their spiritual contained under them. 2. His spiritual blessings are here only two; but those instar omnium, as comprehending all the rest, his establishing of his co∣venant with them; and his residence and presence among them, with them, and in them, as the parallel Scriptures prove, Ezech. 37.26, 27. 2 Cor. 6.16. Revel. 21.3. This is Gods method even with Jewes and Gentiles. If so great goodness of God cannot so far prevail with us as to keep us in the way of his Commandements, but that we will depart from him, he then hedges in our way with thorns, Hos. 2.6. When his mercies can∣not win upon us, then he sends his judgements; when rewards will not perswade us, he then afflicts us with his punishments. Yea, if lighter afflictions will not move us, he then sends heavier. Which is the purport of this Chapter, from verse 14 to the 40, and of my Text; which is named once before, ver. 21, 22. Herein we have 1. the Lords supposition of his peoples disobe∣dience and obstinate opposition; If ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me. 2. The Lords answerable opposition threatned against his peoples supposed disobedience and opposition, then will I walk contrary unto you also in fury. Both which will afford us these several points of doctrine.
1. The Lord supposeth his people may not hearken unto him. 2. That they may not hearken unto him for all this. 3. That they may walk opposite unto him. 4. If thus they walk opposite and contrary unto him, he also will walk contrary unto them in fury. 1. The Lord supposeth his people may not hearken unto him. The word  and the words which answers to it, , and aire to hear or hearken, they all signifie to obey: As my sheep hear my voice, John 10.27. Be swift to hear, slow to speak, James 1.19. Which Scriptures, and many other speak not of the out∣ward hearing, or if of that, yet in order to the inward; , it is the minde and heart that hears and sees. This inward sight and hearing therefore is obeying; as the holy Ghost saith, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, Hebr. 3. For whereas Cor est terminus nium actionum ad intrà, the heart is the term of all actions tending inward, no action can be performed aright, unless the heart be suitably affe∣cted with it. So that to the due and effectual hearing of the Lords voice, there is required a soft, pliable, and tender heart, and humble, meek and yielding spirit, such as that was of Josiah, 2 Kings 22.18, 19. The Lord may well suppose, that his people will not hearken unto him, but give a deaf ear to his command to walk in his sta∣tutes, to keep his Commandements and do them, which is the precept here to be heard and obeyed, ver. 3. If we shall consider the Lords experience of mans perverse reasonings touching the grace and mercy of God; the delay of his judgements against impenitent sinners; hope of impunity; delight in the pleasures of sin; the great gain hoped for by continuance in sin; and a thousand such, whereby the man frustrates Gods counsel and hardens his own heart against the Commandement of God, to his own destruction. Hence it followes, that the Lord hath his speaking power, and his voice; and that he puts forth his voice, and would have it heard and obeyed by his people. This is necessary, as Plato himself could say, because the will of God cannot be known unto men, unless God by his Oracle reveal it. Hence it is that  the voice is , by the voice we know the thoughts and will, which otherwise are hidden in the soul. This minde and will God reveals either immediately by his own in-speaking; or by means of those who are his Truch∣men and Interpreters; which comes all to one purpose: For the inward in-speaking is Gods Oracle, and they who speak, ought to speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. And in this sense it is true, he who heareth you heareth me.
The Lord leaves it to the power, will, and choise of his peo∣ple, whether they will hearken or not, whether they will obey or not obey. So the holy Ghost saith Hebr. 3. To day if ye will hear his voice, &c. and here in the text, If for all this ye will not hearken unto me, &c. He speaks to those who are his people with∣in his call, within hearing. And therefore Psal. 95.  si in voce ejus, if ye will hear in his voice, if ye be within hearing; if ye be his flock, for to those he there speaks. So Esay 1.19, 20. If ye be willing, if ye be obedient, &c. But if ye refuse and rebell, &c. whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, Ezech. 3.11.—21. If any man will do his will, &c. John 7.17. These, and many the like Scriptures evidently prove that the Lord having declared his will unto his people, he leaves them in the hand and power of their own counsel, as the Wise man saith, Ecclus. 15.14. It is a free and voluntary act to sin, and to be disobedient, and harden our hearts against the voice and calling of God. And as free and voluntary an act it is through the preventing grace of God to hear the Lords voice, to be willing and obedient. Where∣fore be we exhorted, Beloved, to hearken unto the Lord, to walk in his statutes, to keep his Commandements, and do them. In one word, to be obedient unto him: That's here meant by , as I shewed before, and the LXX here render it by , to obey; and the Chald. Par. by . So Castellio turns it, Quod si neque tum mihi morigerantes, &c. If neither then ye be obedient unto me, &c. So the French Translation, and the Italian. And all other sound to the same purpose. All the promises of God, all the temporal and spiritual blessings tend hereunto. Yea, all the threatnings; all the punishments, all the curses aim at this, to make the people obedient unto their God; which is the main drift of this whole Chapter, yea, of the whole Law and Gospel, and in special of this Text. What ever fals short of this, however pleasing to us, its not ac∣ceptable, not pleasing unto God. 1. Whether it be Reading, and curious prying into the Word of God. , Ye search the Scriptures; (so those words are to be translated, as I may shew hereafter if the Lord will) for herein ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testifie of me: but ye will not come to me, that ye might have life, John 5.39, 40. 2. Or, whether it be outward hearing of Gods word: For not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law shall be justified, Rom. 2.13. Otherwise they deceive them∣selves, and that in the main, James 1.22. 3. Nor is it enough to know the word and will of God; the Lord saith of those hypocrites, Esay 58.2. They seek me daily
and delight to know my wayes. And the same people had a form of knowledge, even so far as to be able to instruct others; yet they taught not themselves, Rom. 2.20, 21. 4. Nor will holy conference prove acceptable, without obedi∣ence. For of such holy pratlers the Lord saith, with their mouth they shew much love, but their heart goes after their covetousness, Ezech. 33.31. And therefore the Lord expostulates with the wicked, in his judgement, what hast thou to do to declare my sta∣tutes, or that thou shouldst take my covenant in thy mouth? see∣ing thou hatest instruction, and hast cast my words behinde thee, Psat. 50.16, 17. 5. No, nor is faith it self sufficient without the obedience of faith, Rom. 1.5. For faith without works is dead, James 2.26. 6. Nor is a velleity or half-will enough. Agrippa was almost perswaded to be a Christian: but S. Paul wisht, that he and all that heard him, were both almost and altogether Christians, Acts 26.28, 29. Completa voluntas pro facto aestimatur, a compleat will is ac∣cepted for the deed; that is, when the deed cannot be done, nor is at all in our power; according to which the Apostle saith, that, if there be first a willing minde, it is accepted according to what a man hath, not according to what he hath not, 2 Cor. 8.12. 7. But what shal we say of obedience of it self? if it be only in part performed, when it is in our power to do the whole, and stand com∣pleat in all the will of God, the partial and half obedience is not accep∣ted. Saul had done much of Gods will and in lieu of what was wanting, he reserved a Sacrifice: But what saith Samuel unto him? Hath the Lord delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifies, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better then sa∣crifice, and to hearken, then the fat of Rams, 1 Sam. 15.22. Yea, though lesse of the work were performed, yet, if done with our whole will, and all the power we have, its accepted of God. David must not build God an house, though he much desired so to do, 2 Sam. 7.5. yet what David might do, he did to the utmost of his power; I have prepared, saith he, with all my might, for the house of my God, &c. 1 Chron. 29.2. And this was accepted of God, saith Solomon; It was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the Name of the Lord God of Israel: But the Lord said to David my Father; Forasmuch as it was in thine heart to build an house for my Name, thou didst well in that it was in thine heart; Notwithstanding thou thou shalt not build the house, 2 Chron. 6.7, 8, 9. 8. Can we ascend yet one step higher? We may. Read we may, and search the Scriptures, and hear, and know all that's knowable, and talk it out again: yea we may believe, and may have all faith, 1 Cor. 13.2. Yea we may be somewhat wil∣ling to do; Nay, we may do many things as Herod did, Mark 6.20.
Nay, we may do all we ought to do; yet if we persevere not in the faith, good will, and obedience, all we have done, is as if it were undone: when a righteous man turneth away from his righte∣ousness, and committeth iniquity, and dieth in them, in the ini∣quity which he hath done, shall he die, Ezech. 18.26. He that en∣dureth to the end, the same shall be saved, Matth. 10.22. Be thou faithful unto the death, (of all and every sin,) and I will give thee the crown of life, Revel. 2.10. The Lord strengthen us all in faith, good will, obedience and perseverance! For tis possible, not∣withstanding all the promises of God, and all his threatnings denounced against his people, yet that they may not be obedient. That's the Lords second supposition in the Text. 2. The Lord supposeth, that his people may not hearken unto him, for this; or, as it is explained, for all this, (for all is not in the Text) notwithstanding all the punishments inflicted. Whence it appears, that the end which the Lord aims at in all the chastisements and punishments of his people, is their obe∣dience. Which is the drift of our Lords expostulation with them, Esay 1.5. Why will ye be stricken any more? Its possible that the Lord may inflict punishments often and of∣ten upon his people, as here seven-fold more then formerly, yet may his people not be obedient. Yea, tis possible that the rebellious heart of man may vie and contest with Gods judgements, and be so much the more provoked to disobedience; Exul ad octavam Marius bibit, & fruitur diis Iratis. He pleased himself in Gods anger. But the Scripture will give us the like example of Ahaz, In the time of his distresse he did trespass yet more against the Lord. Then it ses a brand of infamy upon him, This is that King Ahaz, 2 Chron. 28.22. Hitherto we have heard the negative or privative disobedience, not harkening unto God. Come we now to the positive; and that's the Lords third Supposition. 3. The Lord supposeth, that his people may walk contrary unto him. These words may be considered two wayes; , ac∣cording to the opinion and judgement of men; , according to the truth of God. Being considered according to the opinion and judgement of men, the people of God may be understood to walk opposite unto God, two wayes; Disparatè. Contrariè. 1. Disparatè, in disparate affection; as when that one way of Gods Commandements, is opposed by the many erroneous and by-wayes of men: as one straight line is opposite unto manifold crooked lines; one vertue unto divers vices. The Pharisees opposed the Sadduces, and the Sadduces the Pharisees; but they were both against Christ.
But the opposition runs more strongly, when all the disparate disaffections are drained and brought altogether into one chanel; when Ʋnum uni opponitur, when one is opposed to one, as God and Satan, Christ and Antichrist, God and disobedient man. Si mecum ambulaveritis in occursu, if ye walk with me, è regione, as encountring with me, &c. So Arias Montanus. Both these are good senses, but however our Translators have thus rendred the words, this seems not to be the genuine meaning of them. 2. Let us inquire into these words , according to their true sense and meaning: and herein 1. What is meant by walking. 2. What by walking with God. 3. What is it to walk with God, , which is here turn'd, contrary to me. The word , (whence our English word to walk,) in Scrip∣ture is almost wholly metaphorical, and the same which the Latins understand by versari, conversari, and the like, importing what we understand by life and conversation. What our Translators turn here, if ye walk contrary to me, is neither so nor so. For the word  doth not signifie contrary; nor is  unto me; but  notes contingency, chance, or casualty, and  with me: as in the margent, at all adventures with me. Accordingly our Translators elsewhere render . Jacobs sons tell their father all that befel unto them, Gen. 42.29. Un∣cleanness that chanceth him by night, Deut. 23.10. There shall no punishment happen to thee for this thing, 1 Sam. 28.10. Mordecai told him all that had hapned unto him, Esther 4.7. Haman told every thing that had befallen him, Esther 6.13. The like we have Ruth 2.3. Eccles. 2.15. In these places named, and all others where the word  is used, it's rendred according to this sense, and by the same or the like words. That we may understand this the better, we must know, that in humane affaires, a thing is said to come to pass casually or by chance when it happens otherwise then we counselled, would, inten∣ded, or purposed, and beside or contrary to our hope and expectati∣on. Now whereas the will of the Lord is, that we walk with him in his way, that is, as ver. 3. that we walk in his statutes, keep his Commandements, and do them, and that with our whole heart and will; and so to please God as the Apostle turns the word, , Hebr. 11.5, 6. On the contrary; when a man does what is com∣manded, as it were beside his purpose and intention, it is  by chance. As when the heart of a man is fully set in him to do evil, if yet he have occasion offered, without his intention or seeking to do good, & do it—, as it were nolens volens, by the bye and beside his intention, what he does, may be said to be done by chance. So that he is , a double-minded
man unstable in all his ways, James 1.8. he is , he is mutable and changeable, adhering and siding now with one party, now with another. Thus the man walks with God  by chance. Or else as the learned Jewes explain  via fortui∣ta by chance or the way of fortune or chance. And so the sense will be, if ye so walk with me, that what befals you from me, ye ascribe to Fortune or Chance. I shall speak something to both senses. As to the former; If ye walk by chance with me, &c. There is an harmony of other translations with this. The French Bible hath the Text answera∣ble to our margent, If ye walk with me at all adventure. And the Spanish translation, If ye walk with me by chance. So Diodati al∣so in the margent: and Tremellius, If ye walk with me, temerè; & he explains his meaning by, sine discrimine, without difference, , utut accidat, however it happens, Secuti studia ve∣stra, non voluntatem meam, following your own desires, not my will. To the same purpose Piscator in his Latin Scholia. As for our Translation, it seems not to make handsome English; If ye walk contrary with me. Yea, it implies somewhat like a contradi∣ction, to be contrary, yet with me. They were advised of this; and therefore they forced , which signifies, with me, contrary to the proper meaning of it, and turn it, [to me.] Howbeit they have not erred alone, but herein have followed the tract of all our English Translations, which sound to the same sense, as also that of Luthr, and all the Low Dutch. Now if we shall enquire, we shall finde that there is great reason why the Lord may suppose this possibility, that we may walk at all adventures with him. We are his workmanship created unto good works, that we should walk in them, Ephes. 2.10. And for this end he made us according to his own image in wisdom, in righteousness and holiness of truth, and hath given us his Spirit as a light to be president over our souls, Job 29.3. as a Candle upon our heads, to guide us in the way of his Commandements. Yet, that our walking with our God, might be noble, free, and without constraint, he hath put this light in earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. He hath made us , a souly man, whose , leading power, or reason, is apt to conclude either way Ex quovis medio dato, according to any argument given; and being furnished with a competent measure of divine light of life, he leaves us in the hand of our own counsel, Ecclus. 15.14. which is an inconsistent estate moveable and inclinable either to good or evil. Beside, this innate principle of mutability, in our rational part, many leading men have learned and art Probabiliter in utramque partem de quovis themate disputandi, of disputing Pro & Con, de quovis
ente & non ente. This although what ever is rational and true in it, it proceeds from the , and him that is true, 1 John 5.20. yet its mixt with much wisdom of the flesh; which darkens the true reason, and hinders the light of life from shining to it, 2 Cor. 4.4. But as we have a reasonable soul which ought to be guided by the minde of God, so we have also vertibile principium a mutable and changeable principle in our soul, our will, which is prone in utram{que} partem, to follow the dictate and conclusion either way, which the uncertain and undetermined reason shall lead unto. And these two greater wheels turn the whole fabrick of the in∣feriour powers, the passions, affections and lusts; which are easily moved to run riot; especially since there are so many sensible ob∣jects distracting and troubling this lower region of the soul; which like the turba the populacy consisting most-what  of earthly minded men (for such as is the earthy, such are they that are earthy, 1 Cor. 15.48.) they are easily stirred up to mutiny and tumult; as the dust is soon raised, but not so easily laid. For the affections being , in the unreasonable part of the soul, they are easily inclined downward by the allurements of their sensible present objects; and as a steep descent and slippery way causeth oftentimes the unwary traveller to make more hast then good speed: Such and so violent is the attraction and draw∣ing of the present seeming good which too often is disjoyned from the true good; whereby the rational appetite the will and the rea∣son it self is preposterously brought off to side with the rebellious Rout; as the Pilot in a storm leaves the helm, and suffers the vessel to be carried by the violence of the winde and weather. All which laid together, and well considered may make up a sufficient reason, why the only wise God should suppose it possible, that his people may walk by chance or at all adventure with him. But we meet with one objection, that makes all this contem∣plation quite void. For if the way of man be not in himself, so that he hath no power at all to walk with God, to what purpose does the Lord command us to walk in his way? and why does he threaten us for not walking in it? yea, why does he suppose it possible, that we may walk otherwise then he hath commanded?Jer. 10. ver. 23. Jeremy saith so much. O Lord! I know, that the way of the man is not in himself, it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps. There is no doubt but this Scripture hath a truth in it, and somewhat toward that sense wherein its commonly understood. For in God we live and move and have our being, Acts 17.28. Nor can the man think one good thought of himself, without the Lord, nor withstand an evil. Yea, without him we can do no∣thing, John 15.5. And it true which the Schoolmen say, that the
works of grace which are to eternal life, are not in the power of man without the inspiration and help of God. So Aquinas; Ideo gratia prevenit, quia non est liberum arbitrium sed potius infun∣ditur ab ipso Deo. Grace is therefore said to prevent, because it is not the faculty of reason and will (so he defines liberum arbi∣trium, 1 part. quaest. 83. a 3. & 4.) but is rather infused of God himself. For if in natural actions we need divine direction, how much more in supernatural? These sayings and other like are true; but not grounded upon this speech of the Prophet Jeremy. For what if this Scripture be not thus to be understood? Sure∣ly the holy Word of God is not tanquam scopae dissolutae; not are∣na sine calce; it is not alwayes incoherent and without connexion of one part with other, as some would have this to be. Whereas if we look well into it, we shall finde, that the Prophet having warned Jerusalem of the distress coming upon them, Jer. 10.17, 18. he takes upon himself the person of the Church lamenting the ruine of it, ver. 19, 20. which he demonstrates from the causes meriting, ver. 21. and inflicting, ver. 22. which yet he denies to be in Nebuchadnezzars own power, but in Gods over-ruling hand, ver. 23. O Lord! I know, that the way of that man, , that is, of Nebuchadnezzar, is not in himself. Then followes 1. Pre∣catio, his prayer for the Church. O Lord! correct me; let thy fa∣therly chastisement excuse or prevent my utter destruction. 2. De∣precatio, which ruine he prayes against; Correct me not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing. 3. Imprecatio; he prayes a∣gainst the Gentiles; Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not. Which clearly appears to be the meaning of this Scripture, by comparing with it, Ezech. 21.18.—24. where the Lord governs Nebuchadnezzar, and directs and turns him from Rabbah of the Ammonites, whither he was marching, to Jerusalem. So that the way of that man was not in himself, it was not in that man that walked, to direct his steps. Good use therefore may be made of that Scripture, as hath been shewen; but the History must be maintained, however some other sense may be couched under it. So that it no way excuseth any believer, but that he may walk in the way of of Gods statutes, keep his Commandements and do them, and so, through the grace and mercy of God, live, and walk with God. Wherefore dissemble not with thy God, O man! not tempt him with thy pretence of weakness or ignorauce, nor abuse that Scripture beyond the scope of it, to maintain thine habitual sins under the colour of infirmities. One came before the Oracle at Delphos to try whether Apollo could discover his fraud or not. He had under his Cloak, a live Bird; and he asked the Oracle, Utrum vivum proferam, an mor∣tuum,
shall I bring forth somewhat that lives, or somewhat that's dead. Apollo or his Priest perceiving his hypocrisie and deceit, answered, In te est stulte; Fool! it is in thy power, whether of the twain thou wilt do. Dissemble not with thy God the , who searcheth and knoweth the heart and the reins; pretend not inability, infir∣mity, and weakness. Thou hast power to choose, if thou be a Belie∣ver; whether thou wilt walk in dead works, or walk with the living God; In te est stulte: Fool! it is in thy power, through the pre∣venting, guiding, and assisting grace of God. But so much for answer to this objection. Come we now to consider what may be collected from hence for our instruction. Hence we learn, that, 1. The names of Fortune, Chance, Casualty, Accident, Hap, &c. ought not to offend the people of God. For since the Scripture it self useth this language; and the only wise God condescends in this manner of speech to speak to us, why should we be scrupu∣lous or doubtful, whether we should so speak yea or not? Only that conceit be far from us, that we should think any event for∣tuitous or casual in respect of God; but that he foresees, and wisely disposeth and ordereth all things, which seem fortuitous, casual, and accidental unto men. But more of this anon. 2. Hence we may note, that the Commandements of God are a way. Where, by the Commandements of God, we understand not only the Decalogue or Ten Commandements, but as the Scripture useth  the Law largely, as Psal. 19. and often elsewhere, for divine doctrine, and the revelation of Gods will in his Word. And so the Gospel also is  a Way, Acts 9.2. and often elsewhere. And that 3. Being a Way, it hath divers stages, parts, degrees; many sins to be departed from; many vertues and graces to be walked in; many enemies to be subdued. 4. The walking with God in the way of his Commandements in truth, and with a perfect heart, is the whole business of Gods people, and what he requires and expects of them, 2 Kings 20.3. Yea, this is the whole duty of man, Eccles. 12.13. Or indeed the whole man, as the words import. 5. Walking is Motus progressivus, a progressive motion, a pro∣ceeding from grace to grace, from vertue to vertue. It is Motus con∣tinuus, not forward and then backward again; that's not one, but divers motions. Some works there are which being intermitted, all that is done is lost: And such is our walking in Gods way, if interrupted and broken off. If the Nazarite make himself unclean by the dead, all the dayes that were before, shall be lost, because his se∣paration was defiled, Numb. 6.12. And if a traveller in Gods way,
run well for a time, and then pollute himself with dead works, all his labour is lost, he must begin again. 6. It is possible for Gods people so to walk, through the grace of God, without whom we can do nothing, and through whom we can do all things, Phil. 4.13. that they may keep his Commande∣ments and do them. 7. Its possible also that Gods people may not walk with God in truth and with a perfect heart; but that they may diversly, con∣trarily, tasually, and at all adventures with God. 8. There is no antecedent necessity determining us to walk, or not to walk with God in the way of his Commandements. 9. The Lord takes notice of the frame and disposition of our heart, whether we be with him or against him; and if with him, whether with purpose of heart, or by chance only. 10. Hence we have a balast for the settlement of our fluctua∣ting and doubtful judgements, in this later part of time when so many winds of doctrine blow; when so many wayes lie opposite, disparate, contrary one to other; and we see so many walking in these opposite, disparate, and contrary wayes, judging, censu∣ring, and condemning one another; —stat, & incertus, qua sit sibi, nescit, eundum. How shall the unexperienced traveller do who sincerely would, but knowes not how to hit upon that way where∣in he may walk with God. This hath been the case of many, and possibly may yet be the condition even of some of you. It was, it seems, the doubt which troubled some in the Prophet Jeremies dayes. For thus he directs the people, Jer. 6.16. Thus saith the Lord, stand ye in the wayes and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall finde rest for your souls. If the Lord point those in Jeremies dayes to an old way, it must be a very old way indeed. We must look for it among the paths; it seems, it is not a broad beaten road: that broad way leads to destruction. But we inquire for Gods way wherein we may walk with him to life everlasting. Its found among the paths; its a narrow way. And it seems, there are many narrow wayes, many affected and chosen strictnesses and strait wayes, which are to be found in every divided judgement. One or other is strict and religious in his own chosen way. But are they not paths, narrow paths cut out of the broad way? Our search is for Gods old way, his old path, wherein Enoch is said to have walked with God, Gen. 5.22.24. and Noah, Gen. 6.9. But yet we finde not what that way was. The Lord himself will teach us it, Gen. 18.19. It is that which Abraham our father taught his sons, to walk in the way of the Lord, to do justice, and judgement. This is that old way wherein Abraham walked with God, as himself testifies of him, Gen. 26.5. Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my Commandements, my statutes, and my lawes.
All other wayes they are of yesterday. But we walk by faith you'l say: And did not Abraham who is the father of the faithful? But we walk in love; and its an old Commandement, saith S. John. And did not Abraham walk in love, when he kept the Commandements of God? How else could he keep them? Exod. 20.6. they that love me and keey my Commandements: and, faith works by love. And by faith and love Abraham walked with God in his statutes, kept his Commandements, and did them. And this is the way we enquired af∣ter: the first we finde commended to us, Gen. 18.19. and the same the last, with a blessing annexed unto it, Blessed are they that do his Commandements, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in thorow the gates into the City, Revel. 22.14. Justly therefore are they hence reproved who walk by chance with God; sometimes very hot and zealous, and sometimes again as cold: as in a feverish and aguish distemper, unevenly and inor∣dinately, like their pulse. Yea, quasi aliud agentes, as if the service of God and walking with him to all well pleasing, were a , a business only by the bye. O the preposterous heart of man! how perverse and untoward is it! pursuing vain and transitory things, with all eagerness and earnestness; neglecting and slighting things lasting and everlast∣ing; making those their , their main and principal business, these their , their business by the bye: following with their utmost endeavour those things which will not profit them in the latter end; little regarding those things which will then profit us, and indeed nothing else but they. Hezekiah had now a mes∣sage of death sent unto him by the Prophet Esay, 2 Kings 20.3. Thus faith the Lord, set thy house in order; for thou shalt die and not live; its said, that Hezekiah turn'd his face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, saying, I beseech thee, O Lord, re∣member how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. Let the Atheists of our time consider this, who think it a vain thing to serve God; and that there is no profit to keep his Ordi∣nance, and to walk mournfully before the Lord of hosts, Mal. 3.14. Let the Edomites, the earthly minded ones consider this who hunt after the lusts of the old man, and slight the blessing and the eternal inheritance, as if it were good for nothing. The time will come, when they shall experimentally finde, that nothing but humble walking with God with a perfect heart, 11.  and doing what is good in his sight, will profit them; and, unless they timely enter into that way, walk in Godt statutes, keep his Commandements, and do them, they shall seek the blessing and eternal inheritance and the way leading thereunto, with tears, and not be able to finde it, but die in their sins, Gen. 25.33, 34. and 27.38. Hebr. 12.16, 17.
This also reproves our hankering and halting between two opi∣nions, whether we should walk with God or walk with Baal, or ra∣ther with Baalim, or many lording lusts which have dominion over us. If the Lord be God, serve him; if Baal be god, serve him. We cannot serve the Lord and Baal, God and Mammon. But there is yet another meaning of these words; that the Lord supposeth, its possible that his people might attribute the good or evil which befel them, to Chance and Fortune, not to God himself. And so they should make Fortune their god. The Mythologists, whose proper business it is, to search out the original and truth of old Poetical Fables, they report, that, a∣mong all humane Authors, , Fortane was never held to be a god or goddess, till Homer made it one. Nor doth Hesiod mention any such deity in all his . It is true, Chance and Fortune were taken notice of long before, as I have shewed. And the Phi∣listines owned it, but not as a god, 1 Sam. 6.9. But when Homer had found out such a new god, the after. Poets easily added to his invention, and so enlarged the power of Fortune, that they gave her at length the soveraignty over all humane affairs. And if this fiction had rested among them, who have authority to dare any thing, it had not been so strange. But can we think, that the Ora∣tors, and of them, the most sober men, should entertain the same opinion of it? What saith Demosthenes? . For great is the moment, yea, rather Fortune is all in all as to all the affairs of men. Yea, Tully saith as much, Magnam vim esse in fortuna in utram{que} partem, &c. that Fortune hath great power on both sides, either in prosperity or adversity, who knowes not? for if we have her prosperous gale, we are carried to our wished ends: and when she is trary, we are afflicted: and much more to this purpole, lib. 2. de officiis; wherein indeed he makes Fortune such a goddess as ruleth and disposeth of all things in the world, as I shall shew by and by. But all these own'd a , a plurality of gods; and if so, why might not Fortune have a place among them? since what the Apostle faith of idols, is most crue of Fortune, that it is nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8. But who can imagine, that the people of the only true God, should take Fortune for a god? yet the onely true God supposeth this possible.Esay 65. ver. 11. Yea, this was so possible, that it proved fecible, and was actually done by Gods own people, as he complains, Esay 65.11. Ye are they who have forsaken the Lord, and have for∣gotten my holy mountain, who prepare a Table  for that troop or for Gad, as our Translators turn it in the margent. Pag∣nin understood the host of heaven; Arias Montanus turns it, Jove. So Munster explains Gad by Jovi, and tells us, that the Jewes
thereby understand , that is, Jupiters star. Luther retains Gad, but understands by it, in his Notes, Mars or Mercury. But its most probable that by Gad in that place, Fortune is to be un∣derstood: for so  signifies Good fortune or success. And there∣fore Leah called her son born of Zilpah her hand-maid, Gad, and gives her reason, , Good fortune, success, or prosperity cometh, Gen. 30.11. Hence it was easie for the Heathen Poets, especial∣ly Homer, to counterseit their god Fortune, as they were wont to do others, out of the ancient Monuments of persons recorded in the Scriptures; as I have formerly showen by divers examples. Hence it is that the Vulgar Latin turns Gad Fortune, Ponitis For∣tunae mensam, ye prepare a Table or Altar for Fortune. So Vata∣blus and Castellio in the margent, as also the French Bible. But the Spanish Bible and that of Coverdale hath [Fortune] in the Text. But I may speak more to this on Esay 65.11. if the Lord will. Meantime concerning Fortune we may affirm thus much. 1. That although the Heavens and Stars have their instuencies, motions, and operations; although all inferiour second causes, whether ne∣cessary or contingent, have their energie and causality, and may possibly be so shuffled and hudled together, that their effect is un∣known to us, whence it immediately proceeds, and so may be said to come to pass by Chance or Fortune; yet is the most high God , the first cause and cause of all causes; and he so disposeth and ordereth all second causes whether acting naturally and necessarily, or freely and contingently, that its im∣possible, that any thing should be fortuitous, casual, or accidental in regard of him. And therefore when such actions which, to men, are fortuitous and accidental, come to pass, the less of man there is in them, the more there is of God. As where its said, that a certain man drew a Bow at adventure or in his simplicity, and hit Ahab; there is no doubt but God, who would have Ahab fall at Ramoth Gilead, he directed the arrow, 1 Kings 22.34. And when our Saviour tells the Story or Parable of the man descending from Jerusalem to Jericho, Luke 10. By chance, saith he, there came down a certain Priest that way, ver. 31. the words are  by chance; which we may understand to be from  the Lord, as well as from , which is contingere, to happen. And so we may render the words; A certain Priest Cum Deo or secundum Deum, by divine Providence, came down that way, &c. Hence it followes, that the most high God so disposeth and or∣dereth the whole Series of inferiour and second causes, how vaious and different, yea how opposit, yea how contrary soever their a∣ctivity, operation, and working is; that what seems unto men the most fortuitous and casual event, the same is foreseen, directed, and governed by his providence; as the Lot, Prov. 16.33.
Hence also it appears, that the most high God having in himself eminently and vertually the whole causality and operative powers of all necessary and contingent causes, and the whole disposing and ordering their effects and events, he may most reasonably and just∣ly require of his people, an immediate, constant, and continual dependence upon himself in their whole conversation; so that their whole life ought to be lived in him, who is their life, Deut. 30.20. All their motions moved on him, who is their centre, Hebr. 1.3. All their works wrought in him, John 3.21. Yea, it is his great love, goodness, and mercy, that he requires of his peo∣ple, that they walk with him with intire and perfect heart. So that so far is Fortune from having any power or deity, that it is to be reckoned among the Non-entia. And, if there be degrees of non-entity, Fortune is to be placed in the very lowest; because its born of privation, and imagined out of the ignorance of causes: For if we knew the causes, it would easily appear, that Fortune is, as I said before, a meer Idol which is nothing in the world. Wise∣ly therefore saith the Satyrist: Nullum numen abest, si sit prudentia: sed te Nos facimus, Fortuna, deum, caelo{que} locamus. There wants no God, where Prudence doth reside; But we poor Fools have Fortune deifi'd. Having disown'd the false god, let us own and honour the true God in his just providence & meeting men in their own way. Which is the fourth and last doctrine in this Text. 4. If we walk with God , by chance, and at all adventures, he also will walk with us  and at all adventures. But how can God be said to walk at all adventures with those who so walk with him? I must remember you, that these two are opposed, Purpose, and Chance, or Fortune. When therefore the Lord does not purposely and out of intention, walk with men, he may be said to do it, , as it were by chance. As for exam∣ple; The Lord gave his ancient people the Jewes, the former and the later rain in their seasons, if they performed the condition of the Covenant: For this he promiseth to them who walk with him in the way of his Commandements, Levit. 26.3, 4. These sea∣sonable raines he gave on purpose, and out of good intention unto these who were obedient: but to the disobedient who kept not Co∣venant, but walked by chance with him, he gave them rain also: For he rains upon the evil, and upon the good; but upon the good, Per se, on purpose; on the evil, Per accidens, even as it chanceth. But its here said, I will walk with you , that is, not as we render it, I will walk contrary to you in fury; the word  is in regimine, and so precedes , I will walk with you in furo∣re occursus, in the fury of opposition; so Arias Montanus. Or ra∣ther in the fury of chance or fortune; Fortunâ reflante, or adversâ
fortunâ, with ill fortune. Pardon the expression: But why should I crave pardon? Its that phrase which the Spirit of God conde∣scends to use. The reason of this unfortunate and cross dealing of God with his people, is evident from his peoples fortuitous, accidental and crosse dealing with their God. The terms and conditions of the cove∣nant broken on the peoples part, by uneven and casual walking with their God, require like walking of God with them; or at least disoblige him from his favourable and constant walking with them, and in them, Levit. 26.12. God is a most just Retaliator. Sequitur scelestos ultor à tergo Deus: God followes wicked men going on in their wickedness. It belongs to the Judge of all the world; reducere in ordinem, to reduce and to bring into the order of Justice all those who walk inordinately with their God. Whence it followeth; 1. That Gods threatnings are conditional as well as his promises; If ye walk at all adventures with me, then will I walk at all adventures with you. 2. The Lord takes notice of his peoples thoughts, intentions, purposes, wayes, workes, their outward and inward walking, life and conversation; and accordingly he deals with them. 3. God how ever good, and the chief good, yet is he just also, yea, severe in punishing unjust and wicked men; according to that of a Father; Deus est primariò bonus, acque ex indole naturae; at secun∣dariò & ex accidente severus idem est ex populi peccato. God is pri∣marily good out of the inclination of his nature; but secondarily and accidentally he is severe by reason of his peoples sin. Hereby are they justly reproved who walk with God negligently and casually, as if all things came to pass by chance and fortune; though hereby I do not justifie those who impute all things to a fatal necessity. We read Acts 17.18. that the Epicureans and Sto∣icks encountred Paul. And indeed who ever with purpose of heart cleave to the Lord, and walk with him in his way, as S. Paul did, they shall be encountred with Epicureans and Stoicks. Such Epicurean spirits, I fear, are among us who are without God and divine providence in the world, Ephes. 2.12. And what then rules the world but uncertain chance, or nature, determined to one way of working? Tully in the place before named atri∣butes unto Fortune these effects; among inanimate creatures, Pro∣cellas, tempestates, naufragia, ruinas, incendia; storms, tempests, ship∣wracks, ruins, scaresires. Among the Beasts, Ictûs, morsûs, impetûs; strokes, bitings, violence, &c. Among men, Interitus exercituum; destruction of Armies, &c. And to what else do many at this day refer even prodigious storms and tempests? Are they not com∣monly ascribed to the elements, to the ordinary course of nature, or to chance and fortune?
And because men look no higher, the most high God, sometimes makes himself known in the world by some extraordinary and pro∣digious effects; and so we may understand his threatnings in the text; that if his people walk , by chance with him, as if all sell out by chance; or otherwise without owning him for the cause of them; I will walk with you, saith he,  in the heat and fury of chance. Do ye not remember our late extraordinary droughts? And when the Lord gave rain, did he not withal send destructive hail, thunders and lightnings? I shall remember you only of that memorable one, July 20. 1656. when the rain, hail, thunder, and lightning, laid all the corn and fruit-trees waste five miles broad, and between fifteen and sixteen miles in length, a∣bout the City of Norwich. I received this relation from good men of credit, and sufferers in that calamity: but the thing is suf∣ficiently known. So the Lord walked with us  even in the heat, wrath, and fury of chance. This story I the rather mention; because I have observed it to be the guise of men in this City, like that of the Athenians, Acts 17.21. to spend their time in hearing or telling some new thing; and that commonly they entertain relations of this nature under the notion of novelties, and think no more of them. And there∣fore God by this and like judgements awakens us, and reproves our casual and accidental walking with him; that we should turn unto him, lay his judgement to heart, learn righteousness, and with full purpose of heart walk with him. But the Stoicks of our time are not hereby justified, who will have all things come to pass by an immutable and fatal necessity; as if the series and order of causes and effects were so knit toge∣ther as links in a chain, by an unavoidable destiny; so that how∣soever Gods people walk or have walked with him, they nor could, nor can walk otherwise then they have done or do. No, nor can God himself, having bound up himself by his own de∣crees, walk otherwise with his people then he hath done or doth walk. Surely these men consider not, that the most high God, who made man a noble and free creature, with power to act or suspend his act, to do this or that, or their contraries, he himself reserved to himself the same liberty, or greater then what he gave to the counterpane of himself. And since all things between God and man are transacted by way of covenant, the terms and conditions of it, alwayes suppose free agents entring into covenant; and therefore a possibility of keep∣ing or breaking covenant; and consequently respective rewards and penalties annexed thereunto. Otherwise, man should be unjustly punished for that which could not be avoided; or unduly rewarded for what could not be done otherwise: Yea, there should be, as no merit, so no demerit,
no demerit, no sin, no righteousness. Yea, all perswasions and dis∣swasions, all counsels, exhortations, dehortations, all promises and threatnings, reproofs, admonitions, all commands, all pro∣hibitions; in a word, all acts of God upon mans will, (which indeed, upon the matter, should be no will,) all Lawes of God and men should be altogether null, and to no purpose; or, which a∣mounts to little more, a meer juggle, a meer pageantry of seem∣ing actions done onely above-board, when indeed there should be no such thing. But alas! my heart condemns me, that I have not walked so evenly, so intirely with my God. I have had many a good will and purpose to walk with my God, and somewhat or other inter∣venes, diverts me and turns me from my purpose. Yet fear not; the Lord with whom thou walkest, looks at thy heart and good will, and how thou art affected toward walk∣ing with him. I the Lord search the heart and try the reins, to give to every man according to his wayes, according to the fruit of his doings, Jer. 17.10. If we have forgotten the Name of our God, or stretched out our hands unto a strange god, shall not God search it out? for he knoweth the secrets of the heart, Psal. 44.20, 21. He looks upon the hands thorow the heart. And there∣fore what we have in the Text, if ye will not hearken unto me, but walk at all adventures with me, speaking of the event, the same ver. 21. ye may read spoken of the heart and affection, , if ye will not hearken unto me; if ye have a lust, heart, and will, not to hearken unto me. The Lord looks thorow our heart and will at our feet and walking. O but if our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and he knowes all things, 1 John 3.20. Thus the poor soul dejects it self, and pleads against it self with∣out just cause. Let not thy heart condemn thee:1 John 3. Ver. 18, 19, 20. God is greater then thy heart, and he knowes all things. Alas! saith the poor soul, that's my condemnation, that God is greater then my heart, and knowes all things. It is a true saying, Qui respicit ad pauca, de facile pronunciat; he who looks at few things, soon delivers his opinion. But he who will give a right sentence of Gods truth, he must look about him at antecedents and consequents, and pray to the Lord to give him his Spirit to lead him into all truth. This place of Scripture is not well translated: Let us take the whole Paragraph before us, and consider of it, 1 John 3.18, 19, 20. My little children! let us not love in word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth: And here∣by [namely, by our loving in deed and in truth] hereby do we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure or perswade () our hearts before him, , (not for, but) that if our heart condemn us, or  although (as Matth. 26.35. John 8.14. and elsewhere)
although our heart condemn us (for any former failing) that God is greater then our heart, (greater in wisdom, grace, mercy, and goodness) and knowes all things; he knowes our heart, and the present frame and disposition of our heart, in the deed and truth of love. So that ma∣ny a poor soul dejects and casts down it self, upon a meer mistake of this place of Scripture mis-translated, which being truly ren∣dred and understood makes for the great consolation of it. But I have not walked with my God, in the way of his Commande∣ments. Surely the Lord hath forsaken me. His Prophet tells me, The Lord is with you while you are with him, if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. And this is my condition. Be not discouraged, poor soul! The Prophets words are, The Lord is with you  in your being with him; if there∣fore thou do what is pleasing in his sight, and what he hath shewen thee,2 Chro. 15. Ver. 2. is good, if thou do justly, and love mercy, and humble thy self to walk with thy God, thou art with him, and in thy being with him, he is with thee. Continue thou in so doing, and in the good will so to do. But alas! I endeavour so to do, but I often stumble in the way. That makes thee more diligent and more wary afterward. He who stumbles, commonly takes a larger stride. Be careful and remember, that thou walkest in the midst of snares, and on the battlements of the City, Ecclus. 9.13. Yet fear not; In thy be∣ing with thy God, he is with thee, and will keep thee from falling, Jude, v. 24. Remember what he saith to thee, and to every one who walketh with him; . I will not leave thee,Hebr. 13. Ver. 5. no, no, by no means will I forsake thee. Its such a pack of Negatives, that I read not the like in Scripture, to as∣sure thee, that he will be with thee in thy being with him. But some who can satisfie themselves touching their own estate, take offence at others. And this hath been an old complaint: Why doth the way of the wicked prosper? And why are they happy who deal very treacherously? Jer. 12.1. I envied the wicked, saith David, when I saw the ungodly in such prosperity, &c. Psal. 73.3. And Job 21.7.—15. seems to take the like offence. The better affected Heathen could see this crypsis of providence by dim light of natune. The old Comedian brings in one grown old in honest poverty, thus complaining: . I who am a worshipper of God, and a just man, am miserable and poor: But others are rich who are Church∣robbers, Lawyers, and Sycophants, and wicked men. So he. Such objections as these have troubled good men in all ages, when they see such strange  such seeming incompossibilities un∣to common judgement; wicked men, yet blest of God, men walk∣ing by chance with God, yet God walking on purpose with them, and prospering them. Good men walking with purpose and with
all their heart with God, yet God walking with them, as it were in the fury of fortune. Notwithstanding all these objections, its best and safest to hold the conclusion, as David or Asaph, after a long combate, as it may seem, with atheistical thoughts of sleep∣ing providence, or none, he abruptly begins the third book of Psalmes, Psal. 73.1. , Sed, or veruntamen,Psal. 73. Ver. 1. Yet God is good to Israel, to the pure in heart, to such as with whole heart and with purpose of heart walk with God. And Jeremy layes down this conclu∣sion first, Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgements. Why doth the way of the wicked prosper? And Chrysostome upon Genesis 14. wisely and modestly concludes, , That God no doubt oftentimes disposes things profitably, when yet we know not the reason why so or so. Yet if the places named, Job 21.16.—33. &c. Psal. 73.16.—28. and Jer. 12.1, 2, 3. be well looked into, every objection, brings its answer with it. Howbeit, because yong travellers in Gods way look much at the temporal recompence of reward, I shall speak some∣what on that argument unto them, lest, by the outward prospe∣rity of wicked men, they should be discouraged from walking with their God with purpose of heart. It is possible and true that men may so regulate and order their affairs by prudence and providence, and may so use diligence, that they may stop all holes in second causes, & so make all ends meer, that it will be impossible to miss of their designes, without a mi∣racle; because God will not suffer that order which he hath set in things, nor his universal providence, whereby he cares for, moves and helps on, and concurs with, or at least permits all the actions of all his creatures, upon every occasion to be interrupted. It is also possible and true, that they who lay out themselves and their utmost endeavours, and all their time in plotting and project∣ing and casting about for the things of this life, and will not be modest or shamefac'd in the use of any thriving advantageous means in fashion, as flattery, bribery, lying, serving every base humour, yea, and call it fair and honest dealing too, yea, and set all their wits and consciences upon the tenters, and all for the compassing of some worldly good, it is no marvel if these men have their labours crown'd with good success: since God in these cases goes along with his general providence, concurs with their actions, and permits their evil events. Bildad tels Job truly, that the earth must not be forsaken for his sake, nor the Rock be removed out of its place, Job 18.4. And alas! why should such men be envied? pity them rather; tis their whole portion, tis all they have, but an estate for life, for this life; they shall shortly be sent into a far countrey, like the sons of Ceturah with their gifts, Gen. 25.5, 6. when
Isaac, when they who are as Isaac was, Gal. 4.28. when they who wth purpose of heart have walked with God, shall obtain the inheritance. Wherefore bee wee exhorted to make it our , our business to walk with our God with a perfect heart. It was the ex∣hortation of Barnabas to all the new Converts and Believers at Antioch, that, with purpose of heart, they would cleave unto the Lord, Acts 11.23. The Syriac there hath, with their whole heart they would cleave unto him. If so we walk with our God, he also will walk with us in goodness, grace, and mercy towards us. But herein beloved consists our greatest danger. When our God hath been pleased to make us his people, 1 Sam. 12.22. made himself known unto us; and made known unto us the evil and the good experimentally, so that we have tasted of the evil and the good; when the Lord hath restored us to our freedom, and put it into our own power to cleave unto him and love him, or else to leave him and forsake him, in which state he set Adam (though not without counsel, rebukes, and threatnings,) with ability and li∣berty to stand or fall: If in this case, we hanker and halt before our best friend, if we be in and out, walk uncertainly, accidentally, casual∣ly, even as it happens with our God, if then we depart from him, he then departs from us: For the Lord is then with us as we are with him, 2 Chron. 15.2. So David saith unto the Lord, with the merciful thou wilt shew thy self merciful; with a perfect man thou wilt shew thy self perfect; with the pure thou wilt shew thy self pure, and with the froward thou wilt shew thy self froward, Psalm 18.25.26. And with this free conditional, and impartial providence, David acquaints his son Solomon. Thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a persect heart and with a willing minde: For the Lord searcheth all hearts, and un∣derstandeth all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever, 1 Chron 28.9. So far are they out, who secure men in this estate and perswade them, that they cannot fall away; when indeed there is the most danger of falling away in this estate, if men continue not in the good will and obedience; or being fallen, return not into the way of righteousness, and persevere therein. Consider I beseech you, what the Apostle saith to the Hebrews in this condition: It is impossible for those who were once enlight∣ned and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again to repentance; seeing they crucifie to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame, Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6. And to the same purpose, the same Apostle writes, Chap. 10.16, 17. If we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful look∣ing for of judgement, &c.
Consider also, what comfort it can be to us, that we receive, as we daily do, our outward good things, as Abraham told the rich man, Luke 16.25. when we enjoy them Cum irato Deo, when they proceed not from Gods good will toward us or his purpose to do us good, but as it were by chance, yea, out of the fury of Chance. An ingenuous childe joyes not in all his father gives him, unless he have it with his blessing. And what joy or comfort can we take in what ever our heavenly Father gives us, if it come not with a blessing? If he gives us rain from heaven, the former and the later rain in their season, with what comfort can we receive them, unless they be showers of blessings? Ezech. 34.26. But as the threanings and terrours of the Lord are the greatest to those who walk at all adventure with their God, and forsake his way; so are the promises proportionable to those who walk with God, with full purpose of heart. All the promises of God both of temporal and spiritual blessings, are made unto those who are obe∣dient unto him, and walk with him, as I shewed before. Yea, to walk with God in the way of his Commandements, is such a uni∣versal duty as abundantly rewards it self. For in keeping of them, there is great reward, Ps. 19.11. Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield, and thine exceeding great reward, Gen. 15.1. and 17.1. I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect. What ever can be added unto this, its less. Wherefore let blinde Homer make Fortune a goddess: let the purblinde Heathen worship the goddess of blinde Homers making; They that make them are like unto them, so is every one that trusteth in them, Psal. 115.8. Let the false Christians whose iniqui∣ties have blinded them, walk by chance with the true God; as for us, let us walk with the Lord our God with full purpose of heart. But how shall we walk with our God with full purpose of heart in the way of his Commandements? 1. Hate every false way, Psal. 119.104. 2. Can two walk to∣gether and not agree? Amos 3.3. Agree with thine adversary quick∣ly while thou art in the way with him, Matth. 5.25. , be well-minded, bear a good will, consent unto the Law, that it is good; that's thine adversary. The Law cannot consent to thee, while thou walkest in a way that is not good. The Law cannot remit one jot or one tittle of its strictness: and therefore that cannot agree with us in our evil way: we must go out of every evil way, and agree with it. And there is the same reason of the Prophets, as the Lord saith to Jeremy Chap. 15.19. Let them return unto thee: but return not thou unto them. When the government of Rome was changed from a Monarchy to a Republick, under Consuls and Lawes, the young men of the City attempted to recover the former government; Livy tels us one of their reasons among o∣thers, That Kings might be of a flexible disposition, but Legem esse
rem inexorabilem, but the Law is inexorable. And certain it is, the Law of God and his Prophets they are inexorable, inflexible. They cannot consent to us in any evil way; therein they are enemies un∣to us; we must consent unto them in the good, bear good will un∣to them. So the Apostle, in the person of one in that state: I con∣sent, saith he, to the Law, that it is good, Rom. 7.16. And so do them. 3.Psal. 110. Ver. 3. Luke 2. Ver. 14. Continue in that good will, until the power come. Thy peo∣ple shall be  willingnesses, exceeding willing in the day of thy power. For Christ the power of God, is given , which was the old reading of that Text, which Hierom there∣fore turn'd, Hominibus bonae voluntatis, to men of good will. 4. Follow that great example, which Christ hath given us, that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. Follow that great light, who is the way, the truth, and the life. He who followes him, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life, John 8.12. 5. Walk in that most excellent way, 1 Cor. 12.31. which is ill di∣vided from the first verse of the next Chapter, where we learn, what that excellent way is, even love or charity; that way where∣in there is no stumbling, John 11.9. 1 John 2.10. That way of holi∣nesse wherein the wayfering men, though fools, shall not erre, Esay 35.8. That way wherein, and whereby we keep the Commande∣ments of God, Exod. 20.6. So shall we run the way of Gods Com∣mandements when he shall enlarge our heart, Psal. 119.32. Now unto him who is able to keep us from falling, and to present us faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our Saviour be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever. Amen. Jude v. 24.25.
Numbers. Every male by their poll, from twenty years old and upward,Numb. 1. Ver. 3. all that are able to go forth to war in Israel, thou and Aaron shall number them by their Armies.] The main scope of this Book is the prepa∣ration of Israel for their encamping about the Tabernacle, and their march toward the land of Canaan; wherein, although ma∣ny things of various argument, are delivered, yet, because the principal matter spoken of, is the numbering of the people, (which is twice commanded and accordingly performed, Chap. 1. and 26 of this Book, as once before, Exod. 30.12.) therefore this Book, according to the title of it in the LXX, , is called Numbers. As for the special handling of the Text, let us first enquire into the translation of it; which seems not to be so right as were to be wished. For although all they who went forth to war in Is∣rael, were supposed able, and were numbred, yet in the words be∣fore us, nothing in the Hebrew text answers to able, nor doth  signifie war, nor doth  used in this place properly sig∣nifie to number onely. So that against the translation of these words there lies a threefold exception. 1. Beside the needless enallage and change of number, the Translators adde [able] all that are able to go forth: which is in the Hebrew only  every one going forth. And the same is added to the particular muster of every Tribe, and to the total sum of them. Besides, here seems to be a mistake: For the words every one going forth have no respect to the Army, but to Egypt, as the phrase is used Verse 1. and is so to be here understood; from twenty years old and upward, every one that went forth, (viz. of Egypt.) And that it is so to be understood, appeares Chap. 26.4. where the same phrase, upon the same occasion is fully expressed. 2. They render  war, which signifies an Army, and they themselves so turn it in the same verse, and an Host often in the next Chapter following.
3. They render  to number; which though it so signifie, yet in the business of this and the next Chapter, its a word too ge∣neral, and is more properly to be turn'd to visit, or rather to muster: as the Latin phrase imports, Exercitum lustrare; facere militum recognitionem. So Armilustrium signifies mustering; a viewing of Harness, Weapons, and Souldiers. For they who muster their forces, do not only take account, how many their souldi∣ers are, and so number them, but also enquire and take notice how able, how well appointed, how well furnished they are for war. So Vatablus, Agite delectum, muster them, so the Tigurin Bible. Recensete, take a view, make a general muster; so Tre∣mell us. So Piscator in his High Dutch and Latin Scholia. Beside, the Scripture thorowout this and the next Chapter u∣seth diverse words, as  for number, and  for visiting or mustering. So that the translation confounds those acts which the Spirit of God distinguisheth. In the words are contained these divine truths. 1. Every Male of the sons of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, every one coming out of Egypt to the Army in Is∣rael, must be visited, numbred, and mustred. 2. Moses and Aaron were commanded to visit, number, and muster them according to their Armies. The former contains a description of the Lords Souldiers. The particulars are many. 1. Their Sex; they must be all Males. Every male. 2. Their Age. 1. Definite; every one, from a son of twenty years, which is an Hebraism; or twenty years old. 2. Indefi∣nite, Twenty years old and upward. 3. The place and people: 1. Whence, and from whom, coming out of Egypt. 2. Whither, and to whom, to the Army in Israel. 4. These must be numbred, visited, and mustred by Moses and Aaron. So the Lord saith to Moses, Thou and Aaron shall num∣ber, visit or muster them. If we inquire into the reason why Gods Souldiers should be numbred, visited, and mustred, it will appear 1. from consideration of the Souldiers themselves. 2. Their Commander in Chief. 3. Their Common designe. 1. As for the first of these. They are to be numbred, visited, and mustred, who are able and fit for war; as these Souldiers in the text are, choise yong men in the prime of their age, valiant and couragious. Such Souldiers the Lord requires, Deut. 20.3, 8. 2. Such as these are but few: Rari quippe boni—Pauperis est numerare pecus— Gideons Souldiers, who went to the battle with him, were but 300.
3. But such as these, are excellent absolutely, the Excellent ones, Psal. 16.3. and comparatively more excellent then others, Prov. 12.26. 4. And such are highly esteemed, loved, cared for, numbred; as appears by the contrary; as its said of persons despicable and contemned, Extra numerum esse, nullo numero esse, nullius esse numeri; Military phrases implying such as are of no reckoning, of no account, who stand for Ciphers. But the Lords Souldiers are all numbred, visited, mustred. 2. In respect of the Commander in chief. He is the God of Israel; Israel imports strength and prevalency with God; and God is the strength of Israel, 1 Sam. 15.29. And therefore his Souldiers ought to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, whom he visits, takes care of, numbers, and musters. 3. As for their designe, it is to fight with the sons of Anak, the Canaanites, the Jebusites, the Amorites, the seven nations whose iniquities were full, Gen. 15.16. And therefore it concern'd them to be strong and of a good courage, and to be numbered, visi∣ted, and mustered in order to that designe. 1. Whence it followes, that the profession of a Souldier is a lawful profession. God himself is the Lord of hosts. And he him∣self here commands the Israelites to be mustred. And surely when the Souldiers asked John the Baptist, what they should do, if their imployment had been simply unlawful, he would not have directed them how to behave themselves in it, as he did, but would have advised them to desist from it, as he did not, Luke 3.14. 2. The Lord takes care of his Militia, he will have them viewed, visited, numbred, and mustred. But it is not my business to make a Military Oration, or to en∣courage men to the outward warfare, which throughout the whole Old Testament, is figurative of the inward. Let us there∣fore come to the mystical understanding of these words. It is a Martial, a war-like age all the World over, an age an∣swering to that which they call Seculum , the angry, the wrathful age. Mens mindes and hearts are embittered one against another; their gall of bitterness is overflowen; they contend, they fight one with another, they themselves know not for what, like the Andabatae who are said to have fought blindefold. And well they may. For their fair Helena, the subject and matter of contention, is Religion. Revel. 8.10. When the third Angel had sounded, there fell a great Star from Heaven burning as it were a Lamp; and it fell upon the third part of the Rivers, and upon the Fountains of Waters; and the name of the Star is called Worm∣wood: and many men dyed of the waters, because they were made bitter.
What is that Star called Wormwood, but the false light of mans wit and earthly industry? which falls into the earthly man, and embitters unto him all the waters of divine doctrine, Ephes. 5.26. This Star fell in Germany, and so embitter'd the mindes of men on both sides one against the other, who should have learned and taught better, that they brought the fairest and most fruitful Con∣tinent under Heaven, to a vast desolate Wilderness. I pray God the like may not be said of this Island! Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum. So many mischiefs Religion could perswade. For it is and hath been the policy of Commanders and those who set them a work on all sides, to perswade the souldiery, that their war is for God, and that it is Gods cause they sight for. And who is there who hath any opinion of God, or such as he appre∣hends God to be, that will not for his cause, ; who will make any account at all of his life, but will hazard it, and all he had and is, to serve his God? Bravely resolved, Noble Israelites! But would we indeed serve the Lord of Hosts, be of his Militia, enter, and list our selves in his Matricula, his Military Roll, as his Souldiers? 1. All his Souldiers must be Males, in regard of dignity, strength, and courage. Pharaoh reason'd right, though to a wic∣ked purpose, Exod. 1.9, 10.16.22. The sons of Israel are mightier then we; Come on, let us deal wisely with them, lest they mul∣tiply, and it come to pass, that there falleth out any war, and they joyn also unto our enemies and fight against us, and so get them out of the Land. Therefore lay servile works upon them; enfeeble and abase their spirits, and bring them low. As for their off-spring, kill all the male children, and save the female alive. Thus Pha∣raoh reasoned, and that rightly: for the males of Israel are they who most annoy the spiritual Egypt, and are most fit to ex∣pel the spiritual Canaanites. Yet is this no prejudice unto, no exemption of the female sex from the spiritual warfare. But as there have been Virago's, Man-like women, famous for their Martial exploits, their stout and masculine valour, as Semiramis, Tomyris, the whole Nation of the Amazons, beside many other; so there have been, are, and must be of the same sex, women as valiant and able to wage the Lords wars. Ye read of such, Exod. 38.8. who  waged war at the door of the Tabernacle; how so they did, I have shewed elsewhere, and the like examples ye have, 1 Sam. 2.22. For there is the spiritual and masculine part of the inward man in all faithful and holy women, even strength and vigour of minde and life. Such was in Sarah, Hebr. 11.11. and in all the genuine daughters of Sarah who are not afraid of any amazement, 1 Pet. 3. So that the natural difference of Sex, makes no spiritual difference
in Christ the Leader and Captain of salvation, in whom there is neither male nor female, Gal. 3.28. But as the Christian fortitude is here signified by the mascu∣line Sex, Christs Souldiers must be males; so likewise by their age. 2. The Lords warriours must be twenty years old. This age imports the strength of the yong man. The Lord requires this age in a Souldier who is to fight against the inward and spiritual enemies? For what is here implied by this number, twenty? what else but the Law of God doubled in their number? The Ten Com∣mandements in the letter only, Deut. 4.13. they are proper to the childe and one as yet under age. So the Law is weak by reason of the weakness of the flesh, Rom. 8.3. This weak Law came from Mount Sinai; but the Law is also spiritual, Rom. 7.14. and that comes from Mount Sion, Hebr. 12.22. Even the Ten words which the Lord gave out of the midst of the fire, Deut. 10.4. the fiery Law, Deut. 33.2. or rather, as in the Hebrew, the fire of the Law, that is, the Spirit of the Law, which is as fire, Matth. 3.11. Even the Law of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Rom. 8.2. This is not written in Tables of stone;1 John 2. Ver. 13, 14) the hard heart will not yet receive impression,) but in the fleshy Tables of the heart, 2 Cor. 3.3. This Law bring life and strength and power with it: For as the man is, so is his strength, Judg. 8.21. I write to you yong men, , that ye have overcome  the wicked one, the Devil, 1 John 2.13, and again, ver. 14. I have written to you yong men, that ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, (even the Law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Rom. 8.2.) and ye have overcome the wicked one. It is not the literal law, the Ten words in the letter only; but the spiritual law written in the heart, which having brought us to Christ, makes us powerfull and valiant in him. This was figured by Abner who brought about all Israel to David, 2 Sam. 3.12. And what is Da∣vid, but as anciently etymologized,  and , manu fortis, the strong and able of his hands, and a notable type of Christ the strong one? born in Bethlehem as Christ also was, that is, not only the house of bread, but also the house of war. And the Lord had said of David, By the hand of my servant David, I will save my people Israel, out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies, 2 Sam. 3.18. But David hath another Etymolo∣gie from , Dilectus, the Beloved one, a figure of the love it self, which is strong as death, Cant. 8.6. Unto this David, Abner comes; Abner, what's he but the light of the father? that is, the fathers law, Psal. 40.8. Prov. 6.23. which brings us to Christ. And he comes with twenty men 2 Sam. 3.20. the Commandements in the Letter and in the Spirit. 3. There is no discharge from the spiritual warfare, every one
who is listed in the Army of Israel must be twenty years old and upward, or above. So old he must be, but not only so old but above. How much above? The Scripture no where limits, no where sets any period or end to the Christian souldiers duty and service. But more of this anon. 4. The Lords Souldier must come out of Egypt. Otherwise how can he be said to be redeemed out of Egypt? How can he obtain any benefit of his redemption? A price indeed is paid for redemption; but it profits not them who continue in their slavery, but those who come forth of it, and serve their Redeemer in his wars. For being redeemed out of the hands of our enemies, we ought to serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the dayes of our life, Luke 1.74, 75. For what is it to Come? what else but to believe? so one explains the other, John 6.35. Howbeit this belief is not, that Christ hath come out of Egypt for us; not that we should believe this, and still conti∣nue in Egypt. The people believed the Lord and his servant Mo∣ses, Exod. 14.31. but the people themselves came out of Egypt, and so must we. To believe is expressed by coming; and to be coming is to be yielding, pliable, and obedient. 5. Here is a great difference between the outward and in∣ward souldiery. Old age, as of sixty years, exempts men from going to war, and some of the Jews have so limited the time, but without warrant of Scripture. For hereby was figured the Christian warfare, from which no man can be discharged, no man can be relieved. Paul the aged was also a servant and souldier of Jesus Christ. Nor can sickness excuse us from this warfare, as it doth from the outward. The Egyptian was left behinde, because he was sick, 1 Sam. 30.13. But too many who in time of health and strength and welfare being called to the spiritual warfare, would not hear, Jer. 22.21. the same being pressed by sickness and old age, they then begin to learn the use of their spiritual arms, to repent, deny themselves, mortifie their lusts, their youthful lusts, 2 Tim. 2.22. as of surfeting and drukenness, which follow them to their old age, the iniquity of their heels, Psal. 49.5. which dogs them to their graves; and now they would part with it, when they can enjoy it no longer. Tis true, better late then never: But I much fear, it will be then too late. For the Captain of our salvation calls us to this duty, strive to enter in at the strait gate; For many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter and shall not be able, Luke 13.24. 6. Howbeit the Lord would not that any of his souldiers should dispair or be discouraged, and therefore he saith  omnem egredientem, every one who is coming forth of Egypt, every one who hath a good will and endeavoureth to come out of the Spi∣ritual
Egypt, the Lord accepts of such an one, according to the time, sincerity, and faithfulnesse of his endeavours. He would not that a good thought or will should be lost, but accepts it for the deed when God himself is the cause why the deed cannot be done. Completa voluntas pro facto aestimatur, a complete will, accompanied with our utmost diligence, is esteemed for the deed it self. 7. Provided alwayes, that he who so cometh forth of Egypt, ad∣joyn himself to the Army in Israel; that is, to the Church of Christ, which is Acies ordinata, an Army or Armies with Banners, Cant. 6.4. He must not be , he must not fight alone, but adjoyn himself to the Army, as Paul and Barnabas assembled themselves with the Church, Acts 11.26. that so he may re∣ceive and contribute his strength, as the Poet speaks of the  the Testudo, , the souldiers by joynt Targets and Shields mutually de∣fended one the other. And thus it is or ought to be in the Church of Christ, to which he, who comes out of Egypt, ought to unite himself. 2. Moses and Aaron were commanded by the Lord to visit, num∣ber, and muster all the males from twenty years old and above, &c. And who so fit as they? Moses the King in Jeshurun, Deut. 33.5. and Aaron the High Priest. Moses the King by his autho∣rity (and as his name signifies) drawing forth the souldiery. Aaron the Priest interpreted Mons Scientiae the Mountain of Knowledge, the teaching Priest. It was his duty to instruct and incourage the souldiers, Deut. 20.5. And it is the Evangelical Priests office to do the like in the spiritual warfare, Ephes. 6.10.—18. The Law commanding, the Priest making intercession for the transgressours of the Law. These had their assistants, Numb. 1.4. principal men, of every Tribe a man; of these or most of these names Ainsworth hath given notations, which with some additions and alterations we may fit unto the present purpose. Such was 1. Elizur, My God is the Rock, and the Rock is Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. His father is Shedeur, the light of the Almighty. The light of wisdom and coun∣sel, and the Rock of strength, two main requisites for the holy war, 2 Kings 18.20. 2. Shelumiel, God is my recompence, the souldiers wages, their ex∣ceeding great reward, Abrahams pay after his war, Gen. 15.1. She∣lumiel was the son of Zurishaddai, the Almighty or All sufficient God is my Rock. The Psalmist puts both together, God is the Rock or strength of my heart, and my Portion for ever, Psal. 73.26. 3. Naashon, Experiment, an experienced Souldier: the son of Amminadab, my noble or willing people. Of such Deborah and Barak sung, Judges 5.9. My heart is toward the Governours of Israel
who offered themselves willingly among the people; all volunteers: which was not of themselves, but of God. So 4. Nathaneel, the gift of God; the son of Zuar. The little one, the humble one, the watchman of the City, as the name signifies. 5. Eliah, My God is the father, the strong God, the son of Helon, mighty and strong. 6. Ammihud the glory of my people. A figure of him who is the true glory of his people Israel, Luke 2.32. the son of Elishama. My God hath heard, or, the hearing and obeying of God. And whosoever obey him, he plentifully rewards them: that's 7. Gamaliel, God is my reward; and he is the rewarder of every one who diligently seeks him, Hebr. 11.6. He is the son of Pedazur, the Rock, who is the Redeemer, even Christ. 8. Abidan, My father is the Judge, even God the Father who is Judge of all, the Judge of our just cause, for which we fight his battels. The son of Gideoni, who treads down, breaks, and cuts off the iniquity, according to the Hebrew and Syriac etymologie. 9. Achiezer the helper of his brother. According to Joabs speech to his brother Abishai, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt help me; but if the sons of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will help thee, 1 Chron. 19.12. So we ought to help one another against pride and deceit; that's Aram the Syrian, and the secret sin, that's Ammon. He was the son of Ammishaddai the people of the Almighty. Such must they be who fight against such spiritual enemies. 10. Pagiel, who meeteth God, and God meeteth him; as Melchi∣sedec met Abraham returning after the slaughter of the Kings, Hebr. 7.1. Yea, God meeteth him who rejoyceth and worketh righteousness, E∣say 64.5. Or, who maketh intercession with God for the people; as the word also signifieth, and is spoken of Christ, and prophe∣sied of him,  the great Mediator shall make intercession for sinners, Esay 53.12. He was the son of Ochran, who troubles the enemies of Israel. 11. Eliasaph, God shall increase or adde, viz. courage, strength, knowledge. He was the son of Deguel, the knowledge of God. S. Paul puts both together, Increasing in the knowledge of God, Col. 1.10. who, Numb. 2.14. is called (according to the frequent change of  and ) Reguel, the friend of God. 12. Ahira, a friendly brother, or brotherly friend; the son of Enan their eyes, as a Scout, or Scout-master of the Army. According to what Moses saith to Hobab, Numb. 10.29. whom he intreats to ac∣company the Armies of Israel in their Expedition; Leave us not I pray thee, forasmuch as thou knowest how we are to encamp in the Wilderness; And thou mayest be to us instead of eyes. Indeed Hobab is so necessary unto Israel, that they can do nothing with∣out him; Hobab signifies Dilectus, Beloved, or Love and Charity;
whereby and wherein, Israel doth all things; according to 1 Cor. 16.14. , Let all your things be done in charity. What ever the true house of Jacob doth, that Hobab [the love of God and man] must be the doer of it; otherwise they are not Israel indeed. And therefore the Prophet Micha speaks of a false Israelites who devise iniquity and work evil upon their beds: when the morning is light, they practice it, because it is in the power of their hand. And they covet fields and take them by vio∣lence, and houses and take them away. So they oppress (or defraud) a man and his house, even a man and his heritage. Whereupon, the Lord threatens an heavie judgement against Israel falsely so called, Micha 2.1.6. and then adds an Epiphonema; O thou that art named the house of Jacob, is the Spirit of the Lord shortned? Are these his doings? Is the Lords hand shortned that he cannot save you from doing these things? Esay 59.1. Are these his doings, whose spirit ye pretend? Are these things done in charity? And these are the Assistants of Moses and Aaron in the numbe∣ring, visiting, and mustering the Armies of Israel. Whence its strongly intimated, what manner of people the souldiers of Jesus Christ ought to be; even such as Moses and Aaron and their Assistants were; or such as their well-boding names im∣ply, and hold them forth to have been. For since similitude and likeness is one main ground of love, how could these choose or approve of such for the Lords Souldiers, who were not, in some good measure, like vnto themselves? Yea, what wise and devout Souldier will not endeavour, by such ensignes of true valour, to ren∣der himself approveable? It is part of the fatherly advise which S. Paul now a Veteran, and an old Souldier gives to his son Ti∣mothy, endure thou hardness as a good Souldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth, intangleth himself in the affairs of this life, that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a souldier, 2 Tim. 2.3, 4. The business of Moses, Aaron, and their assistants, was numbe∣ring & mustering the Israelites. The people of Israel were thrice mustered. 1. In the first year after their eating the Paskal Lamb & their coming out of Egypt; when they were to pay every one half a Shekel for the Ransom of his soul, Exod. 30.11, 12. which figured our Redemption by Christ. For we are not redeemed with corrup∣tible things, as silver and gold, from our vain conversation recei∣ved by tradition from our Fathers, but by the pretious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot. And eve∣ry one is to pay his half shekel, whereby some understand Faith: which yet is of no value without holiness of life, and the Re∣demption is from the vain conversation. And therefore the Apo∣stle speaking of our Redemption through Christ, exhorts us to be ho∣ly as God is holy, 1 Pet. 1.15. because it is written, Be ye holy, for I
am holy, ver. 16. This holiness is in part at the first, when men are newly come out of Egypt, as an half shekel, being the holiness of obedient children, ver. 14. and not purified according to the purifi∣cation of the Sanctuary, 2 Chron. 29.18, 19, 20. Howbeit having kept the Passover by faith, and by faith and hope passed thorow the red Sea, Hebr. 11.28, 29. they continue sincere in the good will, (figu∣red by the unleavened bread, 1 Cor. 5.8.) until a greater power come, that they may cleanse themselves from all filthinesse of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. That filthiness of flesh and that of the spirit, are the two sorts of enemies against which the Israel of God is to be numbred, mustered, set in rank and file. And the mustering in this Chapter, is against the former enemies, 1 Pet. 2.11. And that which we read, Chap. 26. is against the later. Of both, the Apostle speaks, Ephes. 6.12. When these enemies are subdued, we take possession of the eternal inheritance. And therefore being mustered the third time, unto these, saith the Lord, shall the land be divided for an inheritance, Numb. 26.53. According to which, in that excellent hymn called, Te Deum laudamus, prayer is made for the Church, in these words, Make them to be numbred with thy Saints, in glory everlasting. Where∣in some have thought numerari to be numbred, should be read, munerari, to be rewarded: But according to the sense given, both will amount unto the same things. O ye true Israelites! ye who are of the Church Militant; ye Males of masculine valour and prowess, ye yong men, who over∣come the wicked one, 1 John 2.13, 14. Ye are the true , , Choise yong men, chosen men of Gods Israel, such as are so often mentioned in the Old and New Testament, strong and able to wage the spiritual warfare; fight the good fight of faith. Adde unto, or in your faith vertue, 2 Pet. 1.5. O ye Veterans, ye old souldiers of Jesus Christ! who have known him from the beginning. There is no limitation, no stint of time for continuance in your service from twenty years old and up∣ward, or above, how much above, is not defined. Your old age is no diminution to your strength and courage. Re∣member what Caleb saith to Jehoshuah, Chap. 14.10, 11. I am this day fourscore and five years old: As yet I am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses sent me; as my strength was then, even so is my strength now for war to go out and to come in. Caleb hath his name from  Canis, as being one of the Lords Dogs, Psal. 68.23. figuring out good will to his Lord and his righteous∣ness; as ye may read in that good old book, under a new title, the Treasure of the soul; to the shame of those who jeer that ex∣cellent book of Tobit, because mention is there made of his Dog. These men know not the mysteries of God, by which character the un∣godly
are described, Wisd. 2.22. Such Calebs are  Secundum Cor, according to the heart of God. These wait upon the Lord, and renew their strength, Esay 40.31. as trees of righteousness, Esay 61.3. for as the dayes of a tree are the dayes of Gods people, Esay 65.22. which bring forth more fruit in their age. Let us do so, brave souldiers! Let us fight the good fight of faith, let us be faithful unto the death (of all and every sin) and the Lord of hosts will give us the Crown of life, as he hath given it unto that old souldier S. Paul; I have fought a good fight (saith he) I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righte∣ous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but to them also who love his appearing, 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. , O ye brave and valiant souldiers! quit your selves like men.
A far off about the Tabernacle of the Congregation shall they pitch.Numb. 2. Ver. 2.] In the former Chapter, Moses relates the numbring, vi∣siting, and mustering of the Israelites, in order to their encamping about the Tabernacle, and their march toward the land of Canaan. In this Chapter, he declar their posture and order of encamping round about the Tabernacle. Before we speak particularly to these words, let us set the translation right; wherein two words may be better expressed,  and . The former is here turn'd the Congregation, the later, A far off. As to the former; What they turn the Tabernacle of the Con∣gregation, it were more properly rendred, the Tabernacle or Tent of meeting or of Testimony. For howsoever  signifie a festival time, when the people were congregated and gathered together, as at the three solemn feasts in the year, 1. The Passeover (to which answereth the Christians Feastival called Easter.) 2. The Feast of weeks, (to which agrees our Feast of Pentecost or Whitsun∣tide,) and 3. The Feast of Tabernacles, (which answereth to the Feast of Christmas; when is commemorated the Nativity of Christ who took flesh, and , took up his Tabernacle in us,) beside other solemn Feasts celebrated yearly by the Jews; yet  hath not the name from thence, but from Gods convening and meeting with Moses, or Aaron or such as came to enquire of the Lord there. Its the Etymologie which God himself gives of it, Exod. 25.21, 22. Thou shalt put the covering Mercy-Seat upon the Ark, and in the Ark thou shalt put the Testimony which I shall give unto thee , and I will meet with thee there. And more plainly, Chap. 30.36. Before the Testimony , in the Tabernacle of meeting,Exod. 33. Ver. 7. where I will meet thee. And Moses confirmes this, Exod. 33.7. And Moses took a Tabernacle or Tent (not the Tabernacle, as our Translators render it, as if it were that which God commanded to be made, but either  his own Tent, as the LXX turn it; or some other, in imitation of Gods Tabernacle; of the making whereof ye read not before Exod. 36.) and he called it the Tabernacle of meeting: and it came to passe, that every one who sought the Lord, went out to the Taber∣nacle of meeting which was without the Camp. It may also be called the Tabernacle or Tent of Testimony or Wit∣ness. Which hath warrant also from the aforesaid place, Exod. 25.21. in the Ark, thou shalt put  the Testimony that I will give thee. And where Moses cals it the Tabernacle  of meeting, Exod. 33.7. there the LXX render it  the Tabernacle of witness. So S. Stephen also cites the words, Acts 7.44. Where the roots  and  are changed in their significations.
And for further proof of this, Moses also calls it  the Tabernacle or Tent of Testimony or Witness, Numb. 9.15. Because the principal thing contained in the Tabernacle, was the Law or Testimony of Gods will. Thither also Moses resorted to enquire the minde of God, and there God met him, and revealed his will unto him. Whence the Targ. turns the Tabernacle of meeting, Exod. 33.7. The Tabernacle of the house of doctrine. And where the Lord saith, I will meet with thee, the Targ. hath, there I will direct my word unto thee. And from hence the Lord delivered his Oracles; whence that part of the Tabernacle was called  the Oracle, 1 Kings 6.16. Hither the Tribes went up, the Tribes of the Lord, to the Testimony of Israel, Psal. 122.4. So that our Translators do much wrong to the sons of Israel, to set them at so great a distance from their God, when they ren∣der the Text, A far off about the Tabernacle of the Congregation shall they pitch. This Translation they took upon trust from that of Geneva, and the other called the Bishops Bible; I both which have the words, as ours here render them; whereas that of Tyndal expresseth  on the other side, which yet is obscure; because no mention is made as yet of different sides of the Taber∣nacle. There is no doubt but , word for word, signifies è regione, straight over against; or, ex adverso, over against. And so Vatablus, Munster, Ar. Montanus, the Tigurin Bible here turn the word: and Castellio, obversa, toward, or against. The LXX render the word  which exactly answers to the foresaid Latin translations. But it seems there hath been some doubt touching this word, how it should be rendred, whether far off or over against. And therefore some, to avoid the inconve∣nience which might follow upon either of them, have left them both out, and  altogether without translation; so Hierom and the Doway Bible, and Coverdale. On the contrary, some have put in both versions, for failing, Ex adverso procul, over against far off; so Tremellius and Piscator. And our Translators put one in the Text, the other in the Margent, which had not been amisse, had they not mis-placed them. That which occasioned the difference, is 1. the Psalmists ex∣plaining  by  a loof, or far off, Psal. 38.11. My lovers and my friends stand aloof () from my sore, and my Kinsmen stand () far off. 2. A distance from the Tabernacle, suppo∣sed to be 2000 Cubits, because such a space was between the Ark and the people, Jos. 3.4. But neither of these proves, that the people should pitch their Tents far off from the Tabernacle. 1. Not the former. For that cannot be said to be far off which is within our kenning; as the Lord saith to Moses, Thou shalt see the Land before thee  è
regione, over against thee, Deut. 32.52. But because that represen∣tation seems to be made unto Moses by spiritual vision, as that to Exekiel, Chap. 40.2. that to our Lord, Luke 4.5. and that also to S. John, Revel. 21.10. In all which examples, the distance is great; the same word  is used where the distance is only a∣bout a Bow-shoot, and so expressed, Gen. 21.16. 2. Nor doth that space of 2000 Cubits, Jos. 3.4. injoyned the people in their march, prove the same distance from the Taberna∣cle in their encamping; For if the distance had been the same with that in their ordinary marching, they had not now needed a new precept, as this seems to have been. But although these words of distance, far off or neer may be comparatively understood, surely it is more harmonical unto other Scriptures, to affirm, that Gods people are neer unto him then far off from him. As I shall shew anon. The words thus opened in general contain in them these di∣vine Doctrines. 1. The Lord hath his Tabernacle or Tent of meeting. 2. The sons of Israel must pitch their Tents over against the Ta∣bernacle of meeting. 3. They must pitch round about the Tabernacle of meeting. 1. The Lord hath his Tabernacle or Tent of meeting. So Tremel∣lius turns the words, Tentorium conventûs, and so Arias Montanus, and the French Bible, and the Italian. Gods Tabernacle is that portable house wherein he walked ma∣ny years with the sons of Israel, until the Temple was built, 2 Sam. 7.6. But what need hath the great God of any either Tabernacle or Temple? Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth is his Footstool; and what House, Tabernacle, or Temple can be built for him? Esay 66. And do not I fill Heaven and Earth? saith the Lord, Jer. 23. Tis true, the Heaven of heavens cannot contain him. He is in∣comprehensible; so that if we look for his adequate Tabernacle or Temple, we shall finde no other but Himself: And therefore Revel. 21.22. The Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of the holy City. So that its a wonderful condescent of the incomprehensible God, that he owns any Temple or Tabernacle upon earth: That of Salo∣mons building was most magnificent; yet that most wise King admires the Lords dignation, But will God indeed dwell on the Earth? Behold, the Heaven and the Heaven of heavens cannot contain thee: how much less this house that I have builded? 1 Kings 8.27. How much more may we wonder at that far grea∣ter condescent? Revel. 21.3. Where he saith, Behold the Taber∣nacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them; and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, their God. Wherein there is expressed the force of Immanuel, God with us.
This is that Tabernacle, namely, the Church, thorow which the Lord Christ passed into the Holiest of all; according to which we may understand that otherwise difficult place, Hebr. 9. where the Apostle telling us of two Tabernacles, or the two parts of the Tabernacle, the high Priest passed through the first part, or the Holy, into the second or the most Holy, once every year,Hebr. 9. V. 7. to 12. with the blood of Bulls and Goats: But Christ being come an high Priest of good things to come, entred once by his own blood into the Holy (viz. the most Holy) the Church triumphant, through a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, that is, his Church militant. For as the passage to the most Holy, lay throught the Holy; so the way to the Church triumphant, lies through the Church militant. In this Tabernacle our God dwells with us, as he had promised, Exod. 25.8. Let them build me  a Tabernacle or Sanctuary, and I will dwell  in the midst of them;Exod. 25.8. and 29.45, 46. which our Tran∣slators turn, amongst them; as also Chap. 29.45, 46. Men are not willing, I fear, that God should be so near them as he promiseth to be, if we prepare him a Sanctuary, even an holy habitation in us. Or else they fear, that Gods indwelling, his  or divine pre∣sence requiring such a Sanctuary wherein he would dwell, might strongly argue an inherent holiness; which rather then they would admit, they render  amongst them; even at such a distance as they would have the Tribes to pitch their tents, a far off from the Tabernacle. Thus commonly when Christ is said to be in his people, they render  and  (which is in or within) either in the text or margent, among you, as Luke 17.21. Gal. 3.1. Col. 1.27. and elsewhere: unless it cannot possibly be avoided, without peril of reprobation, as 2 Cor. 13.5. So that if we compare our estate under the Gospel, with that under the Law, we may thence note the happy condition of the Church of Christ, if they knew their happiness or would believe it. The Lord had his Tabernacle of meeting whither Moses and the Israelites resorted, sometimes from a far off; but it was an E∣vangelical speech, Deut. 30.14. and accordingly S. Paul makes use of it, the Word, that is, Christ is night thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, Rom. 10.8. The Tabernacle of witness was of mans building, and figurative only; and therefore made by Bezaleel, that is, in the shadow of God, implying, that the Tabernacle of meeting was a sha∣dow; made also by Aholiab, that is, the Tent and Tabernacle of the Father; representing only the aeconomy and dispensation of God the Father; whereas the better and more perfect Tabernacle was of Gods own building wherein the Deity it self dwels Bodily, Col. 2.9. wherein the  the divine Word  took up his Ta∣bernacle and dwells in us, John 1.14. which our Translators turn among us: the words are  in us. Happy Christians—bona si sua norint! if they knew their own happiness.
2. The sons of Israel must pitch their Tents over against the Ta∣bernacle of meeting. The Metaphore is taken from Military affairs. The sons of Israel pitch their Tents every one over against the Pa∣vilion of the Commander in Chief, the Corps du gard; as the Souldiers of the Lord ready prest to receive the word of Command, to go whither he bids them go; to come, when he bids them. As his ser∣vants ready to do what he bids them do; as the faithful Centu∣rion saith to the Captain of our salvation, Matth. 8.9. The reason of this, is the resemblance and likeness which ought to be between the Church Militant and the heavenly host, where∣of Daniel saith, Thousand thousands ministred unto him; and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him, Dan. 7.10. And the Church of God, the Mother of all the living ones, was made to be ,Gen. 2. Ver. 18. Judg. 5.23. an help as before him, Gen. 2.18. to help him among the mighty ones, Judg. 5.23. So the Targ. Hierom, LXX, Vatablus, Tremellius, Castellio, Pagnin, Munster, all the Dutch High and Low, the French Bible, and, of our old English Translations, Tyndal and Coverdale, and two others, all render , with or a∣mong the strong or mighty ones; not against the mighty, as our Tran∣slators have turn'd that , that Scripture so much named, and so little understood. Such a Virago, such a valiant Spouse, the Lord hath chosen, to stand before him, as the Apostle with allusion to Gen. 2.18. writes to the Ephesians 1.4. He hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without spot (as ours also turn , Ephes. 5.27.) before him, in love. 3. All the Saints are round about the Lord. The reason why the Saints of God are round about him, is the  the good pleasure of God whereby he hath made us accepted in the beloved, Ephes. 1. It hath pleased the Lord to make you his people. And therefore where should the Children be but about their Father, the Servants, but about their Lord, the Disciples but about their Master, the Subjects but about their Prince, the King of Saints, the Sanctified ones but about their Sanctifier, the younger brethren of Christ but about their elder brother? This description of Gods Saints is taken from the disposition and placing of the twelve tribes about the Tent of meeting; eve∣ry man of the children of Israel, shall pitch about the Tabernacle of meeting, so the Chald. Paraph. turns it, ye that dwell about the Sanctuary. The word is  all his circuits: They are of larger compass then the land of Canaan. So that this description of Gods Saints is too strait. And therefore the Jewes themselves enlarge this interpretation unto the Gentiles, and extend it unto all Nations dwelling round about the holy Land, which was the middle of the world then inhabited, Psal. 74.12. Operatus est salu∣tem
in medio terrae, which the Lord seems to have made choice of, that from thence he might convey, as from the centre of the known world, the knowledge of salvation into all the world, accordingly tis scituate most convenient for that purpose in the fourth or middle Climate, so our Saviour saith, Salvation is of the Jones. Obs. 1. This discovers the diffusive and common nature of our good God. He is no Topical God, he is not confined to some one place or nation: but as the Sun extends the beams to all parts of the Horizon; even so he sends forth , Hebr. 1. And therefore he is called , Ju v. 3. I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, com∣mon faith, Titus 3.4. He was Notus in Judaea Deus, &c. But the true Judaea is the Church of those who confess him. The true Jew is he who is such within, Rom. 2. Gen. 29.35. The true Israel is the pure in heart, Psal. 73.1. without guile, John 1.47. who walk ac∣cording to the rule of righteousness, Gal. 6.16. His Temple are ye, 1 Cor. 3. At Salem is his Tabernacle. His Tabernacle: what is that? what but his dwelling among men? Revel. 21.3. In Salem? where is that? where else but in peace? Factus est in pace locus ejus; Vulg. where the son of peace is, there the peace rests. Psal. 76.1. Thus the straits or narrow bounds of Gods goodness which seemed to be limited unto the Jews,Esay 65. Ver. 16. are enlarged even to all peo∣ple, Esay Esay 54.2, 3. and 65.16. Psal. 71.21. Obs. 2. If the people of God be about him, he himself is in the midst of them. He converses with them as a Father among his chil∣dren, as a King in the midst of his people. The best place as the wise Indian told Alexander the Great, and demonstrated it by read∣ing on a piece of Leather on the one side, it rose on the other, &c. God is in the midst of the City of God, it shall not be moved, Psal. 46.5. But is he no neerer? There is one in you whom ye know not, John 1.26. No, did we know him, we would not cru∣cifie the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.7. Know ye not that Christ is in you? &c. 2 Cor. 13.5. Master, where dwellest thou? John 1.38. come and see. Where two or three are gathered together in his Name, there he is in the midst of them, Matth. 18.20. According to that speech of the Jews, where two or three are net and speake of the Law, the  the divine presence, the Deity is among them, Mal. 3.16. They that feared the Lord, spake of∣ten one to another, and the Lord harkned and heard it, &c. Luke 24.14. When the two Disciples travelled and communed about the things which had hapned, Jesus himself drew neer and went with them. Yea, Christ with his Saints, Brethren, and Members, make but one and the same body, one mystical Christ, Rom. 12.4.5. 1 Cor. 12.12.
Reproof. This reproves our narrow brain and strait heart and affection, who confine God and his goodness within the narrow bounds of our knowledge and acquaintance, and will hardly al∣low him to be good to any beyond those whom we know, love, and affect. An envious, a malignant, a Jewish disposition, un∣worthy the large bowels of Christians. When our Lord named Sarepta, Luke 4.26. when he hinted to them, that Heathens should be partakers of his salvation, they would needs cast him down headlong, ver. 29. when S. Paul mentioned the Gentiles, they gave him audience to that word, but then they were stark mad: away with such a fellow from the earth, Acts 22.22. Yea the Jews Interpreters are of more large bowels then such Chri∣stians, who extend this speech unto the Nations round about the Lord. Is our eye evil because God is good? what else do we mean when, by way of distinction, we call our selves the godly, the Saints, &c. and arrogate all such titles of honour to our selves, as if God wrought only in us, and we would exclude him out of all the world beside? as if the dew of Gods grace fell only upon our fleece, and left dry all the world about us. How dare we thus limit the Holy One of Israel? Psal. 78.41. Hath not our God his circuits? Is not he in the midst of his Saints? are not his peo∣ple all round about him? In every Nation he that fears God and workes righteousness, is accepted of him, all the world over, Acts 10.34, 35. And to all such this may be a strong consola∣tion. What people that the Lord our God so neer them, &c? Deut. 4.7. What Nation so great, that hath God so nigh unto them, to hear their prayers? Nigh to all them that call upon him, Psal. 145.18. and 148.14. Nigh to all such as draw nigh unto him by prayer. They are in covenant with him, Ephes. 2.13. They are neer at command to do him service, Levit. 10.3. They are true Levites joyned unto him. They have spiritual alliance with him by Christ, My Father and your Father, John 20.17. But alas! while we are round about our God, we lie exposed to the adversary without. He goes about like a roaring Lion, &c. 1 Pet. 5.8. Yes, but it follows, whom resist strong in the faith; and greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world, 1 John 4.4. in the midst of you, so strong that, resist him that is in the world, ane hee'l flie from you; and surely you'l say who are Souldiers, that's but a weak enemy, who can conquer onely those who yield themselves, and will not resist him, James 4.7. This promise is to the Saints who keep the Law of God, who are un∣defiled in the way, and walk in the law of the Lord, such , build a wall about themselves, Prov. 28.4. as the LXX turn it. The Lord promises that he will be a little San∣ctuary, to his people, Ezech. 11.16. Yea, as we are round about the
Lord, the Lord is round about us; we have a strong City: salva∣tion will the Lord appoint Murale & antemurale, Wals and Bul∣warks, Esay 26.1. As the hils stand about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people, Psal. 125.2. But God is our Captain and Leader, Hebr. 2.10. True, but also the Lord is the rereward, Esay 52.12. The God of Israel will be our rereward. The Lord is in the midst of his people, his Saints are round about him; yet not only so, but he is round about Israel also, Zacb. 2.4. There we have this objection answered, if Jerusalem be inhabited as Towns without walls, by reason of the multitude of men and cattle there∣in, then shall we lie exposed to the malice of the enemy; Nay, it followes, I, saith the Lord, will be unto her as a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her.
These are the names of the sons of Aaron the Priests, which were anointed,Numb. 3. Ver. 3. whom he consecrated to minister in the Priests office.] Moses having numbered, visited, and mustered the other Tribes, Chap. 1. of this book, and Chap. 2. disposed them according to Gods command, about the Tabernacle of meeting: In this third Chapter, he recites the names of the Priests of Aarons house, and commemorates their unction and consecration unto the Priests office. And the Lord having given the other Levites to the Priests, for the service of the Tabernacle, the Lord commands Moses to number, visit, and muster the Levites, according to their families, the Gershonites, the Kohathites, and the Merarites. Of this verse, I have chosen only the later part to treat of at this time, Whom he consecrated to minister in the Priests office. In which words, we have 1. The consecration of the Priests, he consecrated them. 2. The end of their consecration, to minister in the Priests office. Accordingly there are in the words these two divine truths. 1. He consecrated them. 2. He consecrated them to minister in the Priests office. 1. He consecrated them. Who consecrated them, we shall shew anon. But first let us inquire into the Priests consecration. What is here turn'd, whom he consecrated, is word for word in the Hebrew , whose hand he filled. So Arias Mon∣tanus, Quorum manum implevit: whose hand he filled. So the Spanish Bible, Martin Luthers translation, and Piscators, and three Low Dutch, and Coverdale, Ainsworth, and another old English translations; all which render the words, whose hand he filled. The LXX have , whom they conse∣crated their hands. Harsh. Hierom, Quorum repletae & consecratae manus, whose hands were filled and (that is) consecrated: And this last the most of the other Latin & English translations follow. By filling the hand, some here understand Oleo consecrare, to consecrate with oyl. But in regard of oyl, it were more proper to fill the Head, on which the oyl was poured, then the hand; since only the Thumb of the Priest, and that of the right hand only, was anointed; and that with blood, not with oyl, as appeares, Exod. 29.20. Others have conceived, that by filling of the hand, is to be un∣derstood the Priests taking somewhat in their hands to offer: and this they prove by Jeroboams consecration of Priests, 1 Kings 13.33. and 2 Chron. 13.9. Whosoever cometh to fill his hand with a Bullock and seven Rams, he shall be a Priest  to the no-gods. But this is a very weak proof, to say no worse of it; especially since the Scripture saith expresly, This thing be∣came sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to the cutting it off, and
to destroy it from off the face of the earth, 1 Kings 13.33, 34. That therefore we may know whats here meant by filling of the Priests hand, let us inquire 1. With what the Priests band was filled. And 2. who filled it. The hand of the Priest was filled with the Oblations and Sacrifices to be offered up unto God. What those Oblations and Sacrifices were, we shall best learn out of the first institution and consecration of the Priests, which ye read of, Exod. 29.9. Where, after the clothing of them, follows this command of the Lord to Moses, Thou shalt consecrate Aaron and his sons, the words are the same with those in this Text, Thou shalt fill the hand of Aaron and his sons. With what? That we read at large, together with the rite of consecration, ver. 22, 23, 24, 25. Thou shalt take of the Ram the fat and the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, &c. And thou shalt put all in the hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his sons, &c. 2. But who here filled the hand of the Priests? Here is no men∣tion in the text; some say Aaron. And Vatablus supplies his name in the margent. But Moses is said to have consecrated Aaron, and his sons; and the Spanish Bible puts in the marg. Moses, according to Exod. 29.9. Levit. 8.33. Ecclus. 45.18. And therefore if either of their names be to be supplied, surely 'tis rather the name of Moses then that of Aaron. But whether it were Moses or Aaron, it was no doubt at Gods command; and therefore Piscator in his High Dutch hath Deren hand der Herr gefullet hatte, whose hand the Lord hath filled. The reason of this, appears 1. From the consideration of the Priests office. For since every high Priest is ordained to offer gifts and Sacrifices, Hebr. 8.3. these must have something to offer. 2. No man might assume this power unto himself, Hebr. 5.4. but he who is called of God, whose hand the Lord filleth. Mysticè. What is meant by the hand? Manus est animae virtus quâ tenere aliquid & constringere quis potest, velut si dicamus, actus ejus & fortitudo. The hand is the vertue and power of the soul, whereby we may apprehend something, &c. It is the strength and actions proceeding from inward power and strength. Thus to have something given into our hand, that is into our power. Thus Abraham saith to Sarah, Thy Maid is in thy hand, Gen. 16.6. that is, in thy power. For so it followes, Do to her what is good in thine eyes. Num. 21.2. If thou wilt indeed deliver this people into my hand; that is, into my power, as it followes, then I will utterly destroy their Cities. Now what is that which is given into the Priests hand? what is that wherewith the Priests hand is filled? in the place before named, we read, what. 1. The fat. That's held either the best, as Genesis 4.4. Abel brought of the fat: or the worst, as Psalm 119.70. Their heart is fat as grease.
2. The rump or tail of the Ram, either the best, or the worst. The best, Cauda jubetur adoleri Deo, saith S. Gregory, ut omne bo∣num quod incipimus, etiam perseverantiae fine impleamus: that what ever good we begin, we may also fulfil with the end of perseve∣rance. The rump or tail of the Ram hath a special name , which is from , to curse, which is due to the Prophet who perseveres in speaking lies, Esay 9.15. The inward part, that is the heart as  signifies, as also the minde: and so what Hebr. 8.10. is called  the minde, that Jer. 31.33. is the inward part, which may be good or evil: for the good man out of the good treasure of his heart, bringeth forth that which is good, & the evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, bringeth forth that which is evil, Luke 6.45. And the like may be said of all the rest. Who puts all these in the Priests hand? who else but the great God, as was shewen before. He puts in the mans power to do good or to do evil. Take notice from hence, what the Wiseman saith, Ecclus. 15.14. God himself made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his counsel, (the good and evil is put into thy power) if thou wilt, to keep the Commandements of God, and to perform ac∣ceptable faithfulness: He hath set fire and water before thee; Stretch forth thine hand to whether thou wilt. Before man, is life and death, and whether him liketh, shall be given him. This however Apocryphal, hath prime Canonical Scripture to confirm it with a witness. I call Heaven and Earth to record this day against you that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cur∣sing; therefore choose life, that thou and thy seed may live; that thou mayest love the Lord thy God, and mayest obey his voice, &c. Deut. 30.15.19, 20. And I beseech you take notice how the Angel in Esdras interprets that place, having spoken of this argu∣ment with the Angel, 2 Esdr. 7.1.—58. then ver. 59. the Angel saith, This is the life whereof Moses spake unto the people, while he lived, saying, choose thee life, that thou mayest live. God puts the good, in special, into our hand. Thus to fill the hand is to give possession of the heavenly goods, whereof God hath made Christ the high Priest, Hebr. 9.11. and put all things into his hand; and he makes his believers such when he gives them an earnest of the holy Land. As when possession is given, a clod of the land is given into his hand who takes posses∣sion of it, Acts 20.32. Ephes. 1.14. Note from hence, who is the great high Priest of our profession; who else but the Son of God? John 3.35. The Father loved the Son, and hath given all things into his hand: his right hand is full of righteousness, Psal. 48.10.
Here is the accomplishment of all the typical Priests, in Christ. For what was meant by the first-born Priests, but Christ the first-born of every creature? What was Aarons Priesthood, or Melchisec's, and the execution of their respective offices, in expiation and intercession and manifold particulars, but repre∣sentations of Christ and his Priesthood and the execution there∣of? he was the true Aaron the Mountain of knowledge, the Teach∣ing Priest; who teacheth like him? The true Melchisedec, Heb. 7.1.2, 3. The true Eleazar, Gods helper: the true Abiathar, that excellent Fa∣ther, Esay 9.6. Pater futuri seculi, the Father of the after-world, as Hierom turns it, the everlasting Father. Sadoc, the righteous one. Jehoshuah, the Lord the Saviour, the son of Jehosadac, the righteous Lord, Zach. 6.11. Such an high Priest becomes us to have. Observe, whence the true believers obtain their office of a royal Priesthood unto God, Revel. 1.6. Here is no man named, neither Moses nor Aaron who fils the hand of the Priests; it is the Lord alone who makes Priests. Hence also we learn, what manner of men the Evangelical Priests ought to be, Clean-handed men, Man us habere consummatns, as one of the Ancients speaks, to have perfect hands. Hear what Philo Judaeus speaks to this purpose; God requires of a Priest, first of all, a good minde, holy and exercised in piety; then a life ador∣ned with good works, that when he layes his hands on any, he may say with a free conscience, Those hands are neither corrupted with bribes, nor polluted with innocent blood; they have done hurt, injury, wounds, violence, to no man; they have not been instruments unto any dishonest thing, but have been imployed in things honest and profitable, such as are approved by just, honest, and wise men. So he. 2. Axiom. Wherefore was the Priests hand filled? To minister in the Priests office. That's the end of his consecration. And it is in the Hebrew in one word,  which our Translators express by so many; the LXX render it by one, . Castellio succinctly turns all the words thus, Quorum manûs ipse Sacredotio sacravit, whose hands he hallowed for the Priesthood. 1. Hence we may learn who they are who truly judge themselvs to be of the royal Priesthood. Who but they who are , made perfect or consecrated? so the Apostle renders that phrase, whofe hand is filled, and so the LXX express it, who stand complete in all the will of God. And having done their own work, are rea∣dy to offer something up for others, as prayers, intercessions, gi∣ving of thanks, &c. Such were they who stood idle in the mar∣ket- place. They had done their own work. For shall wee think, they were a company of Circumforanei, a sort of lazy fel∣lons, such as are often in our markets? Our Lard entertaines no such into his service.
2. Hence it appears, that no man taketh this honour to himself, Hebr. 5. That is, that no man ought to take in hand the Priests office unless it be first put into his hand by the Lord. This justly reproves those who do involare violently take unto themselves the Priesthood, who assume and arrogate that office to themselves by their own private, that is, no ority, under pre∣tence of gifted men who boast of a false gift; whereas indeed God hath not filled their hand with any such gift; but they have gotten it by a kinde of Legier de main, they have taken it to themselves by Brachygraphy or Short-hand; and so by a competent measure of boldness, intrude into the Priests office, and into the things which they have not seen, vainly, puft up by their fleshly minde, Col. 2. Nor yet do I here confine the gifts of God, unto mans approba∣tion or ordination. Surely the Lord may fill whose hand he will, speak by whom he will; as he is said to speak, not only by the mouth, as Acts 1.16. & 3.18. but also by the hand of his Prophets; as by the hand of Moses, Numb. 4.37. by the hand of Abijah, 2 Chron. 10.15. and many the like, which our Translators render only [by,] as Haggai 1.1. and often elsewhere. Thus he hath in all ages raised up his Priests and Prophets, with∣out the authority, yea, against the authority of men, Amos 3.8. Acts 4.20. 2 Pet. 1.21. For certainly it is unreasonable, and most presumptuous to confine the Spirit of God unto certain Theses, Articles, confessions, and opinions of mens making, which yet seems so much the more daring, and indeed provoking of the only wise God, in that they cannot say, that their dictates proceed from an infallible spirit; yet would they limit and bound the infallible Spirit of the God of truth, by their presumptuous humane spirit, which, as they themselves con∣fess, is fallible and subject unto errour. This, where-ever it ap∣pears, its the spirit of Antichrist, according to which, the Scribes and Pharisees boldly examined our Lord himself, By what autho∣rity doest thou these things, and who gave thee this authority? And as they dealt with our Lord himself, so likewise with his Apostles, as it is evident in their Acts often. And after the same manner the wisdom of the flesh hath alwayes advanced it self over the wisdom of God. So true is that which our Lord tells us, If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept any saying, they will keep yours also. Which yet seems the more strange, that the same men who have heretofore judged it most unjust so to have their hands bound, & their mouthes stopt, that they might not exercise their gifts (their own complaint, and phrase) the same men or of the same spirit are the most zealous persecutors of others, and that upon the ve∣ry same grounds: whereby they justifie the least warrantable
proceedings of those heretofore in authority, which formerly they most condemned. pudet haec (pudeatve) opprobria vobis, Et dici potuisse, & non potuisse refelli. Be we exhorted, who ever are made Priests unto God, that we become like unto the great high Priest, who fills our hand and makes us Priests unto his Father. He is styled by the Apostle a merciful and faithful high Priest, Hebr. 2.17. As for Mercy, it is 1. The common Character of all who feat God, Psal. 112.4. 2. It is his command whose Priests we are, Zach. 7.9. 3. He gives example in himself, Luke 6.36. and 15.20. Exod. 20.6. 4. As this mercy is not without example, so not without reward, Prov. 14.21. He who hath mercy on the poor,Prov. 14. Ver. 21. happy is he. Or rather, O the blessedness of him, who hath mercy on the poor! Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy. 5. It is more acceptable unto the Lord then Sacrifie, Matth. 9.12. and 12.27. Its the primary will of God, whereas the other is the secondary, less principal, and good only in order to the first. 2. As the great high Priest is merciful unto men, so is he faithful unto God in things belonging unto God. The Father hath given all things into his hand, John 3.35. And he was faithful unto him who appointed him, Hebr. 3.2. which was necessary in regard of the covenant between the Father and the Son, Psalm 40.6, 7, 8. which the Apostle applies, Hebr. 10.5.—9. And as the great high Priest was faithful, so ought we to be in things belonging to God, in our Priests office. We have many kindes of Oblations to offer unto our God, which the great high Priest hath put into our hand. Every Priest must have somewhat to offer. And I fear, we have many of us too much to offer. Have we offered up our free-will offering? Rom. 12.1. Our trespass-offering, Psal. 51. Our daily whole burnt offe∣ring? Psal. 44.22. The Wiseman tels us of many Oblations, Ec∣clus. 35.1. &c. These are the most acceptable Sacrifices when the Priest offers, not alienam carnem, at suam mactat voluntatem, not the flesh of beasts, but his own will. For the inward offerings are most pleasing unto our God, who is a spirit; when we mortifie, kill, and crucifie our corrupt affections and lusts, which are contrary to the law and will of God. So that he who keeps the Law, offers Sacrifices enough, saith the Wise man, Ecclus. 35. Such are all acts conformable to the will of God, all acts of obe∣dience to the law of God, which the high Priest hath put into our hand and power, and enabled us to do, Rom. 8.3. Phil. 4.13. It is the saying of an holy Father, Verum sacrificium est omne bonum opus quod agitur, ut sanctâ societate Deo inhaereamus, &c. A true Sacrifice is every good work which is performed, that with holy fellowship, we may cleave unto God.
And doubtless it is the will of God, and which was at first in∣tended by him, that such a Priesthood should be the common of∣fice of all his faithful and obedient people. And therefore, upon condition of obedience, the Lord makes promise to all Israel, that they shall be unto him a kingdom of Priests, Exod. 19.6. And this promise no doubt had been fulfilled, had they continued in their obedience: But when they fell by idolatry, Exod. 32. upon occasion hereof, God made choise of the Tribe of Levi, who according to their name, clave intirely to the Lord, when all the other Tribes revolted. Yea, and upon the disobedience of Levi, the Lord saith, he will have no pleasure in them, nor will receive an offering at their hand, Mal. 1.10. but that his Name shall be great among the Gen∣tiles, ver. 11. And Chap. 2. Because the Priests corrupted the cove∣nant of Levi, and they made the people stumble at the law, (which hath been and is the great sin of the present Priesthood) therefore hath the Lord rendred them contemptible and base before all the people; where their crime is again repeated, ver. 8, 9. Hence also it is, that the Lord threatneth, that he will cut off the name of the Chemarim with the Priests, Zeph. 1.4. Therefore the promise of the Priesthood is enlarged, even to all the penitent believers and obedient ones; and is said to be fulfilled, 1 Pet. 2.9. Revel. 1.6. O that the same Priests office were fulfilled by us! into whose hand and power the Lord puts such spiritual sacrifices, as shall be accepted of God, through Jesus Christ the great high Priest. By him therefore let us offer up the sacrifice of praise to God conti∣nually, that is,Hebr. 13. Ver. 15, 16 , the fruit of lips con∣fessing to his name. . But forget not doing good and communicating; for with such sacri∣fices God is well pleased.
SERMON IX. MYSTAGOGUS. The Dispenser of Divine Mysteries. Numbers 4. ver. 19, 20. When they approach unto the most holy things, Aaron and his sons shall go in, and appoint them every one to his service, and to his burden. But they shall not go in to see, when the holy things are covered, lest they dye. THese words contain part of the Cohathites service; which is positively and negatively set down. 1. Positively; They may approach unto the most holy things every one to receive and bear his burden. 2. Negatively; They shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered, lest they dye. In the words are contained these divine sentences. 1. The Cohathites may approach to the most holy things. 2. Aaron and his sons shall appoint every one to his service and to his burden. 3. The Cohathites shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered, lest they dye. 1. The Cohathites may approach unto the most holy things. What is here rendred, the most holy things, is in the Hebrew  Sanctitas Sanctitatum, the Holiness of Holinesses; which although it be an expression proper to the Hebrew tongue, whereby the Superlative degree is to be understood, yet is there more then a Grammatical consideration meant in these words, as I shall shew, when we have enquired and found what these most holy things are.
By the most holy things, its plain, from the former part of the Chapter, we are to understand the Ark, the Shew-bread, the Candlestick, the golden Altar, and brazen Altar, with the instruments and utensels belonging unto all these. Which are not to be considered only in themselves, but as they refer us to things far better then themselves; whereof they were only types and examples: and therefore Moses had a charge to make all things according to the patern shewed him in the Mount, Exod. 25.40. which he exactly performed, Chap. 39.42, 43. The Apostle took notice of this, Hebr. 8.5. and 9.23. He cals them , paterns of things in the heavens. And those things are called , heavenly things. These heavenly things signified by these paterns, particularly to relate and explain, would spend too much time, and the Spirit of God contents it self with the general name of beavenly things. The Ark by the Philistines is called, 1. God himself, 1 Sam. 4.6, 7. 2. By the Wife of Phinees its called Glory, that is, the Son of God, the brightness of Gods glory, Hebr. 1.3. The glory of his people Israel, Luke 2.32. By the Psalmist its called the strength of God, Psal. 78.61. In the Preface of that Psalm, he saith he will open his mouth in a Parable, and utter dark sayings. So that what he delivers in that Psalm, are not only Stories, but Mysteries. The golden Altar signifies the Spirit of grace and supplications, Zach. 12.10. teaching us, and helping us to offer incense, that is, to pray un∣to the Father, Psal. 141.2. Rom. 8.26. The Shew-bread, or the bread of faces, so  signifies, which the LXX call , imports unto us the presence of God with his people, and his people with him. The Candlestick holding forth the Word and light of life, which is performed by the Church, Phil. 2.16. which is therefore called a Candlestick, as particular Churches are called, Revel. 1.20. The brazen Altar signified the spirit of patience, whereby we mortifie the deeds of the body, Rom. 8.13. Christ himself is ex∣presly called , The holiness of holinesses, Dan. 9.24. Both because he is most holy in himself, formaliter, and because effectivè he makes others holy. 1. In himself, the Demoniac spake truly of him when he called him , that holy One of God. For so Luke 1.35. the Angel had said unto the blessed Virgin, , That holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. For the Lord Christ was known by this Title of honour, Gods holy One, Psal. 16.10. Acts 2.27. Thou wilt not suffer thine holy One, or merciful One to see corruption. Thus Deut. 33.8. Esay 49.7. Hos. 11.9. Acts 3.14. 1 John 2.20. beside many other places. 2. Effectivè, effectively also he is The holy One, as he who san∣ctifies and justifies the people of God, so Hebr. 2.11. He is called
Gods holy one, Psal. 16.10. And accordingly the word is ren∣dred by S. Peter, Acts 2.27. , Sanctum tuum,Psal. 16. Ver. 10. Acts 2. Ver. 27. thine holy or merciful one, in the singular number; yet is the word  plu∣ral, thine holy or merciful ones; which secretly intimateth unto us what S. Paul saith to the believing and obedient souls, Rom. 8.11. that if the spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he who raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his spirit that dwelleth in you: and ma∣ny other places import the same conformity unto our Lords death and resurrection, as 1 Cor. 6.14. 2 Cor. 4.14. Ephes. 2.6. Col. 2.12. We have heard what these holy things are. Come we now to inquire who are they who may approach unto the most holy things? Who but the Kohathites the sons of Kohath? Kohath or Kehath hath his name from , and signifies Obtusio, obstupefactio, stupidity and dulness, according to Eccles. 10.10. If the Iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he put to more strength. Metaphorically it imports that stupidity and dlness that's opposite unto acuteness and sharpness of wit. Such dulness was supposed in the Kohathites, because, though they might approach unto the holiness of holinesses, yet they might not touch them nakedly and without interposition of divers cove∣rings, Ver. 15. as I shall shew anon. Whence note that, 1. The God of glory, his strength, and power, his Christ, his Spirit, his divine presence, his light of life, his spirit of patience; these, all these, and infinitely more, are here called the holiness of holines∣ses, as being the , as I may so speak, the essential holi∣ness, the Primum exemplare, the subsistence, the Idea of all what ever can be called holy. 2. These holy things make all other things holy which they touch. Thus the Altar sanctifieth the gift, Matth. 23.19. The flesh of the sin-offering sanctisith him who toucheth it, Levit. 6.27. And the true holiness imparts the likeness of it self unto who∣soever worthily receives it. He who receives the chastening of the Father, receives also the holiness of the Father, Hebr. 12.10. And so many as receive the Son the holy one of God, receive also power to be sons of God, John 1.12. And he who receives the spirit of holiness, receives holiness also. 3. That which is made holy, is not such by imagination, esti∣mation, imputation, account, or opinion only, but by real and true participation of holiness: The essential holiness imparts and communicates of its holiness unto it, and makes it holy. Accord∣ing to which, he who is wise, is so, by wisdom imparted to him, which is really and truly in him; he who is righteous, is such by righteousness which is truly and really communicated unto him and indeed in him. And the like reason there is of all and every
grace communicated unto us by the God of all grace. Accord∣ingly the Apostle faith, that God the Father makes his children partakers of his holiness, Hebr. 12.10. and renders them holy as he is holy. All this is necessarily to be understood, when we render , holiness of holinesses; that essential holinesse is it which makes all these persons and things holy, which are truly such. Which understanding of this phrase is quite lost, if it be rendred only most holy. And therefore Pagnin renders the words, Sanctitas sanctitatum, Holiness of holinesses. The Tigurin Bible, Sanctum San∣ctorum, holy of holies. To the same purpose Tremellius, Munster and Vatablus. 2. Aaron and his sons must appoint every one to his service and to his burden. The whole burden of the Tabernacle, when the Camp removed, lay upon the Kohathites, the Gersonites, and the Merarites, as appears at large in this fourth Chapter of Num∣bers. The service and burden mentioned in these words before us, concerned the Kohathites. And this is reasonable according to the prudence and equi∣ty of the high Priest who apportions unto every one his burden, according to his strength to bear it: That one be not eased, and another burdened, but that there be an equality. That there be no confusion, but that every one may know his own business. That there be no intrusion of one upon anothers work. Whence it ap∣pears; 1. The Levitical office is a laborious office; a service, a bur∣den. He who desires the office of a Bishop, desires a good work, 1 Tim. 3.1. Docet Apostolus, quid sit Episcopatus, nomen scilicet esse operis non bonoris. The Apostle, saith S. Augustine, teacheth what Episcopacy is, viz. the name of a work, not of an honour. 2. One man must not bear two mens burdens; there is no equality, no equity in that. 3. Hence it appears, that there were orders and degrees of Mi∣nisters in the Old Testament, some imposing, others bearing bur∣dens imposed on them. And because the Law was Gravida Evan∣gelio, big with the Gospel, there must be degrees and orders also of Ministers under the Gospel, and these not inferiour unto those under the Law; both of them representing the degrees and orders among the Angels. We read of three sorts of Ministers distinct in degree from one another. 1. There were inferiour Elders or Ministers, to whom Timothy and Titus gave power to ordain, set up, reprove, restrain, &c. These were as ministeriall Levites of the lowest order. 2. There were superintendents or Bishops, such as Timothy himself was at Ephesus, and Titus in Crete. These answer to the Priests in the Old Testament, and to the Angels called principalities and
powers. 3. There were higher then these superintendent Bishops, who had power to ordain, and setup the Bishops of the second order. And such were the Apostles themselves. For an  is expresly attributed to the Apostles, 1 Ton. 3.1. , if any man desire a Bishoprick: and Acts 1.20. ,Acts 1.20. his Bishoprick, was spoken of Judas fallen from his Apostleship, let another take his Bishoprick. In this sense, S. Paul called Peter, James, and John, who were of highest reputation, Pillars, Gal. 1.9. So that the name of Ecclesiastical Hiearchy is both venerable for antiquity, and wants not its basis and foundation in the heavenly Hierarchy. I speak not of persons who may, nay, who have sometimes un∣worthily intruded themselves, and have been by men, by undue meant, advanced thereunto, and have arrogated honours to them∣selves; I speak of the degrees and orders themselves found both in the Old and New Testament. Those orders themselves may be piously retained and maintained, if the persons admitted there∣unto be called of God, and worthy of such honour, 1 Cor. 12.28. phos. 4.11, 12. we read of divers orders. Whereof the first three Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists are by some godly and judicious Divines made all one, or such as may be found in one and the same person: For whosoever is an Apostle, or hath seen Jesus Christ in the spirit, by which token S. Paul asserts and proves his Apostleship, 1 Cor. 9.1. he must needs be a right Propher, and a true Dagelist. The other two may be reduced to the other two subordinate sorts of Ministers. Now where out Lord saith, he that is , great, (or greater V.L.) among you, let him be your Minister, Matth. 20.26. And he that will be greater or great∣est, , among you, Matth. 23.11. shall be your servant; great, greater, and greatest therefore there are among Christian Ministers. But he that is greater or greatest, hath the greatest burden. What a speech was that of S. Paul? 2 Cor. 12.15.2 Cor. 12. Ver. 15. I teek not yours but you: and I will gladly spend and be spent for your souls. . 3. They shall not go in to see when the holy things are cove∣red, lest they die. The Kohathites might approach to the most holy things, to receive every one their service and their burden, as appears by the for∣mer words. These words discover how far the Kohathites might go. Not so far as to see when the holy things are covered, (no, not upon pain of death,) lest they die. But these things will better appear in the particular handling of the severals contained in gross in these words. The Kohathites must not go in to see when the holy things are covered, lest they die. Wherein, these di∣vine truths are contained.
1. The holy things are covered. 2. The Kohathites must not go in to see the holy things when they are covered. 3. They must not go in to see when the holy things are cove∣red, lest they die. 1. The holy things are covered. What are here called holy things, are in the abstract with an em∣phasis,  the holiness; and it is no other then what was called before holiness of holinesses. This holiness is said to be covered. The word here turn'd covered, is , which properly signifies to be swallowed up, devoured, destroyed. So Arias Montanus turns it here, juxta obsorbere, at the swallowing up. And though it be of∣ten used in Scripture, its no where used to signifie covered, ex∣cept only in this place. Howbeit I shall speak somewhat unto both senses. 1. The holiness is swallowed. 2. The holiness is covered. 1. The holiness. Some would understand hereby Rem sanctam, some holy thing. Others, Res sanctas, the holy things. But why should not the Spirit of God express it self in its own sense? The word is  the holiness. But can holiness be devoured, swallowed up or destroyed? Can it not? if it cannot, what's become of it? There is a great deal of inquiry made, what's become of the Ark, the golden Altar, and the other paterns of the holy things, whether the Romans car∣ried them away among their other spoyls, when they took Je∣rusalem. But who inquires after the holy things themselves? who in∣quires after God? God himself was signified by the Ark, as I shewed before. The Ark signifies the glory of God, the beauty of holiness. Where, O where is that glory to be found? Ichabod? where is the glory? faith the wife of Phinees; she understood the Ark of God. And may not we make the like inquisition and complaint? Ichabod? where, O where is that glory, that beauty of holiness? Its taken captive by the Philistines; who are they but Potu-cadentes, as Hierom interprets them, fallen with drink; or earthly spirits. The Drunkards, the Wine-bibbers have swallowed up the beauty of holiness. The Gamesters have lost it. The earthly spirits have buried it. Its certainly swallowed up. The Son of God that holy One, and the Just, was understood by the Ark; it is the signe he gives of the Son of man, that as Janah was three dayes and three nights in the belly of the Whale; so should the Son of man be in the heart of the earth. Matth. 12.40. And is he not yet swallowed up in the heart of the earthly man? He so complains, I am become as a dead man out of minde, Psal. 31.12.
The perfection of life figured by Joseph, that's swallowed up. Jacob saith, Gen. 37.33. an evil beast hath devoured Joseph: Joseph without doubt is rent in pieces. And it is a dangerous thing at this day to say, Joseph is yet alive, Gen. 45.26. His father would hardly be∣lieve it when his sons told him so, Gen. 45.26. Veritas in puteo; truth was in the pit; and when Democritus went about to draw it out, his countreymen the Abderitae said, he was a mad man, and sent to Hippocrates to bring him to his wits: as our Lords kins∣men said of him for the like reason, that he was beside himself, Mark 3.21. Yea, others said he had a Devil and was mad, John 10.20. So Festus said to Paul, Acts 26.24. And the Philosophers called him a babler, because he preached concerning Jesus and the resurrection, and life to be by him, which they and many at this day think to be utterly swallowed up and lost, and will ne∣ver appear. The reason why the holiness and holy things are swallowed up and devoured, may be understood from the consideration of Satan and his ministers their envie against the holiness of God and his holy ones, 2 Cor. 11. For Satan hath had in all ages his ministers who have devoured the holy things and Gods holy people: Such an one was Balaam, whose name sounds a devourer of the people. And these devour the narrow way; the patience of Jesus Christ figured by the Altar, Esay 3.12. These devour the oyl of the Lamp in holy, even mercy, Proverbs 21.20. And what they de∣stroy not they decry, as errour, heresie, false doctrine, and what not? So that the holiness and holy things themselves, and they who bear them, which should shine gloriously, are under a clowd of aspersions, reproaches, slanders, as David speaks, Psalm 57.3. The reproach of him that would swallow me up.1 Pet. 5. ver. 8. Thus we read of the Devil who goes about seeking whom we may drink up, or swallow up and devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. the word is , to drink up. And he stands before the woman to devour her childe, Revel. 12.4. and he casts a floud of water, even persecution, obloquies, and reproaches after the woman to overwhelm her, ver. 15. it is in the old Epi∣gram when one sober man was among a company of drunkards, he alone was by all the rest reputed as mad and drunk; as they are thought at this day, who affirm, Joseph the perfection is alive; that the life of God, whence we have been estranged, Ephes. 4. is to be restored; that transgresson shall be finished, and that here shall be an end of sin; and that the everlasting righteousness shall be brought in; and that the holiness of holinesses, even Jesus Christ himself the anointed one shall appear in our mortal flesh, Dan. 9.24. 2 Cor. 10.11. That evil shall be put out, and deceit shall be quenched; that faith shall flourish, and corruption shall be overcome, and the truth which hath been long without fruit, shall be declared, 2 Esdras 6.27, 28. Who ever dares aver these things for truth, shall be de∣cryed
as a mad man; and it is the great mercy of God if he be not swallowed up and devoured by lyars, evil beasts, and slow bellies, Titus 1. I have spoken hitherto of the word  in the proper sense of it, as it signifies to be swallowed up, devoured, and destroyed. And so the holiness or holy thing or things are swallowed up. Now be∣cause what is so devoured, is hidden from our sight, hence the word hath the signification of hyding or covering. And so the words will afford us this sentence also; the holiness or holy thing or things are covered. This sense is warranted by the fifteenth verse of this fourth Chapter, where Moses useth  to cover, instead of  in this text, And the Chald. Paraphrast so renders the words; which covering, because it was speedily done, the LXX render  confestim, quickly. So the Tigurin Bible, cum involvantur sancta, when the holy things are wrapt up. So Munster, Vatablus, and others. The holiness or holy things are covered and hid from us by two kindes of vailes; whereof one upon the object or holy things them∣selves; the other upon us. 1. The vailes upon the objects holiness or holy things themselves, are the ceremonial services in types and figures. Thus we read of the manfold coverings of the Ark, the Mercy seat, the table of shew∣bread, the Altar, &c. All which are paterns of heavenly things, as hath been shewen. For as in the body of man, the most tender & pretious part is covered by a soft one, as a silm, and that by some harder and stronger part; as the sight of the eye, by the tunicles; the brain by the pia mater, that by the meninx and dur a mater: So have the holy things of God their next, inward, and subtil cove∣rings, as ridles, parables, and numbers; and these more sensible and outward, as the outward coverings of the worldy Sanctuary, Hebr. 9.1. 2. Other vailes there are upon us, whereby the holy things are hidden from us. And these are either 1. As it were innate and inbred, according to which the Apostle saith, that  the natural or souly man perceiveth not the things of the Spi∣rit of God; for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. Or 2. there are vailes acquisite and of our own making; and these are of two sorts, whereof the one, we draw or suffer to be imposed and drawn upon our mindes; the other upon our hearts. 1. That which is drawn upon our mindes is the vail of knowledge falsly so called; a vail of false notions and misunderstandings of spiritual things, saith S. Hierom, which hath covered all the world: and, since there are many Antichrists, 1 John 2.18. this is one, and a great one, a vail upon the minde, the , the ruling part of the soul.
2. The other vail is that of obstinacy and unbelief cast upon the heart; of which the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 3.15. the vail is upon their heart. Of these two is twisted and woven that large black thick vail that covers all nations, Esay 25.7. The words are re∣markable, , the face of the covering covered,Esay 25. v. 7., and the vail vailed. The covering is covered and the vail vailed, that the covering and vail might not be discerned, but the false light taken for the true light, knowledge falsly so called mistaken for the true knowledge; wisdom from beneath, for the wis∣dom from above, the strong imagination which is unbelief and disobe∣dience mistaken for the operative, powerful, and living faith; the blackness of darkness for the brightness of Gods glory. This is meant by Gog and Magog, the great and last enemies we read of, Ezech. 38.9. which compass the Camp of the Saints, Revel. 20.9. Their names signifie covering; and accordingly the Spirit of God makes use of them. Thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the land. And there∣fore the Apostle tels us, that the man of sin must be revealed and uncased, who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is cal∣led God and is worshipped, 2 Thess. 2. He would be taken for the true light, for God himself; and takes up his place in the Tem∣ple of God, the mindes and hearts of men. This the Apostle cals the mysterie of iniquity, and the deceiveableness of unrighte∣ousness. And so it is indeed, when iniquity it self is taken for righteousness it self; when erroneous opinions are taken for the truth it self; when gross ignorance is taken for true knowledge; when palpable darkness is taken for the light it self. A mystery of iniqui∣ty, a strong delusion, when men are brought to believe a lie in∣stead of the truth. 2. These coverings are patcht together with great artifice by the subtilty of the old Serpent, which, to hide and defend himself, hath found out a world of distinctions, without any ground of them in the Word of God; as the Sepia, to escape the Fisher∣man, and preserve her self, casts forth a filthy black liquor, saith Aelian. The Reason why the holiness and holy things are covered, may be considered either in regard of the things themselves, which are covered, or in respect of the persons whether he be  discovering the holy things, or  those from whom they are covered, or , those to whom the holy things are dis∣covered and revealed. 1. As for the holy things themselves, there is a kinde of necessity, that they should be concealed; because they have no name of their own, nor sensible figure, nor any outward semblance proper to themselves, saith Dionysius Areop. all which they must borrow from things known to us if we must know them. So that the reason why the holy things are inveloped and hidden, is è necessitate materiae, as the Philospher speaks of the
hair, though in somewhat a different sense, it proceeds from the necessity of the matter it self. But further, as the hair is also a glo∣ry to the woman, 1 Cor. 11.15. (though effeminate & womanish men have robd them of that ornament) so it is for the excellency & glory of divine truths, that they be so hidden in mysteries. Nature hath concealed her treasures from open view: for tis from the worth of gold and silver, that they are hidden under the barren earth; and from the worth of the kingdom of heaven, that is, a treasure hidden in the field, Matth. 13. Thus Pearls are hidden in shells and under water. And the kingdom of heaven is a goodly Pearl, a treasure,2 Cor. 4. ver. 7. , in earthen vessels, or rather ves∣sels of shells, as the word properly signifies; and the Apostle may be conceived to allude unto the Pearl in the shell, 2 Cor. 4.7. unless we may think, that he had reference unto Gideons light in earthen pitchers: for so the kingdom of God is the kingdom of light, as the Devils kingdom is the kingdom of darkness, Col. 1. But that is a needless and superfluous ornament, that beside adorning is for no other use. And therefore as the hair is a glory to the woman, so it is given unto her as a necessary covering. Ye know, pretious Stones and Jewels are wont to be kept and con∣veyed from hand to hand, not nakedly and openly, but in Cabinets and Caskets, or other coverings. And this is the most profitable and pleasing way of conveying these pretious Jewels, these heaven∣ly treasures of divine truth unto men, saith Aquinas. The other reasons considerable in the persons both revealing mysteries, and thse to whom they are revealed, and from whom they are hidden, will be more properly and seasonably alleaged for the proof of the following points. 1. Hence we learn the object, ground, and matter of all or most controversies in the Church of God. The holy things of God are covered. For men differ not in opinion touching things openly known: For who but a mad man or stark blinde would dispute, whether it were day or not, when the Sun shines forth bright and clear at high noon? Some divine truths there are as clear and evi∣dent as the Sun shines, so that no question can be made of them: they give testimony of themselves, and need no other argument to prove then to be. These prevent all controversies and strivings of men about them. But other divine truths there are mystical and hidden; and a∣bout these and these only, men differ; and hence proceed most controversies, which distract and divide the Church of Christ at this day, Which when we hear, we may well conclude, that the truths whereabout they differ, are not known: For were they known, there would be then no further difference about them; we will not quarel a blinde man, but pity him rather, if he say, tis dark, when the Sun shines. Of such as these, S. Paul speaks, they are
turnd aside, saith he, unto vain jangling, desiring to be teachers of the Law, (yea, and the Gospel too) understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm, 1 Tim. 1.7. and 6.20. he rightly calls controversies , the oppo∣sitions of science or knowledge falsly so called: For did they truly know the truths whereabout they contend, they would not contend about them as they do. And therefore when controversies are started and hotly pursued in the Church, its a good rule not to be over-hasty in siding and adhering to spirits of contradiction; but rather to do, as they say, tis the safest course for a traveller in a dark night, and in danger to be mislead by the Ignis fatuus or fools fire, to sit down, and wait upon the heavens for light. The Prophet Esay prescribes the same course for avoyding the like fools fire of contention kindled by ignorant and undiscreet zelots, Chap. 50.10, 11. Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness and hath no light? Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Behold all ye who kindle a fire, who compass your selves about with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled: This shall ye have of my hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow. 2. The Scripture is not so plain, perspicuous, and easie, as some conceive it to be. No, no; For though I dare not say with S. Hierom, that Nullus apex vatat mysterio, thre is not a tittle with∣out a mystery, yet well may I complain with that Father, That, though the meanest and easiest Trade requires long time, per∣haps seven years, to learn the mysteries contained in it, (and when they are known, perhaps some of them are little better then my∣steries of iniquity) yet some notwithstanding entertain so poor a conceit of the most mystical art of life, that it may be gain'd extem∣pore. The daily experience of this makes me often renew this complaint, That men who can thrive at no Trade, Repentè sic Theo∣logi prodire, suddenly turn absolute Divines, Postquam omnis res—Janum Ad medium fracta est, aliena negotia curant, Excussi propriis— Broken men make themselves whole again by the cure of other mens souls, who have had but little care of their own souls, or bodies, or estates. 3. Yea, hence it followes, that it is no dishonour, as some think it to be, to discover a mystical, spiritual, and all egorical sense of the holy Scriptures, both of the Law and of the Gospel. Nay rather, Magna gloria est sequi Dominum, Its a great glory to follow the Lord, who, by Moses and the Prophets, in this Scheme, speaks unto us. And our Lord Jesus, Mark 4.34. spake not without a parable unto the multitude. And his Apostles writings are full of them, and
discoveries of them. And who is there of all the Fathers, who hath not used them? And shall it be a discredit unto the children to imitate their fathers? Will not the dishonour rather fall on them, who adhere only to the Letter, yet hold themselves to be stew∣ards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1? when yet they declare on∣ly the letter and history of the Scripture, which every one alrea∣dy knowes to whom they speak. To such as these, our Lord spake,Luke 24. v. 26, 27. when he said, O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things and (so, Vulg. Latin, Munster, and Castellio) to enter into his glory? And beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he ex∣pounded unto them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself. Had these things been meerly literal and historical, what need had there been of exposition? But because they were mysti∣cal, and they understood them not, therefore he cals them  such as understood not spiritual things, as the Apostle useth that word in that sense, Gal. 3.1. As I may hereafter shew, if the Lord will. 2. The Kohathites must not go in to see when the holiness or holy things are covered. There is reason enough for this, if we alleage the Lords pro∣hibition; he hath for bidden them to go in to see. But there is rea∣son also for the Lords prohibition, in regard 1. of the secrets covered, as hath been shewen: and 2. in regard of the persons; 1. The , God himself who reveals and conceals his secrets, and 2. in regard of the Kohathites themselves who were , unqualified for the sight of divine mysteries; and 3. in regard of those who are  persons initiated and fit to see and know them. The great  the Dispenser of secrets, he hides them from the wise and prudent, and reveals them unto babes: and the reason follows; even so Father, for so it seemed good unto thee; Hoc videlicet ostendens quod injustum esse non potest quod Justo placet, shewing thus much, that it cannot be unjust that pleaseth the just God, saith S. Gregory. And his justice will appear from the consideration of the unqualified and qualified persons. 1. The Kohathites prefigured men in their natural or animalish condition; also such as are under the Law: In both which re∣gards, they were , not fit to see the holy things covered. 1. The Kohathites prefigured men in their natural condition, who are not capable of the things of Gods Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. And therefore the Kohathites have their name from stupidity and dulness. 2. These Levites represented such as are under the Law; and the holy truths of the Gospel were not made known to such, but were hid from ages and generations, Col. 1.26. These were commanded to keep out and not come in to see. To them who
are without, all things are in parables, and not plainly revealed, Mat. 4.11. And as it is just with God to exclude those who are , and unqualified persons, so just it is also with him, yea, and his gracious act to reveal his secrets  to qualified persons initiated and sitted to receive them. For so God gives to the man that is good in his sight wisdom and knowledge, Eccles. 2.26. But this, will some say, proves a fatal decree of biding the holy truths of God from some, and revealing them to others. As our Lord seems to say expresly, Matth. 13.11. To you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God, but to them it is not gi∣ven. Holy Chrysostme will not admit of any such collection. His words are these on Matth. 13.11. . Christ speaks thus, saith that holy Father, not as if he meant to bring in any ne∣cessity or fatality into the world, no, nor chance and casualty, but that he might shew, that evil men are the cause of their own evils, and that the knowledge of divine mysteries is the gift of God. But this seems hard measure, and at least an unkinde exclusion of the Kohathites, men in their natural estate, and such as are under the Law, that they should not be admitted to see the boly things. Not so; for God is the God of order; and in all ages the Law, and the legal services, and the Ministers of the Law are in order to the Gospel, according to the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.12. unto whom it was revealed that not unto themselves, but unto us, they did mini∣ster the things which are now reported unto you, &c. Besides, although they know not the secrets and holy things of God, yet some things are so plain that they cannot but know them, which God hath imparted indifferently to all. Thus when the Scribes of Esdras had written 204 books, the Highest spake thus unto him; The first that thou hast written, publish openly, that the worthy and unworthy may read; but keep the Seventy last, that thou mayest deliver them only to such as be wise among the peo∣ple: For in them is the Spring of understanding, the Fountain of wisdom, and the Light or stream of knowledge, 2 Esdras 14.45, 46, 47. If the Kohathites, men in their natural condition, stupidity, and dulness, yea, men under the Law, must not go in to see the holiness or holy things, then surely men under sin & dominion of fin, ought not to go in to see them. These are exclusissimi of all other most excluded. They are without the fold of Christ, and therefore not of his sheep; nor do they hear his voice, nor know him, John 10. who is the wisdom and holiness of holinesses, Dan. 9.24. They are not of the houshold of God, Ephes. 2. but without the house, where Christ
expounds mysteries to his Disciples, Mark 4.34. and 9.28. and 10.10. There is a wall round about Gods house to make a se paration between the Sanctuary and the prophane place, wherein they are who are without, Ezech. 42.20. They are without the City of God, aliens from the Common-wealth of Israel, strangers and foreiners, not fellow Citizens with the Saints, among whom God reveals his mysteries, Col. 1.26. They are without the kingdom of God, re∣bels unto Christ, such as will not that he should reign over them, or should be other then a Priest, and he such an one as they feign him to be, by whom they may imagine-away their sins; they will by no means admit him as a King who may bear rule, and reign over them. Now mysteries of State mysteries of a Kingdom are not revealed to Strangers, much less to Enemies and Rebels. Hence it appears, that there are degrees of holy things, as also of holy persons who may approach unto them, as also of the spiritual sight and knowledge of them. As for the holy things some were within the vail, and in the most holy, others were without the vail. Accordingly there are some great mysteries, as that of union with God, , a great mystery, Ephes. 5.32. These are called , Wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.8. we speak wisdom amongst them that are perfect; and Rev. 13.18. here is wisdom. Proportionably to these two kindes of holy things there were two degrees of holy persons. 1. The high Priest who alone might en∣ter into the most holy only once a year, Levit. 16.2. Hebrews 9.7. 2. The Priests of the second order might enter and approach and see the holy things without the vail. Accordingly there are degrees of holy persons: whereof some are yong and weak,Hebr. 5. ver. 13. and of little understanding , unskilful, or rather, according to the margent, having no experience in the word of righteousness, for they are babes. Un∣to which are opposed perfect men, in the next words, Hebr. 5.13, 14. the perfect men,1 Cor. 2. ver. 6. among whom the Apostle spake wisdom; or rather, he spake the wisdom, that is , in perfect men, 1 Cor. 2.6. Yet there rests one main doubt. For whereas the holy things are here said to be covered and hid from men in their animalish condition, and from those under the law, and yet much more from wicked men, who, of all other, are  and exclusissimi most of all excluded from the sight of the holy things; yet we read of many wicked men, false Prophets, false Apostles and o∣thers, who have seen far into the secret things of God, to whom many Mysteries have been revealed: And many such Seers and pre∣tending Saints there are at this day, Qui curios simulant & Baccha∣nalia vivunt.
It is very true. Yet we must understand a difference of reve∣lations, and men to whom they are revealed. For revelations be∣ing proportioned unto the diverse receptivities and apprehensi∣ons of men; whereof some are fitted unto sense, others to the understanding, others above the natural reach of both: men of ordinary capacity, who busie not themselves much with divine truth, may attain unto the first kinde; of which sort was Pha∣raohs, and Nebuchadnezzars dreams. But the second sort re∣quires a more sublime and subtil understanding which also hath a genius of divining in it. And into such understandings some di∣vine truths may glide, as a sound into the ear, or a light into the eye, without our choosing either to see or hear. And such were Balaams visions and revelations concerning Christ. He heard the words of God, and saw the visions of the Almighty, having his eyes open, Numb. 24.4. Both these may befal all men alike with∣out difference of good and bad, since revelation abstractly taken is terminated upon the apprehensive faculties, and respects pre∣cisely the sense, imagination, and understanding, according to none of which, a man is said to be morally good or bad, but according to the will and charity the best habit of it. So that it cannot be de∣nied, but that the sense, fansie, and understanding of flesh and blood may know and pry far and reveal much of divine truth; yea, see farther then some others who are spiritually minded. Thus Cai∣phas saw it was necessary, that Christ should die, which S. Peter himself saw not. Yet are these said not to know them nor reveal them; because neither extensively according to the latitude of the object, nor intensively according to the due and thorow perfection of the act. 1. Not extensively, because there is yet a vail and covering up∣on the object which they see: so that albeit they see far into di∣vine matters, yet not unto the end of the things they see, faith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.13. their sight is bounded with a shadow, Col. 2.18. So that seeing they see not; somewhat they see, that's true, yet they see not the utmost truth of what they see. For who more skilful in the letter of Moses's Law, then the Scribes and Pharisees were? yet they believed not in Moses Law, saith our Saviour, and proves it, because they believed not in him who is the and of the Law. They desire to be teachers of the law, saith the Apostle, under∣standing not what they say, nor whereof they affirm, 1 Tim. 1.7. 2. And as they fail in extent of the object, so in the intensiveness of the act. For there must be not only Urim, but Thummim also in the breast-plate: not illumination only, but integrity of life al∣so in him who truly knowes and reveals divine truth; and there∣fore knowledge in the Scripture notion, is then through and per∣fect, when it is terminated upon the heart; and revelation is then through and perfect, when it proceeds from the heart. Ac∣cording
to that true rule; That the heart is the term of all actions from without, and the fountain of all actions from within, whether they be words or deeds. Thus the true knowledge and wisdom which is the ground of revelation, is affective and experimental and effective. Whence it is that knowledge and wisdom, and their con∣traries are ascribed unto the heart the seat of the affections. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and men are said to be wise hearted, or contrarily to have their foolish heart darkned; and out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. Accord∣ing to this notion of knowledge, the Lord speaks to Jehoiakim; did not the father do judgement and justice, and judge the cause of the poor and needy, and then it was well with him? And was not this to know me, saith the Lord? Jer. 22.15, 16. Such is not the knowledge and revelation of flesh and blood: its not affective not experimental; they have no part of what they know; but as Cooks they dress meat for others palates; or as Leaden Pipes they con∣vey and derive the water of life thorow them to others, but drink not of it. So Poasts and Curriers carry mysteries of State, but are not privy to them: and as the Kohathites bare the secret holy things, yet saw them not. Hence it is, that, though the Scribes were the most learned of the Jews, yet when they rejected and diso∣beyed the word of the Lord, and would not be taught to the king∣dom of God, the Pen of the Scribes was vain, and there was no wis∣dom in them, saith the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 8.9. Yea, though what they said was true, yet as they said it, it was not true. For though they say, the Lord liveth, they swear falsly saith the same Prophet, Jer. 5.1, 2. And therefore our Saviour silenced the De∣vil when he revealed him. And the reason is, He that names the Lord Jesus Christ must depart from iniquity. For no man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but from the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. Thus did S. John: That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life: That which we have seen and beard, declare we unto you. Since therefore what speculative knowledge of divine mysteries wicked men have, doth not make them good, since their sight and dis∣covery of them, extendeth not unto the true end, nor proceeds from the true beginning, they may be truly said to know and not to know, to see and not to see, to hear and not to hear; which in Gods true estimate is not at all to hear, see, or know them. The Koha∣thites bare those holy things which they must neither touch nor see. Is not this the condition of many at this day, who, as S. Paul saith, desire to be teachers of the Law, and understand not what they say, nor whereof they affirm? 1 Tim. 1.7. Nay, do not many teach the Gospel, and preach Christ born, crucified, dead, buried, risen, ascending into heaven, &c. yet understand no more then the
bare letter of all these articles of faith? what understand they more of Christ, then the dull Kobathites did, of the holy things which they carried, yet neither toucht nor saw them? For what else is the letter covering the spirit to these, then the many cove∣rings of the holy things to the Kohathites? They have no spiritual, no tactual, no experimental knowledge of the things they speak of. The spiritual, the tactual, the experimental knowledge is that whereof S. John speaks of himself and his fellow Apostles, they had heard and seen and handled of the word of life, 1 John 1.1. How shall we come to see and know the boliness and holy things of our God? Surely this comes not to pass by any , any sagacity or curious inquisition of our own. We cannot know the holiness and holy things, unless the holy one himself teach them, and reveal them to us. And this he will do in his due time if we do not hoodwink our selves with the black vailes on our mindes and hearts. For since there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, nor hid that shall not be made known; surely it is not the will of God that his holiness of holinesses should alwayes be concealed; nor from all men; since the Priests saw them. And so shall we, if we be Priests unto our God; if we sore not up too high; if we intrude not hastily into the things that we have not seen; if we exercise not our selves in things that are too high for us; if we behave our selves and quiet our souls as children weaned from their mothers womb, Psal. 131.1, 2. If we climb not up into Gods house some other way, but can be very well content to enter in by the door, and sit down in the lowest room. For every Teacher of Mysteries, how much more the great My∣stagogus, the great dispenser of his secrets, he requires belief and hu∣mility in all those whom he teacheth: Oportet discentem credere, the Disciple must believe, and humble himself to be taught. For so all the , all who have been taught of God, have abased themselves and humbled themselves before him. Esay 6.5. Wo is me, for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, &c. This humiliation made way for his purging and illumination, which follow in that Chapter. Thus Daniel was prepared for his Vision, Dan. 10.2. In those dayes I ate no pleasant bread, &c. And Saul must be first cast down and humbled, and then directed to Ananias, that is, as Johannes, the grace of God, and then immediately taught of God. For with the lowly there is wisdom, Prov. 11.2.Psal. 119. ver. 141. And therefore what we read, Psal. 119.141. I am small and despica∣ble, yet do I not forget thy lawes; [yet] is a most absurd and de∣structive supplement. The words sound thus, I being little and de∣spised have not forgotten thy precepts. Littleness and despicable∣ness are no repugnancy to the learning of Gods lawes. That note of diversity without doubt were far better left out; and if any sup∣plement
be needful (the words make a good sense without any) a rational and illative were more fitly put in the room of it. I am small and of no reputation, therefore do I not forget thy precepts. So our Lord saith to his Father, Matth. 11.25. Thou hast hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes, humble ones and little ones. Such as these God the Father teacheth. The Prophet Esay 30.20. speaks thus to the Church, , thy Teachers shall not be far from thee; but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers. The word is in the form plural, but rendred most what in the singular, noting the Unity in Trinity. But that it is to be understood of God the great Teacher, the next words prove, Thine ears shall hear a word behinde thee, &c. So God the Father speaks to his Disciples, Esay 8.16. Seal the Law among my Disciples; whom he brings brings up under the pedagogy of the Law, which is God the Fa∣thers Law, Psal. 40.8. Herewith he corrects us and instructs us, Psal. 94.12. Hereby he makes us partakers of his holiness; here∣by he reveals Christ unto us, Gal. 3. For the Law is the Schoolma∣ster unto Christ, who is the holy of holyes, the holiness of holinesses, Dan. 9.24. And he is our other Teacher, our Master even Christ. And what does our Master Christ teach us? 1. Self-denial, and 2. Taking up the Cross daily, Luke 9.23. 1. There are abridge∣ments of three selfs in man since the fall; one whereby he agrees with the beast, and lives according to the principles of bruitish man. Another whereby he becomes one with the old Serpent, cal∣led the Devil and Satan, who deceives all the world with false principles of corrupt reason, Revel. 12. A third, whereby man stands conformable unto God and the heavenly man, 1 Cor. 15. And this is the man and all the man,Ecces. 12. ver. 13. Eccles. 12.13. Fear God and keep his Commandements; for this is  all the man; what ever else is in man contrary unto this, its either the beast or the Devil. 2. His second precept is taking up the Cross, even the Christian patience which S. John cals the patience of Jesus Christ, Revel. 1.9. The yoke of Christ, Matth. 11. the narrow way of mortification. Walk in this way, bear his yoke, his Cross, his patience, and fol∣low him through his death in humility, meekness, faith, and obe∣dience. But how shall I obey unless I know? Hast thou not been in∣structed out of the Fathers law? Thou art not, (its impossible thou shouldst be) without all knowledge. Obey therefore what thou knowest. To him who hath not yet denyed the brutish life, the Scripture saith, be sober. Let not your heart be overchar∣ged with surfeting and drunkenness and the cares of this life, Luke 21.34. Obey that which the very beast obeyes. Neglect not the meanest precept. Whatsoever he bids you do, that do. Fill the
water-tots with water; if thou hold that, he will turn it into wine. To him that hath, shall more be given. Depart from all known iniquity. Believe every Precept every Commandement. Adde to that faith, vertue, prowess, and courage; and then fol∣lowes knowledge, 2 Pet. 1. Such self-denyers, such Cross-bearers who persevere in so doing, are the true Disciples of Christ, whom they follow into his death; and by conformity unto his death, he destroyes, he swal∣lowes up (the word  is used Esay 25.7.) he devoures in all such,Esay 25. ver. 7. the vail vailed and the covering covered: And swallowes up death in victory. And thus we understand Simons speech touchiing our Sa∣viour,Luke 12. ver. 32. Luke 2.32. Where he cals him, , Lumen ad revelationem Gentium, so Hierom turns those words; and so they sound in the Syriac interpreter, A light for the reveal∣ing, uncovering, & taking the vailes from off the nations, where∣by Christ who is  the brightness or off-shining of his Fathers glory,Hebr. 1. ver. 3. he is also the glory or great light (so glory signifies, 1 Cor. 15.40, 41. and elsewhere) of his people Is∣rael. And blessed be God the Father of lights and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he hath revealed the brightness of his glory, whereby the thick darkness and black vails begin to be discovered and taken off all nations, and the scales of false notions and mis-un∣derstandings begin to fall from the eyes of men. But let us come to the third and last particular. 3. They shall not go-in to see when the holiness or holy things are covered, lest they die. As if it were a speech like that Genesis 3.3. , ne fortè, lest ye die. But the text is word for word, according to the Hebrew; They shall not go in to see when the holy∣ness or holy things are covered,  and die; which words import what would be the issue and event of the Kobathites bold intrusi∣on and curiosity, if they should go in and see them.Psal. 143. ver. 7. So they ren∣der Psal. 143.7. Hide not thy face from me, lest. I be like to them (or, as in the margent, For I am become like to them) that go down into the pit. The word is  and I am like; and both may be a good paraphrase. Yet the Chald, Par. in both places followes the Hebrew, so doth the LXX, and Hierom, and Pagnin. This menace and threatning was really fulfilled upon the Beth-shemites, 1 Sam. 6.19. This comes to pass by the pride and curious searching of the earthly man, of which the Apostle speaks, Col. 1.18. They intrude into the things which they have not seen vainly puffed up by their fleshly minde. And therefore Hierom turns the words, Alii nul∣lâ curiositate videant quae sunt in Sanctuario; let others with no curi∣osity see the things which are in the Sanctuary. This proceeds also from the vast disproportion between the most holy God his holi∣ness of holinesses and the natural man; much more the sinful man.
Would we see the most holy God, and his holiness of holinesses? Nor he, nor they can be seen by other then they who are like him. That's the main end of the true religion to be like unto our God; But wherein? even in holiness and righteousness. We cannot other∣wise see the most holy God and his holiness in our selves; as the eye cannot see the Sun unless it be soliformis, in some sort like the Sun, and have its image in it. God is light and life; and such is the mystery of God. And therefore to the seeing of God and the things of God, there is required the light and life of God: In thy light shall we see light. The mystery of Christ the new man the ho∣liness of holinesses cannot be known but by a renewed minde, a minde renewed in knowledge according to the image of him that created him, Col. 3.10. which the genuine Disciples of Christ have, 1 Cor. 2.16. No man can otherwise judge of spiritual things, un∣less he be spiritually minded. Our God is most pure and holy; and therefore only the pure in heart can see God. For whereas holiness is separatio ab aliquo & applicatio ad aliquid, the first part of it, is se∣paration from all uncleanness of flesh and spirit. Which done, the second takes place, applies us and dedicates us unto God. Thus when the sinful life is deaded and mortified, we then see our God. For no man can see God and live his own sinful life, Exod. 33. There is a death necessarily preceding the sight of the most holy God & his most holy things. This that is precious death of the Saints in Gods sight, Psal. 116.15. This is that death wherein the righteous hath hope, Prov. 14.32. And his hope is crowned with the beatifical vision; as at the death of Christ the vail of the Temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, Matth. 27.51. so that the holy of holies appeard? And when Christ, who is our life shall ap∣pear, then shall we also appear with him in glory, Col. 3.4. Then shall all vailes be removed: And the Spirit which searcheth all things, even the hidden things of God, shall teach us all things, and lead us into all truth. For which let us pray, that God of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of glory, may give unto us the Spi∣rit of wisdom & revelation in the acknowledgement of him, the eyes of your heart being enlightned to know what is the hope of his cal∣ling,Ephes. 1. ver. 17, 18 and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints. To him be glory and honour and thanksgiving now and for evermore. Amen.
When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit or do a trespass against the Lord, and that person be guilty,Numb. 5. Ver. 6, 7. then they shall confess their sin that they have done, and he shall recompense his tres∣pass with the principal thereof, and adde unto it the fifth part there∣of, and give it unto him against whom he hath trespassed. But if the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespass unto, let the trespass be re∣compensed unto the Lord, even to the Priest.] Ye may perceive, it was not without cause, that I shewed that the word  which is so often by our Translators turnd to number, does not in the for∣mer Chapter of this book properly so signifie, but to muster, and view, and visit the Lords army, in order to their encamping, and marching toward the land of Canaan. For having so done in the four first Chapters, in this Chapter the Lord gives order for the purging and cleansing of the Camp, as from bodily pollution; and so every Leper, & every one who hath an issue, must be put out of the Camp; and the pollution of the soul, which is either ceremo∣nial; as whosoever is defiled by the dead, as by touching or ha∣ving communion with dead works, ver. 2. or moral, and such is that in the words before us. Wherein we have 1. A supposition of sin committed, and guilt contracted by it: When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit, &c. 2. An imposition of a penalty for his sin. Or, a dire∣ction how he should expiate his sin, which is to be done by Con∣fession, and Restitution. He shall recompense his trespass with the principal and addition of the filth part unto the person damni∣fied. But put case that the person who hath suffered damage, yea, and his Kinsman be dead, what is in that case to be done? Let the trespass be recompensed unto the Lord, even the Priest. The supposition I read thus, word for word out of the He∣brew; A man or woman if they commit of all the sins of man to trespass a trespas against the Lord, then that soul shall be guilty. Wherein are contained these divine sentences. 1. It is possible that a man or woman may commit one or o∣ther of all the sins of man. 2. That they may commit some sin of all the sins of man, to tres∣pass a trespass against the Lord. 3. The soul that so doth, shall be guilty. 1. A man or woman may commit some of all the sins of man. So the Hebrew, so the Chal. Par. and the LXX to a word, . So Pagnin, Si secerint ex omnibus peccatis hominis. 1. A man or woman. It is the observation of Abenezra, and of divers out of him, that  the man, and  the woman, have in them  and , both which make up the name of , the name of the Lord; so long as man and woman, husband and
wife have in them the name of the Lord, so that they fear God and love one another, so long the Lord is with them, and helps them; but if they forget the Lord, and hate one another, that name  is lost, and there then remains only , fire, fire; the fire of contention and debate between them (such as often proceeds from jea∣lousie, as in the latter part of this fifth Chapter,) and the fire of Gods wrathful indignation upon them. 2. What are all these sins of man or men? there are divers kinds, divers sorts of injuries, a multitude of sins implyed in these words , of all the sins of man, or men; such as men are wont to commit one against another. Which we may re∣duce to two heads, violence and deceit, which is more properly understood by the word , which does not only signifie praevaricari praevaricationem, to prevaricate and deal unfaithfully, but to steal, filch, minm, purloin, cheat, cousin, circumvent, go beyond a man, over-reach him, &c. This is called  from  which signifies to raise up or lift up, as also the contrary, to cast down; which suits well with the nature of deceit and fraud. For he who deceives another, he either directly or indirectly raiseth up the party deceived to an hope and confidence in him who is now about to deceive him; and having wound up his hope and expectation of some good, he foully frustrates him, and casts him into a mischief which he feared not. So that in deceit there are commonly these two things. 1. , deprivating and frustrating of the thing we hoped for; and , an evil, a mischief, a damage which we feared not. The possibility of this, is understood by the particle when or if. It needs no proof when the acts themselves appear. For, that a thing is possible, does not prove the thing to be. A potentia ad actum non valet consequentia. But if a thing be, certainly it is pos∣sible to be. Ab actu ad potentiam valet consequentia. That it is pos∣sible to commit some or other of all the sins of men, appears by the manifold examples, Rom. 1.28.—32. And such as S. Paul prophe∣sied of, 2 Tim. 3.1.—5. And would God that the examples of these sins did not so abound among us to prove the possibility! Let us inquire into the reason of this, why men are so fraudu∣dulent and deceitful, so violent and mischievous one to another, so full of cheating, theft, and rapine. Truly we must refer the reason of this to the principles of Atheism, Ephes. 2.12. without God in the world; or, which is next unto it, Epicureism excluding divine pro∣vidence from this lower world, Ezech. 8.8. and 9.9. when they think that the Lord hath forsaken the earth. Or, which is near to that, Saduceism, denying rewards and punishments after a well or ill lead life. Or, which borders upon that, corrupt principles of false Christianity; That the duties of the Moral Law belong not unto them who are in Christ; as they fansie themselves to be. That
God will see no sin in them. That all things indeed are theirs; and that they who are thought to be the true owners of them, are but intruders and usurpers. That sin is unavoidable, and that it is impossible to cease from sin, though by the power of God; yea, by the greatest power that can be given to man in this life. That solemn agreements and covenants be∣tween man and man, are but covenants of works: That we must not hope to be justified by our own works; though they proceed from the spirit of God, but by faith in Christ; That he has been just, for us, and done all things that we are commanded to do, 1600 years ago, and has suffered the punishment due to us for our not doing them. That the very best works we do, are sins. That cheating, cousening, deceiving, circumventing, fraudulent dealing, overreaching, of all the sins that men commit, the very worst of them are but infirmities in the Saints, what ever they are in other men. From these corrupt principles, and such as these, men work, and for one end men work to be rich in this world; and by the abuse of these riches, to take their ease in their old age, eat, drink and be merry; as our Lord discovers the rich mans rea∣soning, Luke 12.19. So violent men argue, Prov. 1.11, 12, 13. Wisd. 2. In like manner the deceived heart is inticed by hope of stoln waters, Prov. 9.17. and bread of deceit, Prov. 20.17. So that the true reason of all deceit and violence and wrongful dealing among men who pretend religion, is corruption of doctrine, and, may be referred to it directly and demonstratively, as to the proper source and Fountain of it, Esay 30.10. They say to the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets prophesie not right things: speak unto us smooth things, prophesie deceits, Jer. 5. the last ver. The Prophets prophesie lies, &c. and the people love to have it so. But who sets the false Prophets a work? who but the Abaddon and Apollyon, the destroyer, the author of violence and wrong? who but the same subtil Serpent who deceives all the world? Revel. 12.9. who is called in the Syriac , The Deceiver. What therefore our Philosophers commonly ascribe to habits contracted by frequent actions either good or evil, are indeed to be referred to the good or evil spirit. As the Apostle saith of the good spirit, all these things, saith he, worketh that one and the self-same spirit, 1 Cor. 12.11. So on the contrary, all these evil things worketh the evil spirit, which fils men with all unrighteousness, deceit, and violence, Rom. 1.29. And because the universal and first cause cannot be idle, we shall finde him giving those up to a reprobate minde,Rom. 1.28. who refuse to retain God  in their experimental knowledge, ver. 28. O that men and women (the Lord here speaks of both,) could or rather would yield to be disswaded from their gainful sins! This Scripture reacheth all, as well on the military profession as the civil
state, as well the Souldier as the Citizen. The words are  of all the sins of man, especially those sins of injury and wrong done one to another for gain and advantage sake, whether by violence or deceit. John Baptist saith to the Souldier, do violence to no man; accuse no man falsly, and be content with your wages. S. Paul saith to the Citizen especially, let no man go beyond and defraud his brother, 1 Thess. 4.6. Vend not false wares. Put not Quid pro quo. Set not forth the refuse for good, Amos 8.6. Set not your clothes nor your consciences too much upon the tainters. Do not fal∣sifie the ballance by deceit. Use no false weights, false measures, false balances, false coynes, false lights. Get not your treasures by a lying tongue, Prov. 21.6. Officers! use no false accusation, forged cavillation, Luke 19.8. Exact not undue fees. Do not falsifie your trust. Work-masters! Grinde not the faces of your poor workmen, whose la∣bour is your gain. Delay not, detain not, defalcat not his due. Pay him clear off. Keep him not obnoxious to thy work and ser∣vice, by withholding part of what thou owest him. Covet not, thirst not after a long mornings-draught, out of his dear earnings, out of the swet of his wife, children, & servants, who want that for their necessary support which thou causest thy workman waste∣fully to spend at the Tavern, Alehouse, or Gaminghouse. These are crying sins which enter into the ears of the Lord of hosts, James 5.4. who is the avenger of all such, 1 Thess. 4.6. These are some of all the sins of man. Some of our Cities sins. O that we considered aright, how contrary these things are, not only to our Christian presession, as hath been shewen, but also to the very light of nature! Would it not shame us to hear this out of the mouth of an Heathen man, as he is accounted? Detrahere aliquid alteri, &  hominis incommodo, suum au∣gere , inag  mors, quam paupertas, quàm delo; quàm caetera quae possunt at  accidere aut rebus ex∣ternis. To take some what from another, and one man to increase his own profit by the disprofit of another, its more against na∣ture then death, then poverty, then grief, then what ever else can befal the body or outward estate. So Tully, and much more to the same offect. 2.  possible, that a man or woman may commit some one or other of all the sins of man, to trespass a trespass against the Lord. This expression [to trespass a trespass] ought not to seem strange unto us, that the Nown of the same Verb is repeated with it; as gaudere gaudium, pgnare pugnam, vevere votum, militare militiam, which the N. Test. hath made familiar, as to war a good war∣sure, 1 Tim. 1.18. to fight a good fight, 2 Tim. 4.7. What some say, that the sin committed against man, is here said to be com∣mitted against the Lord in regard of his denial or oath, Levit. 6.2, 3. It hath some truth in it: But in other sinnes against men,
where no denyal or oath is interposed, the sin yet is said to be committed against the Lord, as Gen. 38.7, 8. and 39.9. Sins com∣mitted against men, are committed also against God, 1 Cor. 8.12. The 2 Tables of the Commandments are said to contain laws teaching our duties toward God and toward our neighbour. Which is not so to be understood as if the soure first Commandments adequately contained our duty towards God, and the six last our du∣ties toward men. For without doubt the six last contain our du∣ty towards God also; and forbid the breach of it. Our heavenly Father is to be honoured, according to the fifth Commandment. And spiritual murder, as by Crucifying Christ in us, is forbidden by the sixth Commandment. And by the seventh is forbidden spiri∣tual whordome against God, as well as corporal against our neighbour. So that we see reason why it is said, that the Tables were written on both their sides, Exod. 32.15. But does any man commit any in on purpose to trespass a tres∣pass against the Lord? The words sound so,  to trepass a trespass; and so our Translators turn the words. I so the words be to be understood, every sin committed a∣gainst our brother, should be a sin with an high hand, as intended against God himselfe. We must know therefore that there is a twofold end: 1. finis agentis, and 2. finis rei, the end whereat he aimes who doth any thing, as he who doth injury to his neighbour, he aimes at the in∣crease of his own wealth. 2. The finis rei or the end whereunto the deed it selfe done tends, is quite another thing than that the sinner aimes at, as the breach of Gods law, provoking His wrath, &c. Let us consider some examples of this kinde. Esay 3.8. Their tongue and their doings are against the Lord to provoke the eyes of His glory. Ier. 25.7. Ye have not hearkened to me faith the Lord, that ye might provoke me to anger with the works of your hands. It is not probable, that the people, though a sinfull people, had any such aime, or intended any such thing, as to provoke the Lord. That of all other were a most foolish and impious enterprise. Doe we provoke the Lord, saith the Apostle, are we stronger than He? 1 Cor. 10.22. Surely they did not intend to provoke the Lord to wrath; they had no such end, no more than they intended to doe themselves hurt: Yet they did those things which tended to provoste the Lord to wrath, and in the effect tended to their own hurt. Mark how the Lord reasons, Jerem. 25.6. Provoke me not to anger with the works of your hands, and I will doe you no hurt. Yet ye have not hearkened unto me, saith the Lord, to provoke me to anger with the works of your hands, to your own hurt. No doubt they intended not to provoke the Lord to anger; they intended not to them∣selves
hurt. Yet the finis rei, the end that their sin aimed at, was to provoke the Lord to anger, and to doe themselves hurt. Observe how the Lord prizes neighbourly-love and faithful-dealing of man with man. He accounts the breach of brotherly love by unjust dealing, as done unto himselfe. 3. Then the soule that so doth, shall be guilty. So I would read the words, as here to end the sentence. When a man or woman hath committed of all the sins of men, to trespass a trespass a∣gainst the Lord, then that soule shall be guilty. I shall shew reason for this anon. Meantime, I am not alone in the opinion. For here Munster ends the sentence; and Piscator, Martin Luther also, and two low Duch translations, the French Bible and the Italians. And of our old English, Tyndall, and Couerdall, and two others. That soule hath guilt upon it. And indeed how can it be otherwise? If we consider well what it is to sin 1. against man, and to sin 2. against God, and 3. to be guilty. 1. To sin against man, as directly or indirectly to rob him, deceive him, cheat him, goe beyond him, overreach him, is to break the society of men, which is contrary to nature; as you heard before from the voice of nature. And the same Author fully presses it, lib. 3. de Off. Si etiam hoc natura prescribit, ut homo homine quicunque sit, ob eam ipsam causam quòd is homo sit, consultum velit, necesie est, secundum eandem naturam, omnium utilitatem esse communm. If even nature prescribe this, that man be willing to provide for the good of man who ever he is, even because he is a man, its necessary, that, according to the same nature, the profit of all men be common. Whence by strong reason he infers, that they who deny that any regard is to be had of those among whom they live, but that, to encrease their own profit, they may rob or steal from others, Hi derivat communem humani generis societatem, They, saith he, break the common society of mankinde. So that he who commits any of all the sins of men, as he breaks, so he is broken off from humane society, and stands alone by himselfe, divi∣ded from all men. And that much more, that, by the same sin, he sin against God, as this Scripture speaks expresly. And the same voice of nature confirms it, as the same Author goes on. Quâ sublatâ, take away humane society, saith he, and bounty, liberality, goodness, justice is utterly taken away. Quae qui tollunt, etiam adversus Deos immortales impii judicandi sunt: Ab iis enim constitutam inter homines societatem evertunt. Thus, saith he, who take away these they are to be judged impious against the immortal God; For they overturn that society which is con∣stituted of God among men. So he. As therefore he who so sins against man, breaks himself off from mankind, and stands alone by himself; so he who by sinning against man, sins also against God, he breaks himself off from God; according to that of the Prophet,
Your sins have separated between you and your God. Esay 59.2. And I am broken by your whorish heart which hath departed from me, Ezek. 6.9. He who hath so sinned against God and man, and by so doing hath broken himself off from the society of both, he must be guilty. 3. What is it to bee guilty? The words here used are , then that soul shall be guilty. Which our Translators turn, that person shall be guilty. But surely  though of large signification, (as I shall shew ere it be long, if the Lord will) yet the first and principal signification of it, is the soul. And guiltiness is properly in the soul. So I render the words, that soul shall be guilty. What we call guilty, Tremellius here turns rea; but not so pro∣perly. for reos appello non eos modo qui argumentur, sed omnes quo∣rum de re disceptatur. I call them reos, not only who are repro∣ved, but those concerning whose business, question may be made, saith the Orator. And so a man may be called into question who is not guilty of any crime; as its said of Cato that noble Roman, that he was accused four and fourty times, but never found faulty. Who ever is so accused and questioned, and proves faultless, is pro∣bably an honester man, then he who was never accused. For he who has been accused has been searched and tryed; whereas he who was never questioned may have many faults though hidden. He who is here said to be guilty, having been tryed is culpable and faulty, and such as is called reus sons, that is nocens, a faulty person; For si bonus est insons, contrarias & malus est sons; Auson. So that Sons is an evil man, from  rebellious against God and man. Or from , odious, hateful to God and man, and to him∣self also. If we consider the original word  rendred here to be guilty; which from its affinity with  and  imports an horror and abominatiou as from blasting and as it were a lovely and desolate estate; such as needs must the guilty mans be, who is broken off from the society with God and man. So that to be so guilty, to be in fear and horrour, after commit∣ting some of all the sins of man, to trespass a trespass against the Lord, to be so guilty its a duty, an obligation that lies upon the sinner; as in the day of expiations the people are commanded to afflict their souls, Levit. 16.29. under penalty of being cut off, Levit. 23.29. And such a duty it is as the Lord expects, Hos. 5.15. I will go and return to my place until they acknowledge their offence.Hos. 5. Ʋe. 15. The words are  until they be guilty: Dones deficiant, as Pagnin turns the word, until they fail, faint, and quail in their courage, till fear and horrour overtake them; and so the words following sound. Until they be guilty and seek my face, in their affliction [or strait  unto them] they will seek me early.
Such a desolate state sin committed against God and man, the sinner, through mercy, is disposed unto, Lam. 3.28, 29, 30. He sits alone, and keeps silence, because he hath born (the yoke) upon him. He putteth his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope. He giveth his cheek to him that smiteth him, he is filled with reproach. Such an abased condition the Lord requires toward repen∣tance, remission of sin, and expiation of it, 2 Chron. 7.14. It my people upon whom my Name is called shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their evil wayes, then will I hear from heaven, &c. If we consider this well what it is to be guilty, and how it fol∣lows upon sin committed against God and man, we cannot but won∣der at an impudent and daring generation, who have on their souls an heavie load of guilt, yet beat it lightly, at least with pre∣tence of much innocency. Spem vultu simulat, premit alo corde dolorem. Confident in face, but full sad in heart. Nil conscire sibi, nullâ pallescere culpâ. Own's no guilt to himself, appall'd at no fault. Yea, with great boldness they intrude into the Congregation of Saints, as if they were of their communion. The Lord himself seems to marvel at the peoples impudence, Jer. 7.8, 9, 10.Jer. 7. ver. 8, 9, 10. Behold ye trust in lying words that cannot profit. Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery and swear falsly, and come and stand before me in this house which is called by my Name, and say, we are delivered to do all those abominati∣ons? as if they should say, we come into the Temple to thank God for the success of our sins, or to pray for help to do them; or we are free'd or redeem'd [] to commit these abomi∣nations. And truly its wonderful, that the just God shewes not some notable example upon such hypocrites. He hath so done, as ap∣pears by what the Wiseman speaks, Ecclus. 1.29, 30. Be not an hypocrite in the sight of men; and take good heed to what thou speakest. Exalt not thy self lest thou fall, and bring dishonour upon thy soul, and so God discover thy secrets, and cast thee down in the midst of the Congregation; because thou camest not in truth to the fear of the Lord, but thy heart is full of deceit. Hence it followes, that the man hath in himself , a Judicatory, a Tribunal where he judges, or may judge himself, 1 Cor. 11. Judge your selves, &c. accuse or condemn himself, Rom. 2. According to wch a man is said to be worsted in his cause, 1 Cor. 6.7. This is utterly ,1 Cor. 6. ver. 7. a fault among you that ye go to law one with another; it is a worsting as when a man does causa ca∣dere lose his suit. According to which, a man is
self-judged and condemned, Tit. 3.11. according to which, a man being self-judged, self-worsted, self-condemned, he is also , a self-tormentor; yea too often , a self-executioner. Take notice hence how partial men are unto themselves; they will not own their own guilt. Achan took, Josh. 7. And Micha took, Judg. 17.2. Neither of them stole. And the Civil Law calls stoln goods, Res amotae, things put out of their place. The figures Euphemismus and Charientismus, whereby graceful names are put upon dishonest and soul actions, are of notable uss in these evil dayes. Which may discover the egregious folly of many vain men who go about to silence the clamour of their guilty consci∣ence, with a noyse of Musitians. Alas! to what purpose are the Minstrels, when the Damsel is dead? Matth. 9.23. Or who put themselves into merry company of some Buffoons who may jeast away their sorrow. Or else they get them among their associ∣ates and carnal friends, perhaps as deep in guilt as themselves; and there they hope to drive away their guilt with a Club, or play it away at Cards or Dice. Or else they get into the countrey, and hope to run away from their pursuing guilt. But evil hunts the wicked man to overthrow him, Psal. 140.11. —haeret lateri lethalis arundo. Alas! These and such shifts as these, are but like the skinning over of a festred wound: It will break out again. And when men have used all their arts and policies to hide themselves from their guilt, their sin will at length finde them out. Mystice. We read Verse 5. that the Lord spake unto Moses. This form of words so often iterated, are not vainly to be neglected, like Homers : nor to be understood onely according to the dulness and incapableness of the hearer, but ac∣cording to the Majesty of him who so speaks. For the Lord Je∣sus tels us, that God is a Spirit, John 4.24. And the Apostle, The Lord is a Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.17. And therefore what he speaks, must be spiritually understood. Yea it is not only spiritual, but even Spirit it self. The Lord Jesus, John 6. when he had in mystical words delivered at large the secret of his body and blood; some who were fleshly minded, said, How can this man give us his flesh to eat. My words, saith our Lord, are spirit, and they are life. And, whereas the words before us are a part of the Moral Law, and belong to the eighth Commandement, Thou shalt not steal, Exod. 20. S. Paul tels us, that the Law is spiritual, Rom. 7.14. and therefore it hath a spiritual understanding. These words therefore have their mystical meaning hinted in divers parts of the text, both in the supposition of the crime and guilt, and in the imposition of penalty, expiation of the trespass, and reconciliation of the trespassers. Any of all the sins of man com∣mitted,
involves and implyes the trespassing a trespass against the Lord. Wherein this trespass consists, will appear if we compare the parallel Scripture, Levit. 6.2, 3. If a soul sin, and trespass a trespass against the Lord,Levit. 6. ver. 23. and lie unto his neighbour in that which was delivered to him to keep, &c. This supposition seemed strange to one of the most pious and learned Fathers, That there should be any soul found guilty of these, or any such crimes among the people of God. Absit hoc ab Ecclesia Dei: and again, Absit, absit, inquam, ut haec ego de aliquo fidelium sentiam. Far be it, far be it, I say, that I should believe these things to be spo∣ken of the Church of God. Yea, saith he, I dare confidently af∣firm of you, that ye have not so learned Christ; (would God I could as truly say the same of the present Church of Christ!) Wherefore since those enormities concern'd not the Church of Christ according to the letter, that holy Father applyed that law spiritually to the Church. And let us inquire what is the De∣positum, that which is delivered to be kept. Surely the Lord hath delivered unto every one of us a depositum; somewhat he has committed to every one of our charge to be kept, even our pretious soul and body, and the image of our God imprinted in it, and stampt upon it, as his coyn, his money, to be imployed to our Ma∣sters use. Most certain it is, thou hast received this thy Lords money, the image and superscription of thy God, without blemish, no way adulterate, not at all abased. For nothing can proceed from the most holy God which is not holy. This image, this depositum, this pledge must be restored unto thy God, intire in specie; there is no recompense to be made in va∣lue for it, it self must be restored unto God. If therefore thou be holy as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1.15. If pure as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. If perfect as he is perfect, Matth. 5. If merciful as he is merciful, thou bearest his image, the image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.49. These, all these are in thy God by nature; and all these are in his image, which is to be imitated and drawn out in thee, and restor'd in∣tirely to him, as thou receivedst them. If these be in thee, happy, thrice happy thou! This was that pledge which S. Paul gave Ti∣mothy a charge to keep, 2 Tim. 1.14. O Timothy! that good thing committed to thee keep by the holy Ghost which dwelleth in us. But if now we have imbezill'd our Lords money, if we have been unholy and prophane, if impure and unclean, if unmerciful and cruel, if we deride, as many do, the perfect life, and jeer it out of the Church as an impossible thing, thou hast wasted thy Lords money, thou hast spent thy fathers substance, thou hast defaced the image of thy God, thou hast adulterated his coin; and thus thou hast lyed and denied that good thing committed to thy charge, and hast the Devils image minted and imprinted on thy soul.
2. We read of fraudulent dealing in fellowship, Lev. 6.2. What fellowship, what partnership is this? Does not the Apostle say, If there be any fellowship of the spirit? Phil. 2.1. This fellowship of the spirit cannot be without fellowship with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, which S. John and his fellow Apostles had, 1 John 1.3. And S. Peter, we are made partakers, saith he, of the Divine Na∣ture having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4. Since therefore so blessed a fellowship is vouchsafed unto us, e∣ven a fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and with the holy Spirit, if we be partakers of the Divine Nature, O how careful, how watchful ought we to be, lest, by our unfaith∣fulness we deny that blessed society! It is denied in works, not in words only, Tit. 1.16. For what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? what communion hath light with dark∣ness? 3. The Lord discovers another trespass;Levit. 6. ver. 2. taking away a thing by violence, or, by putting of the hand, as in the marg. If we ren∣der that place word for word, it sounds thus, If a soul sin and tres∣pass a trespass against the Lord in putting of the hand, or in rapine, or hath oppressed his neighbour by violence or fraud. For  sig∣nifies both. 1. To over-power one by forg'd cavillation, Jer. 7.6. Mich. 2.2. 2. To deceive and circumvent, by fraud, Mal. 3.5. Where the Translators put oppress in the Text, and defraud in the Margent, (as they might have done here,) implying that the word hath both significations. Where they quite leave out  which signifies to take away by open violence. For what they turn [taking away by violence,] they otherwise render in the margent, [putting of the hand.] What they adde, or hath deceived, answers to , as hath been shewen; so that  or by rapine is quite left out, and not translated. By [putting of the hand] may be implyed imming and pilfering and such like close theeving; where by a kinde of Legrer de main, men steal the word one from another; whereof the Prophet speaks, Ver. 23.30. By rapine is understood open force and violence, whereby men forcibly take to themselves all the promises of God, which belong not unto them; and thereby lay violent hands upon the kingdom of God, before John Baptists day dawns unto them, Mat. 11.13. Of both these the Prophet speaks, Hos. 7.1. The thief comes in and the troop of robbers spoyleth without. And our Lord, He that entreth not by the door (even the death and life of Christ) into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber, John 10.1. Where the old English Manuscript renders  and , a night-thief and a day-thief.
Hitherto we have had the supposition of a crime, and the guilt of it. Come we now to the Lords imposition of a penalty, and the means of expiation of the sin, and reconciliation with the parties wronged, which are literally in this order, man, and God himself; and accordingly he ordains the means. The penalty and means of reconciliation unto man is two fold, Confession, and Restitation. Confession is here injoyned by  a Verb in the reciprocal form; then they shall confess themselves; which is an inward and reflex confession of the heart. Confitebuntur se; so Pagnin renders the word: but then it followes ; which I know not well how to make English of, unless as he renders the word, super peccato suo, concerning their sin. But [Super, concerning] is here added to the Text: and particle  imports the case following. I shall therefore understand and suppose the inward and reflex acknowledgement of sin, and render the words as ours do, They shall confess their sin. What sin is here meant, appears out of the former verse. As for confession, the Schoolmen following S. Austin, have distingui∣shed it into confessio Laudis. Fraudis. Confessio laudis, Confession of praise is to the honour of God: Con∣fess or praise the Lord; for he is good, Psal. 106.1. Confessio frau∣dis confession of fraud is to the dishonour and shame of our selves, that we have suffered our selves to be beguiled with the deceitfulness of sin. Such a confession the Apostle makes, Tit. 3.3. we our selves have been sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving di∣vers lusts and pleasures. This we may call a reflex confession; there is also a direct confession which will follow upon this, Con∣fessio fraudis a confession, that we having been deceived our selvs, have also deceived others. And this confession supposes the other; For no man deceives another, but first he is fouly deceived himself. Hitherto we have had the first means of expiation and reconci∣liation, viz. Confession. Come we now to the second, viz. Restitu∣tion, in the words following. And he shall recompense his tres∣pass with the principal thereof, and adde unto it the fifth part there∣of, and give it unto him, against whom he hath trespassed.] Which words I would rather, for more exact answer to the Hebrew, thus render. And he shall restore his trespass in the head-sum thereof, and shall adde over and above it, the fifth part thereof, and shall give to him against whom he hath trespassed. For although to recompense and restore seem to be the same, yet they indeed are not so. For to restore is properly applyed to the same thing filched and stoln; as Micha  restored in specie the eleven hundred shekels of silver, Judges 17.3. But to recompense, is more properly understood of the price or value of the thing taken
stoln; whereas no doubt but the Lord here requires the thing it self to be restored, as it evidently appears by comparing the pa∣rallel place herewith, Levit. 6.4. where the same law is given,Levit. 6. ver. 4. and restitution of the same thing taken away, enjoyned. In the words we have these divine directions to him who hath committed some or other of all the sins of men, to trespass a tres∣pass against the Lord. 1. He shall restore his trespass in the head sum thereof. 2. He shall adde over and above it, the fifth part thereof. 3. He shall give to him against whom he hath trespassed. 1. He shall restore his trespass in the head sum thereof. His trespass here is that thing wherein the guilty person wron∣ged his neighbour, so called by metonymie. Which is to be re∣stored in the head sum. The word is  incapite ejus, as Arias Montanus turns it, and the Vulg. Latin, and the Chald. Paraph. as also the LXX. He must restore his trespass: So five of our old English tran∣slations have it; nor doth this our last amend them herein. Restitution in the School is largely taken; sometime according to the multiplicity of goods wherein our neighbour is unjustly damnified: for there are goods 1. of the soul, some naturall en∣dowments, and others conferred on us by grace: 2. there are goods also proper to the body, as strength, health, integrity of parts, beauty. 3. Goods of same, as a good name. 4. There are goods of fortune, as they are called, as riches; and these in the letter are here properly understood. And thus Restitution is described by Aquinas, actus justitiae com∣mutativae, an act of commutative justice, whereby the true owner is restored into possession of his own goods. In which descrip∣tion, one main thing is wanting, which is supplied by Gabriel Biel, viz. That those goods now restored were violently or fraudu∣lently taken away. Violent and fraudulent dealing, deceit, cheat∣ing, cousening, makes a breach upon proper interest, breaks the bond of humane society, yea, the bond of union with God; ren∣ders the soul desolate and alone without God and man. These Bonds cannot be reunited, unless there be restitutio inte∣gri, until Restitution be made to the full. Non remittitur pecca∣tum nisi restituatur ablatum. The sin of deceit and violence (that Davus which makes all this trouble) is not remitted, unless what is taken away, be restored. This is an hard lesson, will some say; who have otherwise learned Christ. These are the very times which our Lord fore∣told, should come; that there should be false Christs and false Prophets. For some have imagined such a Christ to themselves, as hath so done and suffered all things for them, that he has left no∣thing for them to do, nothing for Christ to do in them; A Christ
that hath been just for them, so that they need not be just. Such a Christ as has been sober, chaste, continent for them, so that they need not be so. Such a Christ as has paid their debts for them to God and man. Against these I shall lay down these two positions. 1. There are distinct dominions, rights, and proper interests in temporal things. How else can there be thefts? since theft is the taking away that which is anothers. If it be anothers, then hath that other no right in it, which he may call his. He hath dominion over it, power to use it, spend it, alien it, sell it. Hence it is, that the Lord requires in every believer, contentation, 1 Tim. 6.8. Yea, that every one be provident for time to come, Prov. 30.25. that he make provision for himself, and his house; that he be not burdensom to others, 2 Cor. 8.12, 13. Yea, so provident he ought to be, that he have wherewith to pay publick charges, Matth. 22.21. Yea, that he may supply the necessities of the poor Saints, according to brotherly love, 2 Cor. 8.12. Yea, that, according to common love, he may have to give to him that needeth, Ephes. 4.28. Now, were there no proper interest, no meum nor tuum in the world, no man could call any thing his own, or use it, spend it, alien it: nor have where∣with to be content. Nor would there be buying, or selling, giving or receiving, borrowing or lending, or any other act which supposeth property. 2. This right and proper interest in temporal things, is not founded in grace; so that a man who hath grace, may not take away that which is another mans who hath no grace. Our Lord determi∣ned this long since, when he forbad his own gracious people, to intermeddle with the graceless Edomites, Moabites, and Amerites; and that they should by no means invade their possession; and his reason is convictive; he had given them, their possessions, Deut. 2. Which yet will appear more forcible, if we consider the ends why the Lord gives his temporal good things unto graceless men; that they may seek out God, Acts 17.27. that they may repent, Rom. 2.4. So that he who takes away the goods of graceless men, he hinders them from the means of finding God, and repenting of their sins. Yea, if those two things be granted, 1. That the dominion and right to temporal things is founded in grace. 2. That a man may be his own judge, who is, and who is not in the state of grace, no man shall quietly possess any thing, he has. If a gracious man steals, his grace is no grace. Yea, hence will follow a prodigious distinction of theevery, that which a graceless, and that which a gracious man commits. Come we to the measure and manner of Restitution. He shall restore his trespass with the principal thereof, and adde unto it the fifth part thereof, and give unto him against whom he hath tres∣passed.
1. He shall restore his trespass; that is, the thing wherein he hath trespassed, by a Metonymie. But what is here meant by the words following? with the principal thereof. What is this principal? Is it some other thing beside the trespass? Surely no: Why then is it said, he shall restore the trespass with the principal thereof, if the principal and trespass be the same thing? This doubt must be cleared by a spiritual sense; of which anon. Meantime, as to the letter, we may observe, The wisdom and goodness of the most righteous God the Judge of all the World, in remo∣ving all impediments and lets from among men, that his royal law might take place in their hearts; so that we might owe nothing unto any man, but to love one another. And what reason is there for this Restitution? What is more just then the rule of the most righteous Judge of all the World? The Lord tryeth (or purgeth) the righteous; but the wicked, and him that loveth violence (or rapine) his soul hateth.Psal. 11. ver. 7. For the righteous Lord loveth righteousnesses (inward and outward righte∣ousness. The word is plural, ) his countenance doth be∣hold the upright, Psal. 11.7. Whence the Psalmist adviseth us to make trial of this by our own experience among men; Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the end (or reward) of that man, is peace, Psal. 37.37. So the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more then the beginning, &c. Job 42.12. Ye have heard of the patience of Job,James 5. ver. 11. and have seen the end or reward of the Lord, James 5.11. But the transgressours shall be destroyed together: The end (or reward) of the wicked shall be cut off. And truly if men patiently wait on the Lord, they shall ob∣serve that he will bring forth the flying rowl in his due time, even the curse that goeth forth over the face of the whole earth, &c. and it shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that sweareth falsly by Gods Name (forswearing what he has stollen) and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof, Zach. 5.1.—4. For it must have a time; because 1. God is patient and long suffering, and would not that any should pe∣rish. And the fin being conceived in the heart as in the womb, Psal. 7.14. it must have a time to bring forth: and so must the judgement and the curse which goes along collaterally with the sin. And when sin is perfected, it bringeth forth death. And when once the curse hath setled, it is no starter, but it remaines in the midst of the house; (for punishments were wont to be inflicted on the houses of malefactors, Ezra 6.11. Dan. 3.29. to root out their name and memory.) And when the curse hath taken up its place in the house, its hot idle there, but it consumes and eats where ever it comes. For as the blessing increaseth, Gen. 9.1. So the curse di∣minisheth, and brings to nothing, Levit. 26. Deut. 28. This curse
goes along with goods however unjustly gotten by fraud or vio∣lence. The story of Glaucus the Lacedemonian, which Herodotus reports, is remarkable. He had received a sum of money of a certain Milesian, for the use of his children under age: Glaucus denied the receipt of the money, with an oath. Glaucus afterward guilty, consulted with the Oracle; which gave him this answer; That the curse . Seizing stock and house, wholly shall destroy. Which as the Historian affirms, afterward accordingly came to pass. For howsoever violent and fraudulent men may flatter themselves and one another, we shall finde all pretious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil, Prov. 1.13. yet ver. 32. The prosperity of such fools shall destroy them. Yea, we may refer the ruines and destructions of Kingdoms and Commonweals, as wise Historians and Statesmen do, unto the same causes. For of that Anarchy and ruin of Judah, where∣of ye read, Esay 3. ye finde the cause ver. 14. the spoil of the poor is in their houses. And Jeremy having told the house of Israel and Judah, Jer. 5. That their sinnes had with-held good things from them; what sins were they? Verse 26, 27. As a Cage is full of Birds, so are their houses full of deceit. And Zephany having de∣nounced an heavy judgement against the Jews, Ver. 9. among other causes deserving it, he saith that the servants filled their Masters houses with violence and deceit. But let me again minde you of what one of the most antient Fathers hath written concerning these very sins, whereof the Lord here speaks; Absit, absit, inquam, ut haec ego de aliquo fidelium sentiam! Far, yea far be it from me, that I should think these things of any of the faithful! And good reason; since this is the character given of those Primitive times: Adeò sancta erat illis temporibus fides, ut fallere aliquos posse non crederetur. There was such faithfulness and integrity among them, that they thought it impossible that any one of them should deceive. And because they themselves loved truth and faithfulness, and knew not what it was to deceive, they thought no man would deceive them. So the Virgin-Church might say of her self, —Ego nescia rerum, Difficilem culpae suspicor esse viam. Vpon this very consideration, that holy Father understood the former part of this law spiritually. And I believe, upon the same grounds, we may so understand the latter part of it. Let us in∣quire and make trial. This ground we may lay, or rather, its laid to our hand, The law is spiritual, and this law, as hath appear'd in the former part of it.
Its here said, he shall restere  his trespass, his sin. So  signifies, and is rendred by the LXX , tres∣pass, Esra 9.6. , sinne, Gen. 42.21. , injustice, Jer. 51.5. , lawlesness, Ezek. 16.21. So Vatablus, and the Tigurin Bible, Reddet culpam suam, he shall restore his fault. If there∣fore  so signifie, as it doth, how shall the sinful man make any restitution, satisfaction, or recompense for his sin? a man may run into debt, but how he shall discharge it, how he shall pay his debt, there's the question.—Facilis descensus Averni, sed revocare gradum superas{que} ascendere ad auras, hic labor, hoc opus est—we may abase our selves even to Hell, Esay 57.9. But how shall we arise?Hos. 13. ver. 9. Corruption, O Israel, is thine own; but thy help is in me. And what is the condition of one, is the same of all. For all have sinned, and fallen short of the glory of God, Rom. 3.23. And who can satisfie one of a thousand? What then shall the trespasser, the sinner, the unjust person do? garly! how shall he pay his , his trespass? The Text an∣swereth this question, , He shall restore the trespass in his Head. And 1. What is the Head? And 2. How shall the poor indebted man pay or restore his trespass in his Head? Surely the Head is Christ, Ephes. 1.22. He is Head over all, especially to his Church, Ephes. 5.23. Col. 1.18. Yea, yet more especially, the Head of every man is Christ, 1 Cor. 11.3. to rule and govern the man. This is the ransom which God findes, upon the mans ac∣knowledgement of his sins, Job 33.23, 24. whom the Lord sets forth a ransom for all to be testified,  in their se∣veral seasons, 1 Tim. 2.1. Of this debt and discharge of it, the Apo∣stle speaks, Rom. 3.23. That we may the better underdand this great work of the Lord Jesus our Head, and only Mediator, and how he makes reconciliation for the sins of the people, Hebr. 2.17. I beseech you consider it in this order. The Lord Jesus makes reconciliation, 1. Passively and exemplarily. 2. Actively. 1. Pas∣sively, by his inward and outward suffering, his dolours and ago∣nies of his soul, the buffetings, the scourgings, the contradictions of sinners against himself; yea, the suffering of death it self. 2. Actively, and that two wayes. 1. Purgatively, by incorporating and imbodying or fleshing us with his flesh: For so Believers are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephes. 5. And arming us with a lowly, meek, obedient, watchful, wise, and long-suffering minde and spirit, and spirituall blood; whereby we are enabled against carnal and fleshly pollutions, as also against spiritual defilements. 2. Meritoriously, by taking away the guilt of these sins, where∣of we have repented, and which we have left, Gal. 3.13. Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us.
2. The debtor must adde over and above, the fifth part. I shall not here trouble you or my self with what one of the ancient Greek Fathers descants upon , the word here read in the LXX; but his mystical sense is good, Quin{que} munerus frequen∣ter, imò pene semper pro quin{que} sensibus accipitur, saith he; The number five often, yea almost alwayes is taken for the Five Senses. These five senses may be restored in holy actions; so as, if we have abused them in worldly businesses, and imployed them in those things which are not according to the will of God, we may now restore them in holy & religious actions; and adde over and above, five others, which are the senses of the inward man: according to which, being become pure in heart we see God, Mat. 5. And ha∣ving ears to hear, we may hear what our Master Christ teacheth. That we may receive that sweet savour, whereof the Apostle saith, we are a sweet savour of Christ unto God, 2 Corinthians. 2. And that we may taste and see that the Lord is gratious; that our hands may handle the word of life 1 John 1. Accordingly the Apostle prayes, that our love may abound yet more and more, in knowledge and all judgement,Phil. 1. ver. 9. Phil. 1.9. The words are, , in acknowledgement, and in eve∣ry sense. Unto all these, one must be added, saith he, Ʋt ad unum Deum haec cuncta referamus, that we refer all these to the one and onely God. So he. Or, by the fifth, we may understand what ever is above that which is elementary, visible, and of this lower world, all whatever is holy, just, good, wise, patient, meek, loving, gracious, ho∣nourable, excellent. This, and infinitely more then all this is to be attributed unto him, against whom we have sinned. To him be Glory, Majesty, and Dominion for evermore.
All the dayes that he separateth himself unto the Lord, he shall come at no dead body. He shall not make himself unclean for his father or for his mother, for his brother or for his sister when they die; because the consecration of his God is upon his head.] These words contain a part of the Nazarites Rule; which wholly consisted in absti∣nence. 1. From all what ever the Vine brought forth, as wine; and also from strong drink. 2. From polling or shaving his head. 3. From what ever was unclean, as from touching or co∣ming at a dead body; so that he might not go to any funeral. What? Not of his Father or Mother, or Brother, or Sister? No: He shall not be unclean for any of them when they die. So that the third part of the Nazarites rule, is in the words before us; and the reason of it. Which words generally contain these di∣vine Axioms. 1. All the dayes that the Nazarite separates himself unto the Lord, he shall not come at a dead body. 2. He shall not make himself unclean for his Father or for his Mother, for his Brother or for his Sister, when they die. 3. This he must not do, because the consecration of his God is upon his head. In the first of these, are vertually contained these propositions. 1. The Nazarite is separated unto the Lord. 2. The Nazarite must not come at a dead body. 3. All the dayes that the Nazarite separates himself unto the Lord, he must not come at a dead body. 1. The Nazarite is separated unto the Lord. And 1. Who was a Nazarite? And 2. What is it to be se∣parated unto the Lord? 1. The Lord in the former words gives us a description of a Nazarite, A man or woman who marvellously separates him or himself to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to separate themselves unto the Lord. These Nazarites were either perpetual, as Samson, Judges 13.7. And Samuel, 1 Sam. 1.11. Or for a certain time, as Paul and others with him, Acts 18.18. This vow, although according to the ceremony, it required abstinence from certain things, as hath been shewen, yet in the realty and substance of it, it imported a dedication and consecra∣tion of holy persons unto God, although they abstained not ex∣actly from those things. Thus the Rechabites who abstained from Wine, Jer. 35. are accounted Nazarites by Suidas, whether they abstained from the other two, it appears not. Nor could Samson exactly observe that prohibition not to come at a dead body, when he made so many slaughters among the Philistines, heaps upon heaps. So that in a large sense, we may say of all devout persons
who renounce the world and the lusts thereof, and wholly de∣vote and consecrate themselves unto God, that they are spiritual Nazarites. Such an one was Jeremy and John Baptist, and Joseph, who long before them both, and before the institution of the ce∣remonial separation, was called a Nazarite, as I have shewen on Gen. 49. v. 26. And if we consider well the Christians vow in Bap∣tism, To forsake the Devil and all his works, the vain pomps and glory of the world, with all covetous desires of the same, the carnal desires of the flesh, so as not to follow, or be lead by them; he who performs this vow, (and every Christian soul is obliged so to do) he may well be accounted a spiritual Nazarite. 2. What we turn to separate, , supposes and implyes ad∣joyning. For the separation is properly from something. And therefore he who is here said to separate himself unto the Lord, he ver. 8. is said to be holy unto the Lord. And so the Nazarite is understood to separate himself from those three things before mentioned, and to dedicate and apply himself unto the Lord. For 1.Eccles. 10. v. 19. Whereas Wine is a figure of earthly delight and joy, as be∣ing that which rejoyceth the life, or the living, saith Solomon, Eccles. 10.19. The will of the Lord is, that all the joy and delight of our souls should not run out unto any of the creatures, but should be wholly centred in his love, which is better then Wine, Cant. 1.2. 2. And whereas much pride and vanity is discovered in sha∣ving, and crisping, and curling, and triming, and powdring the hair; the chaste and modest Spouse of Christ hath power and glory on her head, and thereby professeth her subjection to her Lord and Husband, 1 Cor. 11.10.—15. 3. And because our natural affections, loves, & desires, are car∣ried forth to our relations, as our Parents, Fathers, and Mothers, or Brethren, and Sisters, the Lord will that these affections be all called home, and placed, and fixed on himself. There is great reason, that the Nazarite be separated and holy unto the Lord; because he is holy: So he declares himself, Lev. 11. And so the Seraphim proclaim him, Esay 6.3. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts,Esay 6. v. 3. The fulness of the earth is his glory. So it is in Hebrew. Accordingly the four living creatures, Revel. 4.8. (which our Translators call Beasts;Revel. 4. v. 8. whereas the word  there used is well known to be common to men and Beasts, and one of them had the face, as of a man,) They have no rest day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. And it is the end of the pure religion and undefiled, to render us like unto our God, as he requires, Levit. 11.44. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Like unto Jesus Christ, Hebr. 7.26. who was holy, harmless, unde∣filed, separate from sinners.
Observe from hence the wonderful exactness and strictness of the true Nazarite; That's implyed in , which signifies Mi∣rificabit, He wonderfully separates himself unto the Lord, from all pollutions of the creatures. He is a man to be wondred at by the dissolute world, who think it strange that he rusheth not with them into the same confusion of luxury, 1 Pet. 4.4. The Pha∣risees sect was of all others, , the most strict.1 Pet. 4. v. 4. There were three sects of the Jewes when our Lord appeared in the flesh, as also before; the Saducees, the Esseni, or Assideans, and the Pharisees. The sect of the Nazarens (so the Christians were called, Acts 24.5.) that was more exact, more strict, then that of the Pharisees, and so, far beyond all the rest. Our Lord Jesus, the Author and subject of the Christian rule, he assures his Dis∣ciples, that except their righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, they shall by no means enter into the kingdom of heaven, Matth. 5.20. And his Apostle tels us, that whosoever names the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, must de∣part from iniquity, 2 Tim. 2.10. This may justly reprove too many pretending Christians, who separate themselves, but neither to the Lord, nor from their sin; but separate themselves one from another, and that under pretence of purity. The Wiseman tels us of such a generation, pure in their own eyes, yet are not cleansed from their own dung, Prov. 30.12.Prov. 30. v. 12. And the Prophet brings them in, saying, Stand by thy self, come not neer to me, for I am holier than thou, Esay 65.5. Alas! what bene∣fit is it unto us, that we are separated from unrighteous men, while we are one with unrighteousness? that we are divided from idola∣ters, when we yet are joyned unto idols? Hos. 4.17. even those in our own hearts, Ezech. 4. Of such as these, S. Jude speaks, ver. 19. That though they were most lewd and wicked persons, these are they, saith he, who sepa∣rate themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit. Separate unto Wine and strong drink, Counter-Nazarites. Of such as these the Lord saith, that he will separate them unto evil, Deut. 29.21. 2. The Nazarite must not come at a dead Body. What is here turnd a dead body, is , and signifies indeed properly, a dead soul. So much the Translators themselves confess, where they put a man or body in the text, they say in the margent, that in the He∣brew it is soul. Thus Exod. 12.16. that which every man must eat, marg. soul, Levit. 4.27. If any man of the common people sin through ignorance, marg. any soul. And 11.43. ye shall not make your selves abominable by any creeping thing, marg. your souls, Numb. 19.11. He that toucheth any dead body of a man, the words we have here in consideration, are a dead soul. And in many o∣ther places.
2. The Nazarite must not come at a dead body. What? Not at a dead body? That's an hard saying. How then shall we bury our dead? which hath been, and is held a good work by all but Cynical men. This consideration will force us upon a spiritual sense, and make us understand , as it signifies, the soul. To come at a dead soul, is here in the Hebrew , non veniet, he shall not come. Hierom turns it well, non ingredietur, he shall not enter into, or come into. And so our Translators render the word, Numb. 27.17. to come in; as often elsewhere. Object. But if we must not come at, or unto a dead soul, we must go out of the world, as the Apostle reasons, 1 Cor. 5.10. To go in unto a dead soul, is to have intimacy with it, as Jacob speaks, Gen. 49.6. O my soul,  (the same word) enter not into their secret. Hence it appears there are dead souls. For what is the natural death, but the separation of the soul from the body? And what is the spiritual death, but the separation of the spirit of life from the soul? ac∣cording to what the Prophet speaks, The soul that siuens, that shall die, Ezech. 18.4. For sin, when it is perfected, bringeth forth death, James 1. And as the man is said to die of some one disease or other, or of some wound, or of old age; even so the soul dies. Thus the false teacher, who consents not to wholesome, or rather healing words,1 Tim. 6. v. 3.4. , the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the doctrine which is according to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting; (so our Translators turn , which is, sick) about questions and strifes of words. And it is a deadly sickness: for it followeth, whence cometh envie; and that slayeth the silly one, Job 5.2. Yea, envie is like the foul disease, the rottenness of the bones, Prov. 14.30. A consumption of the soul; so Wisd. 6.23. Neither will I go with consuming envie; wrath is a feverish distemper, that gives place to the destroyer, Ephes. 4. Covetousness is a dropsie; Quò plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntar aquae. As much he drinks, so much he thirsteth still. And prodigality is a fl and looseness of life. For the prodigal yong man was dead of it, saith his father, when he spent his substance with riotous living, Luke 15.13.32. And there is the like reason of other spiritual diseases. O that men would impartially look into their own spiritual estate, and judge concerning themselves whether their souls be dead or alive. It is of greatest importance, whether so or not. For he who hath not the spirit of life, and spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Rom. 8.9. And we are saved by his life, Rom. 5.10. We enquire not now into signes of the vegetative, sensitive or rational life, but what characters we finde in our selves of the
divine life, or life of God, according to which the soul may be said to live. If there be no sense or exercise of sense, we know, that natural∣ly the man is dead; at least if his taste, if his touch be gone; if he taste not that the Lord is gracious, Phil. 1.9. I pray,Phil. 1. v. 9. that your love may abound, , in acknowledge∣ment and all sense. If there be no breathing, there is no life; if the heart pant not, breathe not after the living God, Cain hath then kil∣led Abel; the self love hath slain the breathing from, and towards God. Gen. 4. I place not talk and speech among the signes of life. Its possible there may be a great deal of holy talk, and yet but talk; which our Lord the wisdom it self seems to wonder at, , O generations of Vipers (the word is plural,) how can ye that are evil, speak good things, Matth. 12.34. A man may live though he be speechless; the true speech is from the life of God:Matth. 12. v. 34. Psal. 65.1. he that speaks, as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. Silence is praise to thee, saith David, Psal. 65.1. though ours turn it otherwise: the silent persevering in well doing, best praiseth and pleaseth God, Psal. 50.23. Psal. 119.175. O let my soul live, and it shall praise thee. The Nazarite ought to come unto such living souls; and his soul shall live. 3. All the dayes that the Nazarite separates himself unto the Lord, he shall come at no dead soul. What dayes of separation were these. The learned Jews have caught, that the time of the Nazerites now was thirty dayes, a whole Moneth; and this they understand to be meant by , ver. 5. He shall be holy: because in that word, the number of thirty is contained. Howbeit this was to be understood, if he vowed himself a Nazarite, and named no certain number of dayes. Of these dayes we understand,Acts 21. v. 26. Acts 21.26. where S. Luke mentions the accomplishment of the dayes of purification, . Against this word Purificationis, whereby Hierom renders , Dru∣sius excepts; and we may as well except against the same word here Englished, purification, and for the same reason: Because purification is properly of those who were before unclean and im∣pure; whereas the Nazarites here mentioned had vowed against all uncleanness, and had kept themselves pure and holy to the Lord. In place of it we may put sanctification. There is reason enough for this in the precept: He who gives it, is Lord of all our time. Herein the Christians vow of spiritual Nazariteship exceeds that of the Law. That of the law might be temporary, as for 30 dayes; but our vow in Baptism, whereby we are initiated into the Christian Nazariteship, is a vow of far greater abstinence, as to forsake the De∣vil and all his works, the pomps and vanity of the wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. 2. Belief of all the Articles of the Christian
faith 3. Of longer time to keep Gods holy will and Commandements, and walk in the same all the dayes of our life. O ye Nazarites! ye who have separated your selves to the Lord, come not at a dead soul all the dayes of your life. It is the soul and spirit that is mainly to be heeded. The holy Scripture reckons persons by their souls; as Gen. 12.5. all the souls, they had gotten in Haran; and 46.26. all the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, and many the like: whereas we account men rather according to their bodies; as when we say, no body, some body, a good body, &c. Ʋnde haec farrago loquendi venerit in linguas? How come we to speak thus but from too little care of our souls? which is helped on by mis-translation. If we come at a dead soul, and so defile our own souls, all our former labour is utterly lost. The dayes that were before, shall fall, because his separation was defiled, Numb. 6.12. He must be∣gin again. And there is the same reason with the spiritual Naza∣rite, Ezech. 18.24. When the righteous man turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and doth according to all the abominations that the wicked man doth, shall he live? All the righteousness that he hath done, shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he hath trespassed, and in the sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die. This no doubt, is a very great restraint upon the Nazarite. But a case may be put wherein he may seem to be released from this restraint. What if his Father or Mother, his brother or Sister die? may not the Nazarite go in to them, or one or other of them, when they die? It is true, Father and Mother, Brother and Sister, they are near and endeering relations, and such as may much win upon us: This is a racite objection made unto the former strict precept. Unto which the Lord makes express answer in the following words. He shall not make himself unclean for his Father or his Mo∣ther, for his Brother or for his Sister, when they die. In these words are contain'd, the great restraint of the Naza∣rite from uncleanness. Herein we have two divine Axioms. 1. The Nazarites Father or Mother, or Brother, or Sister, by dying, become unclean. 2. The Nazarite must not make himself unclean for his Father or his Mother, for his Brother, or for his Sister. The latter of these supposes the former; for unless the dead were unclean, how could they render the Nazarite unclean? But it may yet be enquired, what uncleanness this is in the dead father or mother, brother, or sister. For as for natural uncleanness, al∣beit there be in the dead man a resolution of the humours, and in time of the elements, which may be noysom, and perhaps contagious,
yet neither of these is so speedy, as commonly their Funerals are. However to come in to the same house where the dead are, or to accompany the corps to the grave, can be no annoyance; because the soul being departed, and the natural heat gone, which is the vehicle, and conveys contagion and infection while there is life in the body, the body being now dead conveys no contagion, corrup∣tion, or uncleanness unto those who come at it: so the Italian Pro∣verb, When the beast is dead, the poyson is dead with it. Thus much we may say for natural uncleanness. As for ceremonial uncleanness its meerly positive; and, according to the nature of a ceremony, it is, Pro arbitrio instituentis, accord∣ing to the will of him who ordains it; and so only temporary and for a time; whence caeremonia hath the name from , time; because it is , only for a certain time; and that signifi∣cant also of somewhat that's real, moral, and lasting. It remaines therefore that the uncleanness here spoken of is only ceremonial, and that which imports unto us a morall un∣cleanness. And what's that? Sin and iniquity is the only true uncleanness. And therefore its called by such names as in na∣ture are unclean; as mire and vomit, 2 Pet. 2.22. the menstruous cloth of an unclean woman, Esay 64.6. The dung of a man, Prov. 30.12. you will say, these things should not be named. They are na∣med so in Scripture, to discover unto us how abominable sin is un∣to God, and ought to be unto us. Yea, such is the odiousness and loathsomeness of it, that what ever in nature is, or seems filthy, sin borrows a name from it. This uncleanness is of a diffusive and spreading nature, both in them in whom it first is, and in those also to whom they do affri∣care scabiem, they communicate their uncleanness. The leprosie be∣gins with a spot of uncleanness, and spreads it self in the skin, and defiles the whole man, Levit. 13. Iniquity kindles from a spark; then it burns all before it like a fire, Esay 9.18. Behold ,James 3. v. 5. how much wood a little fire burneth? 2. This uncleanness is contagious and infectious and spreads it self unto others also, especially, if disposed and fitted to receive it, , Evil words corrupt good manners. Or as some understand the words, , light and unsetled man∣ners. For this uncleanness enters oftentimes into the soul; and is conceived only by a word, & concepta cogitatio carnem commovet ad concupiscendum. Prophane and vain bablings, saith the Apostle, increase to more ungodliness; and such words eat like a Canker, 2 Tim. 2.17. And the eye is as treacherous in betraying the soul as the ear is; for mors intrat per fenestras. Jer. 9.21. the dead soul is infectious, and death from it, enters in by the eyes, the windows of the soul, Eccles. 12.3. and corrupts it. Thus it first entred, Gen. 3.6. and
having found the way, its become a beaten rode troden by many of old, and at this day, Judg. 14.1, 2. 2 Sam. 11.2, 3, 4. Mars videt hanc visam{que} cupit potitur{que} cupitâ. Mars sees, and seen, desires, desi∣red, enjoyes. Whence from  to see, comes  to love, saith the Etymologist. And therefore Job makes a covenant with his eyes, that he would not look upon a Maid, Job 31.1. And David prayes, Psal. 119. Turn away mine eyes, that they behold not vanity. But what reason may there be, why the Lord gives special charge to the Nazarite, that he come not at his Father or his Mo∣ther, his Brother or his Sister, when they die. There is greatest danger from them of all others. For, according to the nature of love, Amor transformat amantem in rem amatam, Love changes the party loving into the party loved. And therefore, especially in such deer and neer relations, men commonly oversee, and take no notice of their faults whom they love. Beside, honour being a more eminent degree of love, is more attractive, and drawes more uncleanness from the party honoured. And therefore some followers of Plato, pourtraied in themselves what blemish their Master had in his body; others the errours of his minde. Ye know whose speech it was, but not worthy of him; Malo errare cum Platone, quàm cum caeteris Philosophis rectè sentire. I had rather erre with Plato, then be orthodox with other Phi∣losophers. Man is , an imitating creature. And therefore Apes, Monkies, and Baboons, who resemble men in their feature, are all Mimicks, and imitate what they see done. Now children brought up by their parents, and taught to honour them, have in∣deed no other patern for their imitation: and what either good or evil, they see in them, they swallow it without difference; and rather the evil, because that most-what is rather predominant, and more attractive of its like in those who are already disposed there∣unto. So that children insensibly, by little and little, steal the sins and corruptions of their parents, and become unclean by them. 3. The consecration of his God is upon his head. These words are considerable either in themselves, or as they comprehend the general reason of the whole Law preceding. Being considered in themselves, two things are to be inquired into: 1. What's here meant by Consecration. 2. How we are to understand, that the consecration of his God, is on the Nazarites head. The word here turn'd Consecration, is , which the LXX ren∣der , a vow; whether they read , which signifies a vow, as Drusius conceives, or that they had reference to that part of the vow which the Nazarite vowed, the preservation of his hair. Vatablus, and the Tigur in Bible have Naeser, retaining the He∣brew word. Two of our old English Translations, Coverdale and
another turn the word  abstinence. The Chald. Paraphrast renders it a crown. So Drusius. The Spanish, although in the text it hath consecration, yet in the margent is Corona a Crown. So the word is turnd by the LXX, 2 Sam. 1.10. , 2 Chron. 23.11. And Psal. 132.18. upon himself shall his Crown flourish; the word is , the same in the text. Its called the Crown of his God, because the Nazarite wears that Crown for the honour of his God; and hereby his God honours him, according to 1 Sam. 2. 1. The true Nazarite is in eminent manner in covenant with his God; its said, the Crown of his God, &c. 2. The Crown, though on the Nazarites head, yet is Gods Crown. 3. Here is a ground of great thankfulness to be given unto our good God, that he is pleased to raise up eminent holy men and wo∣men who may be examples of purity and holiness unto their genera∣tion. The Lord commemoratest his his goodness unto his people, Amos 2.11. as one of his special favours. 2. The words are considerable as the reason of the law preceding. The Nazarite must not drink wine, poll his head; or defile himself by his father or his mother when they die, because the Crown of his God is upon his head. 1. The will of the Lord is, that the spiritual Nazarite for no person should become unclean. Its a known rule, Primum in unoquo{que} genere est mensura reliquorum; the first in every kinde, is the measure of all the rest. Whereas therefore our Lord forbids the Spiritual Nazarites to defile themselves for their father or their mother, &c. when they die, since these dearest relations challenge our best affections; therefore à for∣tiori the Lord forbids the spiritual Nazarite to be unclean for any other person whosoever; because natural relations of all other are the strongest and most binding. So Sampson the Nazarite rea∣soned well if he could have held, Judges 14.16. Hence appears the reason why the believers, Saints and holy ones of God, are said to be made Kings and Priests, and a royal Priesthood unto God, and made such by Christ the King of Saints and high Priest of our profession, Hebr. 3. These two orders of men were crowned. But if Kings and Priests and so crowned, and all such, over whom have they dominion? whom do they rule? Revel. , and shall reign upon the earth. Over whom else rule they but over their own spirits, Prov. 23.28. The great Monarchs of the word who conquerd multitudes of nations and people, yet had not rule over their own spirits. 1. This justly reproves those who pretend the spiritual Naza∣riteship of Christianity, yet are wine-bibbers and drinkers of strong drink; such as refuse to be subject unto God in holy life; such as
defile themselves with dead works; these are no Nazarites; they have lost their crown, they have broken their vow of the spiritual Nazariteship. 2. Such as having consecrated themselves, defile themselves. All their labour they have taken, is in vain, as the Nazarite lost all his dayes that were past, when he defiled himself, Numb. 6.10. And all the righteousness that he hath done, shall nor be mentioned: in his trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die, Ezech. 18.24. 3. But more are they to be reproved, who having lost their own crown, and broken their vow of spiritual Nazarites, attempt to take away the crown from others, to corrupt the Nazarites, to inveigle others into their excess of riot. This is a very high pro∣vocation of the great God, and exceedingly moves his wrath, as appears, Amos 2.11, 12. they gave the Nazarites wine to drink, thereby to enfeeble them; therefore the Lord threatens to enfeeble those corruptors of his Nazarites. These, and such as these, are the greatest enemies of the Common-wealth, who deprive it of such Nazarites as in perilous times might avert the wrath of God from us, as they were wont to do, 1 Mac. 3.46. Lord stir up ma∣ny such among us! Mysticè. The Head of every man is Christ, 1 Cor. 11.3. And if Christ be the Head, what is the Crown? What else but the spirit, and minde, the Lamp of Christ? as Job saith, Job 29.3. His Candle shined on my head. All the thoughts, they are in the power of the true Nazarite. All the affections are under his power. And there∣fore some have rendred  abstinence, viz. from all vain desires, all corrupt affections. He wears not the Crown in vain. He who sets the Crown on his head, gives him power to tread upon Serpents and Scorpions, and all the power of the enemy; yea, to tread Sa∣tan under his feet, Rom. 16. This is a ground of exhortation to the true Nazarites of the Philadelphian Church; its the Lords exhortation to them, Keep what thou hast, and let no man take thy Crown, Revel. 3.11. These are they who are made Kings and Priests unto God. Now it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes to drink strong drink, Prov. 31.4. Nor is it for Priests to drink wine nor strong drink, Lev. 10.9. Nor is it for the spiritual Kings and Priests to distemper their souls with the joyes and delights of the earthly life, as I have shewen. But they ought to be wholly subject unto their God, to whom they are consecrated, and whose Crown they wear. Nor ought they to touch any unclean thing, whether of man or beast.Num. 19. v. 11. He who toucheth the dead of every soul of man, must be unclean seven dayes, Numb. 19.11. For the filthiness of a man is much more noysom and unclean, and renders men more unclean then the uncleanness of a beast. The beasts uncleanness makes a man
unclean onely untill the evening, Levit. 11.32. but the uncleanness of a man polluted a man and made him unclean seven dayes, Num. 19.11. And in nature the stench of a prison is loathsome; but the smell of a Stable is, to many, delightful. It is true, the brutish and carnal uncleanness pollutes; but the uncleanness of a man, as he is a man, pollutes seven times more. Carnalia peccata plus habent infamiae; spiritulia verò plus habent de natura peccati. The bestial and fleshly sin is more infamous; but the spiritual sin hath more of the nature of sin in it; saith one of the pious Ancients. And in all these, there ought great strictness to be used: For there is not the same reason of the Divine Law which is of our Humane Laws. We say, De minimis non curat Lex, The Law re∣gards not the least matters. As the Law forbids annoyance of the High-ways: Nor must the Carkase of a Horse or Dog or the like be thrown into a Common rode. But what if a dead Mouse be thrown there? The answer is, De minimis non curat Lex; The Law takes no notice of things so small. And some, out of their Epicurean spirit, would perswade us, that Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovi, that God is not at leisure to heed small matters. Un∣der which pretence, they plead for their infirmities, and those of the largest cize; and by that name, they understand their gross ha∣bitual sins. But the wise man tells us, that he who neglects small things shall fall by little and little, Ecclus. 19.1. Surely our God neglects not, but forbids and punishes even the smallest sins neg∣lected and unrepented of and not forsaken. Therefore vers. 3. of this Chapter, the Lord forbids the Nazarite not only the drin∣king of Wine and strong drink, but also Vinegar of Wine,Numb. 6. ver. 3. and Vinegar of strong drink; neither shall he drink any liquor of Grapes, &c. Howbeit the word  signifies not the liquor or juice of Grapes: For that was before forbidden in  Wine: For what is Wine but the juice or liquor of Grapes, if the Wine be made of Grapes? For Wine may be made of many other things; as Diodorus Siculus writes of , Barley-wine. What then may  here signifie but water wherein the Grapes have been steeped, tinctured and moystened, as in some sleight decoction. And therefore Arias Montanus renders the word made factionem, moystening. The Lord here, when he would prohibite the Nazarite the use of Wine, he forbids all, what ever belongs to it. And thus some understand the Lord Jesus, Mat. 5.33. when he saith, swear not at all: That he well knowing how frequent swearing and forswear∣ing was among the people, and how true it is, Qui facilè jurat, facilè pejerat, He who easily swears, easily forswears himself; That therefore he might restrain men from that frequent sin of perjury, he prohibites what usually leads men thereunto. Thus the Lord having given strict charge to Adam, that he should not eat of the forbidden fruit, Adam gives charge to Eve, that she should
not touch it: as we charge our children not to come neer the well. And thus the wise man gives charge to his children, Prov. 4.14, 15. Enter not into the path of the wicked; go not in the way of evil men, avoid it, pass not by it; turn from it, and pass away. And the wise men of the Jews perswaded the Nazarites, that they might the better observe their vows, not to go into the Vine∣yards. This no doubt is a great error in the sons of men, they fear lest they should commit some great sins, and regard not the less sins, which insensibly dispose them to the committing of the greatest. And therefore the Scripture warns us that we take great heed of the little sins. A little leaven leavens the whole lump, Gal. 5.9. And he who keeps the whole Law and offendeth in one point is guilty of all, Jam. 2.10. O take heed, lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled, Heb. 12.15. Whence it ap∣pears, that the will of the Lord is our sanctification, & in modico & in magno, our whole, our thorow obedience. For in this vow of a Nazarite was prefigured unto us, the state of perfection; such as was held forth unto us in the High Priest on whose forehead was the golden plate with this inscription  Holiness unto the Lord, or, The Holiness of the Lord, Exod. 28.39. This type was really and in the Truth fulfilled in Christ the true Nazarite, the true High Priest. The same perfect life is held forth unto all, and required of all, who are Christs. What else means the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.17. where he saith, Come out from among them? (which is also the Prophets invitation, and call unto us, to come forth out of the confused spiritual Babel.) And be ye separate; be true Na∣zarites, separate your selves unto the Lord. Touch no unclean thing; come not at any dead soul. Be not so endeared unto Father or Mo∣ther or Brother or Sister, when they are dead in trespasses and sins, as to be defiled for them. Though the Priest of the second order, might be defiled, the true Nazarites, who are made like unto the great High Priest, as he might not be defiled, no, not for his Father or for his Mother, Levit. 21.10.11. So neither ought we out of na∣tural endeerment or indulgence, to be spiritually polluted, no, not for our Fathers and Mothers. Forasmuch as Christ hath suffered in the flesh, arm your selves with the same (suffering) minde: For he who hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin. He who doth the will of my Father which is in heaven, he is now adopted into the Divine linage, he shall be my Mother and Sister and Brother, Mat. 12.50. And God the Father speaks unto such Nazarites who separate themselves to the Lord, unto such Levites who in this case, say to their Father and to their Mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknow∣ledge
his brethren, nor do they acknowledge their children; for they have observed Gods word, and kept his Covenant, Deut. 33.9. Vnto such Levites, unto such Nazarites, such separated ones, he saith, Be ye separate; own no father nor mother nor brother nor si∣ster upon earth, and I will receive you, and I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Al∣mighty, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Be we exhorted to separate our selves unto the Lord, to become true Nazarites, that we may obtain the Crown of our God. This seems to be the drift of the Apostles exhortation. 2 Cor. 6. as I shewed before. How shall we obtain this Crown of our God? The Nazarite by wearing of his hair professed himself subject unto God, as the wo∣man hath power on her head, 1 Cor. 7. This subjection is unto the will and law of God, and he is in meditation of the law day and night, Psal. 1. Hereby he is ren∣dred humble, contrite and mortified, endures temptations, and so obtains the Crown of life, James 1.12. See how this was prefigured in Esther the invisible and hidden Church, Esther 2. She had neither father nor mother, v. 7. they were both dead. Such a virgin Church as the Psalmist speaks unto; Hearken, O daughter, and consider; forsake thine own people and thy fathers house, Psal. 45. But did she not make her self un∣clean by her father or her mother when they died? No, Mordecai took her for his daughter. Mordecai: who is that? Amata contritio, bitter contrition. A figure of the holy Law, which renders us contrite and humble, the son of Jair the light. Or Mordecai is do∣cens contritionem, teaching contrition. He becomes the father of Esther; or Myrrha contrita, Myrrh contrite. Myrrh is a principal preservative against infection and contagion. And Mordecai bitter contrition, and teaching contrition, Myrrh contrite preserves Esther from uncleanness of her father and her mother. The law of God teaching and rendring us contrite and humble, is a principal antidote against dead works. Esther is commended unto Heghe the Keeper of the women, Esth. 2. And what is Heghe? Meditation; so Heghe signifies. And Heghe is an excellent Tutor to the women, the thoughts they are spiri∣tually the woman, 2 Cor. 11. I fear, lest as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your , your thoughts, should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. Esther is a long time preparing. And manifold preparations are required of the people of God, Luke 1.17. to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. They were prepared before, and John must yet make them ready.
Esther thus prepared is commended to Ahashuerus the Prince and the Head. And he sets the Crown royal upon Esthers head, Esther 2.17. The like promise is also made by the true Ahashuerus un∣to us, that if we be prepared members of the invisible Church, and bear the Cross, we shall also wear the Crown! For blessed is he that endureth temptation: for when he is tryed, he shall re∣ceive the Crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him, James 1.12.
One spoon of ten shekels of gold.] The word here rendred a Spoon, as also often in this Chapter,Numb. 7. v. 14. seems to be mistaken by our Translators, as I have shewen on Exod. 25.29. or on Exod. 37.16. more fully. The word rather seems to be a vessel for incense; as it is here used, which I prove by reasons there shewen. Sprinkle water of purifying upon them.Numb. 8. v. 7. And let them shave all their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and so make themselves clean.]. The words contain the manner of purifying the Levites, viz. by sprinkling water of purifying upon them. But the words rendred water of purifying, are , waters of sin, or sin waters. So that the Translators rather express the use and effect of these waters, then render the words in their proper sense; as Arias Montanus hath done, who turns the words Aquas peccati, waters of sin. So the Tigurin Bible, and Vatablus. Martin Luther also turns them by one word, Sundwasser, so Piscator, and one Low Dutch. So Ainsworth. And although the LXX have , water of purifying, whom our old and new Translators fol∣low, yet cannot the words be so turnd without a trope. Nor hath the Translator of the Chald. Paraphrast dealt candidly; who turns , Aquas lustrationis, waters of purging, which exactly answers the Hebrew, waters of sin. But what water is it that can purifie the man from his sin? we read not yet that the water of separation is commanded to be made, which is first enjoyn'd, Numb. 19. and not before. The Jews have a good rule, which is of use here, Non est prius & posterius in lege. There is neither before nor after in the Law. So that howsoever as yet the sin-water were not commanded to be made; yet that which was typified by it, the blood of Christ (the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8.) is the true holy water, or sin-water. Yea, lest any age should want an expedient and effectual mean for the purging and cleansing from sin, the Apostle applying this type unto the truth, saith thus, Hebr. 9.13, 14. If the blood of Buls and Goats, and the ashes of an Hei∣fer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ, who, through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot unto God, purge our conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? Whereby the Apostle holds forth unto us that everlasting sin-water, the pretious blood and eter∣nal Spirit of Christ, which cleanseth us from all our sins, 1 John 1.7. But as our Translators, in the first part of the Levites cleansing, make no mention at all of sin which is to be purged; so neither in the second part of it, do they express the word  the Rasor which they must let pass over all their flesh. But instead of this,
they put what they judged equipollent hereunto, let them shave all their flesh; which is not a genuine translation, but an exposition. And they cast the true translation of the words into the margent. And what becomes of them and all the rest, in the Pocket Bible? The third part of the Levites cleansing, [Washing their clothes,] is tacitly implyed the whole mystery of sprinkling the sin-water, and cutting off the hair, viz. the purifying from the superfluity of naughti∣ness, even the sinne it self. So much is intimated in the word , their clothes, which may as well be rendred, their sins and wickednesses, as  signifies. O what an exact holiness and purity does the most holy God expect from us, who profess our selves such as cleave unto him, when he requires so many purifications of the sons of Levi, as we read here, and Malac. 3.3. Lord sprinkle us from an evil conscience; Lord wash us thorowly from our iniquity, multiply, or rather wash me from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, Psal. 51.2. From the age of fifty years,Numb. 8. v. 25, 26. they shall cease waiting on the service thereof, and shall serve no more, but shall minister with their brethren, &c.] Our Lord himself tels Moses, the argument of these words, together with the former and those which follow, Verse 23. The Lord spake unto Moses, saying, This is that belongeth to the Levites, from twenty and five years old, and upward, they shall go in to war the warfare of the service of the Tabernacle of meting; and from the age of fifty years they shall return from the warfare of the service thereof, and shall serve no more, but shall minister with their brethren, &c. So that the words contain the common term between the Levites service, and their ministry; which may be resolved into these divine sentences. 1. The Levites waited on the service of the Tabernacle. 2. From the age of fifty years they shall cease from waiting on the service of the Tabernacle. 3. From the age of fifty years, they shall minister with their brethren. 4. From the age of fifty years, they shall serve no more, but they shall minister. The Levites waited on the service of the Tabernacle of meeting. The Levites may be understood either more specially according to their office, or men generally all such as by faith and good will cleave unto God.Psal. 51. v, 2. What is here turn'd waiting, is indeed warring the warfare of the service of the Tabernacle of meeting. He shall go in  to war the warfare of the service, &c. v. 24. So Tremellius, Diodati, Pagnin, Ainsworth, and Piscator render the words, he shall return from the warfare of the service. Arias Mon∣tanus, Revertetur ab exercitu, he shall return from the army. And so no doubt the words properly signifie, not waiting, as ours turn
them. Whereby the metaphore chosen by the holy Spirit, is waived, neglected, and lost. The reason why this service of God is called a warfare; he who desires to draw near and cleave unto God, will easily un∣derstand, when he shall finde the law of his members warring a∣gainst the law of his minde. When he shall perceive that the world  lies in the evil one,1 John 5. v. 19. Ephes. 6. v. 12. who goes about seeking whom he may drink up. When he shall consider, that he must wrestle with Principalities and Powers, with the Rulers of the darkness of this world, with spiritual wickedness; or ra∣ther the spirituallies of wickedness () in high places. There's no word answers to places. The words are  in heavenly things, Such a service of God may well be term'd a warfare. 1. The service of the Levites about the Tabernacle of meeting was, a laborious service. Its called in the text, , which sig∣nifies the greatest pains and toyl that men undergo, in peaceable times, the labours of the ground, in plowing, sowing, harrowing, fallowing, twifallowing, trifallowing, &c. and this yearly; Nam redit agricolis labor actùs in orbem. The Plowmans labour turns round every year. Its the greatest labour and pains that men can under∣take, in troublesome times, therefore its called warfare in the text. It contains in it self compendiously all evil: And therefore war is called evil, as the sum of all evils, Esay 45.7. The principal labour of the Levite, was bearing the burden of the Tabernacle. Ye finde all the parts and utensels of the Tabernacle divided among the Kohathites, the Gershonites, and the Merarites, Numb. 4. which they must take up and bear, so often as the Camp removed. Mysticè. Such is the labour of the spiritual Levite in the greater and better Tabernacle, Hebr. 9.11. He has his  his great labour and toyl about a worldly Tabernacle of earthly minded men. He breaks up the fallow grounds, the earthly hearts of men, which have long lien lay. He sowes the feed of the Word which the fowles of the air, the evil spirits devour, Matth. 13.4. with 19. The Sun of persecution scorcheth it, v. 5.6. with 20.21. The thorny cares choak it, v. 7. with 22. And it is well, if one fourth part of the soyl, prove good and fruitful, v. 8. with 23. So that the most part of his labour is quite lost, and he spends his strength in vain. Hence it is that the spiritual Levite is compared to the laborious Ox, Deut. 25.4. 1 Cor. 9.9, 10. He treads out the corn, he separates the pure grain from the husk, he brings forth the Spirit out of the Letter. So that great increase is by the strength of the Ox, Pro. 14.4. Yet too often the mouth of the laborious Ox is muzled, contrary to the command of God, 1 Cor. 9.9. by sensual, brutish, earthly-minded men.
But the greatest labour of the spiritual Levit, is the bearing of the Tabernacle and the parts of it, even that spiritual Tabernacle where∣in Christ dwels, John 1.14. Of which burden even Moses, and he a Levit, complains, Deut. 1.9. and elsewhere. In this regard, the spiritual Levit was figured by the Camel, a creature that seems to be made to bear burdens; and accord∣ingly he is so ready to bear them, that he kneels down that the burden may be laid upon him. Of his hair, penitential garments were made of old; such were those of Eliah and John Baptist: Does God take care for Oxen? 1 Cor. 9.9. or Camels? For our sakes no doubt was that written. These are part of the herd called Animalia Dei, Gods animals, Psal. 68.10. Among those beasts Jesus Christ is born, Matth. 2. the resigned patient beasts, Zech. 2.4. beasts before thee, Psal. 73.22. made to bear the burdens of the weak ones, their many frailties and infirmities, their murmurings and repinings, their contumacies and obstinacies; while meantime, in great pati∣ence and long-suffering, they endeavour their repentance and a∣mendment of life. 2. Note here a great difference between the temperal and spi∣ritual warfare. 1. In the temporal the enemies are outward. In the spiritual, they are inward according to the former; Kings go out to battel, 1 Chron. 20.1. According to the latter, the Levites go in to war the warfare of the service, Numb. 8.24. 2. The Prophet Esay gives us another difference: For every battle of the warriour, is with confused noise, and garments rolled in bloods: But this with burning and smell of fire; as in the battle of Gideon against the Mi∣dianites, Esay 9.5. which was not managed by might or by power, but by Gods Spirit, which is as fire. So that when that light and fire appears, all the divided judgements (so the Midianites signifie) fall foul one upon another, and Gideon who breaks and treads under the sin (as his name signifies) obtains a glorious victory. O that unto us that childe were born, that unto us that son were given who may make good his great name in us, according to the following words. 3. Men engage themselves in outward wars, to satisfie the policies, lusts, ambition, revenge and covetousness of the worldly Potentates,—Delirant Reges; Plectuntur Achivi. Ahab was am∣bitious and covetous; and for the satisfaction of his lusts, all Is∣rael mst be scattered on the hills, 1 Kings 22.17. But in the inward warfare the spiritual warriour endures hard∣ship as a good souldier of Jesus Christ, he entangleth not himself in the affairs of this life, that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a souldier, 2 Tim. 2.4. O ye Levites! these things belong unto you, saith the Lord, v. 24. if we cleave unto the Lord, as we all profess our selves to do, and it is the business which the name it self imports, how can we ad∣here unto any creature which may intervene and hinder our imme∣diate union and cleaving unto him?
2. From the age of fifty years, they shall cease from waiting on the service of the Tabernacle of meeting. There seems some jarring between Numb. 4. and this place, Numb. 8. For in the former place, the time of the Levites warfare begins at thirty years of age. But here Numb. 8. their warfare begins five years sooner, viz. at the twenty fifth year of their age. The reconciliation is easie, according to Rabbi Solomon, and others who follow him. That, whereas the Levites warfare con∣sisted of two parts, whereof the former was spent in learning the rudiments of those rites and ceremonies which belonged unto their office. This was the first part of their warfare, which continued from the twenty fifth year of their age, until they were thirty years old. At that age, being the age of full strength, they en∣tred upon the second part of their warfare, wherein they conti∣nued twenty years, viz. until the fiftieth year of their age, when the bodily strength of a man begins to fail him. And the reason is evident. Nature now weary, requires ease and rest. The souls of the Levites, as well as others, dwell in houses of clay, Job 4.19. weak and brittle. And although the soul in her other house, her astral body, be strong, vigorous, and able for action, yet while it acts in and by an elementary body which daily moulders away, in that case, though the spirit be willing, yet the flesh is weak. Though there may be actûs eliciti, actions drawn forth of the soul; Yea, and imperati, actions commanded also by it, yet they must needs be weakly performed, when the keepers of the house tremble, and the strong men bow themselves, and the grinders fail, because they grinde little, and they that look out of the win∣dowes be darkned, &c. Eccles. 12.3. Whence we learn, 1. That the Lord requires our full strength to be wholly spent in warring the warfare of his service. The full strength of a man begins about the thirtieth year of his age. At that age Joseph began to serve the Lord in the kingdom of Egypt, Gen. 41.46. and David in the kingdom over Israel, began his reign and the service of God and his generation, at the same age, 2 Sam. 5.4. Acts 13.36. And at the same age the Lord Jesus being the truth of both these types, he began to serve the Lord, in his tem∣poral dispensation, Luke 3.23. 2. The Lord requires all our time of strength to be imployed in the spiritual warfare, even from the full strength at thirty years, until the decay of it at fifty. Nor will any one, who serves the Lord out of love, which is the highest and most acceptable service, Exod. 20.6. Otherwise conceive, but that all that time is utterly mis-spent and lost, which is imployed in any other service; since the Lord requires all our strength, and all our time to be spent in his service of love, Luke 10.37. There is an  enough and more then enough of our time wasted in the service of sin, how little soever of our
time hath perished in it. And here I meet with a Scripture, which I beleeve, is much mistaken, 1 Peter. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Forasmuch therefore as Christ hath suffered in the flesh, arm your selves with the same minde; because he who hath suffered in the flesh, hath ceased from sin; that he should live no longer the rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts of men but to the will of God. The Apostle having propounded his general exhortation, in the first words; Arm your selves with the same minde, according to the patern of Christs suffering in the flesh; he explains, what he means by suffering in the flesh, viz. ceasing from sin; which expli∣cation given, he proceeds in his general exhortation, interposing himself, by a , that ye or we no longer should live the rest of your or our lifetime to the lusts of men, but to the will of God. For that second verse is not to be knit to the exegesis or explication in the next preceding words, but to the general exhortation in the first words. And so to be read, as if they were put in a Paren∣thesis by themselves. What some might doubt, that the words in our translation are in the singular number and third person, That he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, &c. I answer, the Verb  is in the Infinitive; and so may be rendred according to either number and any person: But it suits best with the general exhortati∣on propounded in the plural, Ver. 1. and so followed ver. 3, 4. as Dr. Hammond hath judiciously observed. But let us resume our business. 3. It is not the will of the Lord, that his souldiers should be alwayes warring, that they should alwayes be fighting. Surely men fight not but with hope of overcoming, and an end there must be of their fighting; because the Lord of hosts engageth us in this bat∣tle; and he does nothing in vain. Yea, we read, that the Prophets must comfort Jerusalem and tell her, that her warfare is accompli∣shed, Esay 40.2. 4. There is a time when the spiritual Levite is discharged from warring the warfare of the Lord; a time when he shall return from the warfare of the service. Among the many opposite times for many businesses, the Wiseman tells us of a time for war, and a time for peace, Eccles. 3.8. 5. The proper time of returning, ceasing, and resting from the spiritual warfare, is the time of the Spirit. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. And this is the time hinted and figured in the text before us; the age of fifty years. Which, if we render according to the Hebrew, word for word, they sound thus, From a son of fifty years; that is, from a son born of the spirit, figured by the number fifty. For thus in type the Levites, the Kohathites, Gershonites, and Merarites, although, for diverse reasons, already shewen, they
began their service at different years of their age; yet they all en∣ded their service at fifty years of age, as appears in them all, Num. 4.15. And from fifty years of their age, they must return from the warfare of the service. More particularly; as fourty years is the time of separation, trial of faith, & obedience, the time of sin, punishment of sin, & humiliation and repentance, and mortification of sin, as I shall shortly shew if the Lord will. So the number of fifty notes remission and pardon, yea, doing away of sin. Whence it was, that the 50 year was the year of Jubile, the year of Release, as it is called, Levit. 25. It is very often in that Chapter called  in the LXX, remission of sins, the time of giving the Law, and giving the holy Spirit, Acts 2.1. The time when they who have mortified their sins are born from the dead, and become born of the Spirit. Thus when David had now fought the Lords battles, Solomon his son succeeded him, a man of peace and rest. 6. We may note from hence, the Lords gracious dealing with those who labour in his service. The Levites who had laboured twenty years in bearing burdens, besides five years spent in prepa∣ration to their warfare, had a time when they were milites emeriti, as souldiers discharged from warring the warfare of the service, when they must serve no more, but minister with their brethren in the Tabernacle of the meeting, to keep the charge, and shall do no service, Numb. 8.25.26. And no doubt but some Analogie there is between the Levitical and Evangelical service in regard of time. If they rested at fifty years, the  and indulgence of the Gospel may allow an Evangelical Levit some ease at sixty years, yea, at sixty three years of age, after nine climactericals; when old age it self begins to be burden enough. Provision was made for the Levite now super-annuated under the Law. And did the Lord wholly neglect his Evangelical Levites, when their strength faileth them? Surely no: Liberal maintenance was pro∣vided for them, whereby their old age might be cherished, after their hard duty performed. But when the Gospell Levites made the people stumble at Gods Law as impossible to be kept, or, (which amounts to the like) not belonging to those under the Gospel; when they corrup∣ted the covenant of Levi, Mal. 2.8. when the people enlarged their desire like hell, Habak. 2.5. The Levite now past his labour, is as much regarded as an old Horse which hath ease and rest only when he is dead. But this is a remediless complaint, when what was provided and consecrated unto the support of the aged Levites, is diverted unto other, and those (to speak most sparingly) whrse ends. May not the consideration of this, shame us who pretend our selves to be spiritual Levites, such as cleave unto the Lord (they
are the true Levites) yet spend our strength and chief time of our strength from twenty five till fifty years of age, (may I not say of some, till sixty, yea seventy years of age and upward?) in the war of their members, following their fleshly lusts which fight a∣gainst their souls? Be we rather exhorted to hasten the coming of the fiftieth year, that year of release from our hard duty and service. That acceptable year of the Lord; that day of the Lord whose approach we must hasten.2 Pet. 3. v. 12. Hasten the comming of the day of God. So Erasmus renders , 2 Pet. 3.12. Accele∣rantes adventum, hastening the coming or presence of that day of God. Its an expression somewhat strange: for we rather wish, Phosphore redde diem—that the time were come, then that we should come to the time or day. Indeed that day of the Lord is alwayes ready, and would shine unto us. but we interpose our clouds or mists and darkness of our sins between it and us. We draw our selves in a boat with cords to the shore, when the shore seems to come unto us. And so it is when we are drawn by the cords of love, unto that day of our God; and the Lord is drawn by his love toward us; as when the Prodigal son returned, his father saw him a far off, ran unto him and kissed him. Thus the Lord meeteth him who rejoyceth and worketh righteousness, Esay 64.5. But when the Levites strength is spent in warring the warfare of the Lord, must the Levites then be idle? Surely no: they must now minister. There is no part of time that wholly exempts any man from serving God. If the enemies be subdued in the spiritual warfare, being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we must serve him in holiness and righteousness all the dayes of our life. As for the two following divine sentences; 3. That the Levites must minister. 4. Not serve, but minister, I have noted somewhat that may give light unto them, on Gen. 39.4. upon the Translators mistake there, which I shall not here repeat.
Let the children of Israel also keep the Passeover at his appointed sea∣son;Numb. 9. v. 2, 3. in the fourteenth day of this moneth at even, ye shall keep it in his appointed season, according to all the rites of it, and according to all the ceremonies thereof shall ye keep it.] These words contain the Law touching the due observation of the Passeover to be kept in the due time appointed for it, and according to the manner prescribed of keeping it. But special charge is given concerning the time, which is twice mentioned, in his appointed season; and again, in his appointed season. Why then do our Translators point us to one evening, when the Scrip∣ture tels us of two evenings, and mentions them precisely both here, and Exod. 12.6. And appoints the set time when the Pass∣over must be killed, and the Feast kept, viz. between the two evenings. It is true, that secundùm idolum fori, according to our common notion we know but one evening in one day; and that about Sun-setting; whence our English word evening is from , a Bed, because the evening or eventide is Bed-time. But its reasonable, yea, necessary, that our notions be confor∣med unto the Scriptures expressions; not that we should force the Scriptures to our notions. For our understandings, wills, affecti∣ons, actions, life and manners, are all of them to be shaped and fa∣shioned according to the Canon and rule of the Word; the Word is not to be formed or modeled according to our understandings, wills, affections, life and maners. It was a foul oversight of the Translators to render these words,Rom. 6. v. 17. Rom. 6.17. , But ye have obeyed that form of doctrine which was delivered you: whereas the words sound thus; But ye have obeyed that form of doctrine, unto which ye were deli∣vered. This they acknowledge to be the sense of the Greek text; which yet they cast into the margent. Where this true translati∣on and many other, more agreeable to the Original, then what they put in the text, are utterly lost in all our English manual Pocket Bibles. But come we to our two Evenings; whereof the one is the de∣clination of the Sun from the Noon-point: the other is the setting of the Sun. And therefore the Chald. Par. renders between the two Evenings  not, as he is translated, ad vesperam, to∣ward the evening, but between two Suns, viz. the declining and setting Sun. The LXX therefore hath, , toward the Evening. And that this was the preceise time of killing the Passover; Josephus testifies Antiq. lib. 16. cap. 10. And Solomon Jarchi, and from them Cajetan and others. The reason of this exact observation of time for the killing of the Passover, was, that there might be a due correspondence be∣tween
the type and the truth; between the slaying of the Passover, and the crucifying of Christ, who is our Passover, 1 Cor. 5.7. For, whereas the Jewes divided their day into twelve hours, (which they made longer or shorter, according to the divers parts of the year,) so saith our Lord, Are there not welve hours in the day? John 11.9. at the third hour, that is, our nine a clock in the morning, they offered up the Morning Sacrifice, a perfect Lamb; and betwetn the two Evenings, about our three a clock after noon, they offered up the Evening Sacrifice, Exod. 29.38.39. Numb. 28.3. This is the offering made by fire which ye shall offer unto the Lord, two Lambs of the first year, perfect in a day, for a continual burnt offering: the one Lamb shalt thou offer in the morning; and the other Lamb shalt thou offer between the two Evenings. These things befel that people in figure, and were written for our admonition, that we might the better be confirmed and assu∣red, that the Lord Jesus Christ is the true Paschal Lamb, 1 Cor. 5.7. the true daily sacrifice, that Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world, John 1. For as, among the many lawes touching the Pas∣chal Lamb, this was one, which was observed in the accomplish∣ment of it in the Lord Jesus Christ, John 19.26. A bone of him shall not be broken; and therefore they brake not his legs, as they did theirs who were crucified with him: So like charge is given, in the Scripture before us, concerning the time, when Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us; which is observed very punctually by the Evangelist S. Mark, Chap. 15.25. It was the third hour, when they crucified him: the usual hour of the Morning Sacrifice, (although, that time might be allowed to other Sacrifices, which by no means, might precede this, the Morning Sacrifice was sometime offered more early.) The same Evangelist saith, that at the ninth hour, (or three a clock after noon, the time of the Evening Sacrifice, unless it did somewhat anticipate, for the reason above named,) at that same ninth hour Jesus cryed with a lowd voice, and gave up the ghost, Mark 15.34.37. All which, although it be very well worth our observation, and may be a good subject for our meditations to busie them∣selves about, especially the Passion week now instant, yet I believe, there is somewhat of neerer concernment unto us, which may hence be taken notice of; without which, all our meditati∣ons about Christ crucified without us, so many hundred years ago, will very little avail us toward our salvation. Surely as we are with the Lord the Sun of Righteousness, so is he with us, as I have lately shewen. If therefore we decline from our obedience, become Apostates unto the light, and turn from the Lord, and follow the Prince of darkness, and will do his lusts, these are two spiritual evenings, between which, the Paskal Lamb is slain. Which are the very same with that of the School; that
sin consists either in aversione à Deo, or conversione ad creaturam, in turning away from God, or turning to the creature. The same two evils which the Prophet saith, the people had committed, They have forsaken the Fountain of living waters, and digged to them∣selves Cisterns or pits, broken pits or Cisterns which will hold no water, Jer, 2.13. According to this distinction, we may reconcile the Wiseman and the Apostle: who indeed differ not but only seemingly. We read Ecclus. 10.12. that the beginning of pride is when one de∣parteth from God, and his heart is turned away from his Maker: For pride is the beginning of sin, &c. that is, Quoad aversionem à Deo, so far forth as a man, through pride, (which is an high opinion of a mans own excellency,) turns away from God. But the Apostle speaking of the other term, 1 Tim. 6.10. Covetousness, saith he,1 Tim. 6. v. 10. is the root of all evil. For so I would rather turn  cove∣tousness, or concupiscence, then strictly, according to the etymon, the love of money, or rather, silver, as the Syriac renders it. For so it is not adequately true, that the love of silver is the root of all evil; which may be said as well of gold or any other creature. And therefore, the Vulg. Lat. renders , Cupiditas, cove∣tousness, or concupiscence. Between these two spiritual evenings, the turning from God, who is our life, Deut. 30. and the turning to the creature, the man dies, from his spiritual life. For the declining or turning away of the simple, shall slay them,Prov. 1. v. 32. and the prosperity [or rather, the ease or rest in sin,] of fools shall destroy them, Prov. 1.32. where, (whether it be the Translators, or the Printers fault, I know hot, but the marginal reading, [or ease of the simple] is mis∣placed, being directed to the former member of the sentence, un∣to which it belongs not; not to the latter, unto which word [ease] may belong, as answering to , which they turn, prosperity; but the word simple may there be well left out: For though , in the former part of the sentence, signifie simple ones, such as are easily perswaded to folly; yet , in the later part, sig∣nifies not such simple men, but arrant fooles, as being joyn'd with the brutish person, and opposed to the wise, Psal. 49.10. troublesome turbulent fools; whence the Star, or rather Constellation called  hath its name, or they from it; which raiseth great storms and tempests, especially in the straights of Sin  subject to it, saith Benjamin in his Journal. the wicked fool is as the troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and durt, Esay 57.20. Now, as the sinful man dies from the divine life, between these two spiritual evenings; so doth the Lamb of God, the Paschal Lamb also die from the sinful man, between the same two evenings. For while we are yet sinners, Christ died for us, Rom. 5.8. as being wounded
not only for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquites, as our Translators turn those words,Esay 53. v. 5. Esay 53.5. but, as they ought to be rendred, He was wounded of our transgressions, and was bruised of our iniquities; the words are , & , which sound, of our transgressions, and of our iniquities. And so Arias Montanus turnes them, A prevaricationibus and Ab iniquita∣tibus nostris. And Tremellius, Dolore afficitur à defectionibus nostris, atteritur ab iniquitatibus nostris, he is grieved of our failings, he is bruised of our iniquities. Which Verbs he puts in the Present tense, implying, that, as in the Prophets time, so long before Christs temporall dispensation, and manifestation in the flesh; so in our times also, so long after the dayes of his flesh, and his temporal dispen∣sation, our sins wound and bruise the Christ of God, as he com∣plains, I am broken with their whorish heart which hath departed from me, Ezech. 6.9. and the like is affirmed, Hebr. 6.6. and 10.29. The Apostle gives us serious advise touching these Evenings, Ephes. 4.26. Be angry, and sin not: let not the Sun set upon your touchiness, fretfulness, or peevishness, : Sol ne oc∣cidat super iracundia vestra, let not the Sun go down upon your trefeness or testiness; there's one evening; neither give place to the Devil; there's the other evening of dismal darkness. O that such a time were come which is promised unto the people of God!Esay 60. v. 19, 20. Esay 16.19, 20. that the Lord were unto us for an everlasting light, and our God for our glory! that the Sun might no more go down! &c. Soles occidere & redire possunt. The Sun of Righteousness may set by death and rise again: And certain∣ly if we suffer with him, if we die with him, we shall also arise with him, and live with him, and be glorified with him. And, as his coun∣tenance is, as the Sun shineth in his strength, Revel. 1.16. So let them who love him, be as the Sun when he goeth forth in his might! Judges 5.31.
And it came to pass as the Ark set forward, that Moses said,Numb. 10. v. 35, 36. Rise up, O Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee, flee before thee. And when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel.] The words contain the prayer of Moses, when the Ark jour∣neyed and rested. When it journeyed, that the Lord would arise and scatter his enemies; when it rested, that he would gather toge∣ther and unite his people, and take up his residence with them. For both these later acts may be comprehended in the Verb , as I shall shew. Two exceptions lie against the translation of this Paragraph; 1. That no notice is taken of the word , nor is it rendred otherwise here, nor in many other places, then only before thee; which is a decompounded word, and signifies, [from before thy face.] I deny not but , the face, spoken of God, notes his pre∣sence; but withal, according to the places of Scripture, where we meet with it, it imports either his grace and mercy, or his wrath and hatred. For as the face of a man naturally declares his will and affections, Vultus index animi, a mans countenance speaks his minde (until that damnable art of seeming perverted the simpli∣city of nature) so the face of the Lord discovers his good will and fa∣vour toward us, or on the contrary his dis-favour, hatred, wrath. Examples are obvious. The Church prayes, God be merciful unto us, and blesse us, , cause his face to shine upon us. Psal. 67.1. But Psal. 34.16. we read  the face of the Lord is a∣gainst them who do evil. And Levit. 17.10. The Lord saith, I will set  my face against that soul; and 20.3. and 26.17. be∣side many like places. Where by the face of the Lord, his wrath is to be understood. Thus in the Scripture now in question, which speaks accord∣ing to our Translators, thus; let them that hate thee, flee before thee: here is an object of wrath and hatred propounded to the Lord; and therefore the Spirit of God expresseth his face; which imports his wrath and hatred against his and his peoples incorrigible enemies. Let them who hate thee flee  from before thine an∣gry countenance. The second exception lies against the last words, Return O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel. The Translators well knew, that  signifies the same with Myrias in the Greek, viz. ten thou∣sands; and therefore they say in the margent, Hebr. ten thousand thousands; though therein they come not home to the Hebrew text; which is in the plural, , ten thousands thousands of Is∣rael. So that neither in the text, nor margent, they expresse the original.
May we conjecture, what their reason might be? Its probable, that they thought there were not so many Myriads of Israelites, and that this might be an hyperbolical speech of Moses. But the Jewes have a tradition, that three Millions of men came with Moses out of Egypt, & wandred in the Wilderness toward Canaan. Which, though it were true, yet these might fall short of the num∣ber mentioned. Nor ought this tradition to be imposed upon our faith. What if we shall rather say, that, when the Israelites were numbred and mustered in the Plains of Moab; and a Catalogue was then taken of the fighting men only, of twenty years old and upward, who were six hundred thousand and a thousand, seven hundred and thirty. Numb. 26.51. It is not said, how many more there were under that age; to say nothing of the women. All which its possible might amount to the number mentioned, with∣out hyperbole. And this may be made yet the more probable if we lay hereunto, what Moses saith, Deut. 1.10. The Lord your God hath multiplyed you, and behold, you are this day as the Stars of hea∣ven for multitude. But why should we confine our thoughts unto an Israel accord∣ing to the flesh? since the Scripture tels us of an Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. an Israel pure in heart, Psal. 73.1. An Israel without guil, John 1. Are there not, or may there not be in the Wilderness, travelling toward Canaan, according to the Jews tradition, more then three Millions of such souls? If so, what need is there, that we should make that an hyperbole, which being duly examined (and that by those who restrain not religion and religious persons to their own chosen way of worshipping God and those who dwell in their street,) may be found even in the letter an undeniable truth? Mysticè. The words before us, are to be understood as dire∣cted unto Christ, who, as I have shewen, in Numb. 4.19, 20. is signified by the Ark of God, called the Ark of Gods strength, Psal. 132.8. where we have a like prayer to that before us; Arise O Lord, to thy Rest, thou and the Ark of strength. But the Psalmist begins Ps. 68. with the words of this prayer; Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered;Psal. 68. v. 41. let them also that hate him, flee before him. Where the word is, , before his face, his wrathful face; which hath a suitable effect in the next words; As smoke is driven away, so shalt thou drive them away; As Wax melteth before the fire, so let the wicked perish , from the wrathful face of God. And ye read the like twice, v. 8. But the ancient Fathers, S. Austin, Hilary, Hierom, Euthymius, and after them, the later Expositors understand the Psalm of Christ and his Church; and aver, that there are contain'd in it the mysteries of both Testaments; especially the giving of the law, the resurrection and ascension of Christ, his bringing his people a∣again
out of Egypt, &c. His leading them thorow the Wilder∣ness, &c. Many have applyed this portion of Scripture unto Christ, be∣fore his appearing in the flesh, as Salomon, 2 Chron. 6.41. Psalm 68. Others, as the Ancients before named have made use of it unto Christ, as to his Resurrection, that thereby he might prove himself to be God; Let God arise, and so evidence himself to the Son of God by his resurrection from the dead, Rom. 1.4. And let his ene∣mies be scattered, that is, say they, the Jewes who said, we will not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19. And indeed they have been so scattered as never nation but themselves have been. Others understand his enemies to be other wicked men. Others yet hereby will have the Devils to be meant. And therefore Athanasius saith of Antony the Monk, that when he was assaulted by the Devil, he made use of those two first verses of Psalm 68. parallel to Numb. 10.35. And there is no doubt but soveraign use may be made of this Scripture upon every assault and temptation of the evil one. When this is enlarged to men of contrary mindes to us whe∣ther Jewes, Turks, or Christians by profession, too often men out of self-love partially endear themselves, or fansie themselves to be endeared unto Christ, as his friends, and, out of private hatred, conceive others, whom they hate, to be the enemies of God and Christ, when its possible to be quite otherwise. Yet hence arise debates, contentions, enmities, and most wars among pretending Christians. Meantime its little understood and less regarded, that the car∣nal minde is an enemy against God; that the friendship of this world, is an enemy against God; Gods enemies are out fleshly lusts which fight against our souls, &c. O how needful is it to pray unto the Lord, that he would arise up in us and scatter these, which are his and our truest enemies! and that they who hate him and us, may flee from his wrathful face. It is the Lords works as to scatter his enemies, even all out carnal lusts, and the spiritualities of wickedness, so likewise is it his work to cause to return, gather, and unite all his scattered friends, his ten thousands thousands of Israel, to one another, and to himself, to re∣turn himself unto the ten thousands thousands of Israel. That is the second object of Moses his prayer. For so largely  the word here used may signifie: And, thus the latter part of Moses's prayer may be two wayes understood. 1. Return O Lord the ten thou∣sand thousands of Israel to one another, and to thy self. 2. (By a Supplement,) Return, O Lord unto the ten thousands thousands of Israel. The senses are both good; our Translators take notice only of the latter.
The former work is the causing all Israel to return one to other, and to himself: The later is the Lords return unto his Israel so returned and gathered one to other, and to himself. These are two great acts of Gods grace and favour toward his people. The former, the Lord accomplisheth by Eliah the Tisbite, that is, the Turner, who causeth to return; according to what the Pro∣phet saith of him, That he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to the fathers, Mal. 4.6. This may occasion a long, but no impertinent discourse. Our Lord, Matth. 17.11, 12. distinguisheth a twofold coming of Eliah the Tisbite. One Eliah, saith he, is already come; the other, shall come. These two comings of Eliah answer to the two comings of Christ; 1. In the flesh: 2. In the Spirit. So that before each coming of our Lord, we read an express promise of his fore-run∣ner, Mal. 3.1. and 4.5. Eliah in his first coming was coursly entertaind by Herod, Hero∣dias, and Salome, Matth. 14. That Elias the Tisbite is yet to come, is much opposed by many who endeavour to confound our Lords words, as that they were to be understood of one Elias, and one coming of that Elias. Against this, I oppose the very context: our Lord saith, Matth. 17.11. Elias cometh or shall come, and shall restore all things. But Ver. 12. he saith, I say unto you, that Elias is already come. How can these be understood otherwise then either of a twofold Elias, or at least of a two-fold coming of one Elias? If further proof of this be needful, both Jewes and Christians un∣derstand the fourth of Malachy ver. 6. of Elia's second coming in the end of the world. Thus the Jewes say of Elias that he must appear to Israel in their bannishment, to bring them again into their own land. And therefore when they administer circumcision, they set an empty chair for Elias, wherein, some say, he sits invi∣sibly. And as the Jewes testifie this, so the Fathers also of the Greek and Latin Church, understand our Saviour to speak of the second coming of Christ, and the coming of Elias before him. Thus S. Cyril, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Euthymius, Tertullian, Hilary, Anselm, Hugo, Lyra, Tho. Aquinas, &c. And reason there is both in regard of Gods promise by Mal. 4.6. and our Lords prediction, Matth. 17.11, 12. and a kinde of necessity in regard of Christ, and they who are Christs. 1. In re∣gard of Christ: for if Christ coming in the flesh must have a , a forerunner, much more must Christ in the spirit have his forerunner. 2. In regard of those who are Christs; for if that handful of men in Judea needed an Elias, how much more all the ten Tribes Ecclus. 48.10. Yea, how much yet more, all other kingdomes, nations, and peoples? all the ten thousands thousands of Israel?
Since Moses prayes, that the Lord would return, reduce, and restore the ten thousands thousands of Israel, it appears that Israel for the present, is in an averse and evil state, of which Moses praies for a change unto a good condition. The averse and evil state of Israel, from which Moses prayes for a change to be made, supposeth a former good condition, wherein Israel had been; and from which they had been depra∣ved and corrupted. So that the office of Elias the Tisbite compre∣hends three things; whereof two supposed the third expressed: the first supposed is, That all things with Israel, have been in a good state. 2. That all things with Israel, have been depraved and corrupted. 3. It is prayed, that Elias would reduce and restore all things from their averse and evil estate, to their first good condition. All which are contained in that full word  used in our Lords speech, Matth. 17.11. Elias shall come and , he shall restore or return all things unto their first good estate. 1. All things have bin in a good estate with Israel. Such their Creator made them, Genesis 1.31. Ecclus. 39.16. So saith Solomon of Adam, That God made him upright, Eccles. 7.29. This recti∣tude and uprightness in man, 1. in regard of God, is a due confor∣mity unto his will in a pure and holy worship and service. 2. In regard of our neighbour, the due performance of justice and judge∣ment. 3. In regard of every mans self, sobriety, temperance and continency. All which are comprised in those three Adverbs, , soberly, righteously, godlily, Tit. 2.12. Are all things in this good condition in our Israel? Are they so among us? I believe, no man, I am sure, no honest man will say so. The Cobler would have taught his Crow to flatter Do∣mitian and those times by saying, , Omnia bene, All things are well. But the Crow could not learn that lesson, nor be untaught the Dorie broad dialect, , Omnia crunt bene. All things shall be well. The like we may say, and its all we can hope for of those evil times. For if we look imparti∣ally upon the present evil, averse and perverse state of things, we will report that in the general, which our Lord spake in a more particular case, Things are not so as they were in the beginning. For when the man is depraved, that Vinculum universi, that bond and tye of the universe, that compendium creaturarum, that sum and breviary of all the creatures, that binding cord, which makes the harmony between heaven and earth, when that's loose and broken, it cannot be but all must full asunder into discord, disorder, and con∣fusion. Here then is work for Moses, [the Drawer, as his name signi∣fies. Here is work for Elias the Tisbite [the Trnor, as that name sounds.]
Elias must rectifie the depravation of all things. John Baptist whom our Lord called Elias, began this work, as much as befitted his dispensation, as the Prodromus or forerunner of Christ in the flesh. The other Elias was to return and restore all things: He was to re∣ctifie the worship of God, to act the part of old Elias over a∣gain. And since John Baptist could not wash away Baal & his Priests; the later Elias must fire them out of Israel. Baals Priests offer their sacrifices without fire, and teach, that the sin must remain unconsu∣med; and that its impossible, it should be consumed in this world. Elias prayes for fire from heaven, even the holy Spirit of God, which is as fire; and that consumes the sacrifice upon the altar of Christs pati∣ence, even the body of sin that is to be destroyed. Yea, it licks up the water, all the transitory delights and pleasures in sin. It consumes the stones, the hardness of the heart; and the dust the knowing know∣ledge which is the Serpents food, Esay 65.25. 1 Cor. 8.1. This Elias must destroy the painted Jezabel, which puts Naboth to death by the authority of Ahab. And does not Jezabel yet act the same part? Revel. 2.22. that earthly lying spirit of the false righteousness in the mouth of the false Prophets, which, by the power and authority of Kings, Princes, and Governours, by the secular power in all ages, and in this last part of time, puts Na∣both to death by false witnesses. For what is Naboth but the true Prophesie? as the word signifieth. And thus at this day, the false Priests of Jezebel by their false testimonies, suppress the true Pro∣phets of God, who have the testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of prophesie, Revel. 19.10. This therefore is Elia's work to discover Jezebel, the false pro∣phets adorn'd with false holiness; and to anoint Jehu a type of Christ, (who was, is, and is to come) and shall cause her to be troden under foot of his army, as the old Jezebel was. And as Elias must rectifie the worship of God; so must he set in order the man toward his neighbour. He must turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the children to their fathers. He shall put an end to all differences between the spiritual fathers and their children; and the spirits of the later Prophets, shall be subject to the former Prophets. Cum Elias venerit, solvet nodos, When Elias comes, he shall untye all knots, resolve all doubts. In a word, he shall bring back the whole man unto his God. He shall restore the natural man to his right, and the heavenly man to his. He shall recover all Edom to the house of Israel, Obad. v. 21. And great reason there is; 1. The honour of the God of Order. His Wisdom, Justice, Power, and Goodness herein is eminently seen. How much more when all, what ever is amiss, is rectified and brought to right again? 2. It is the office of Elias the Tisbite so to do, Mal. 4.5. LXX.
And why should we doubt or despair, but such a time there will be, when all things, which are now , turn'd upside down, all out of order, all confounded, shall be restored and brought to right again? have all the Beasts had their reigns? and shall not God have his? shall not his kingdom come? un∣less we pray in vain; unless we pray without faith and hope. Have we not a promise, that there shall be , times of refreshing? Acts 3.19. Were this mans work, no doubt might be made of it; but the whole is wrought by  there is no∣thing of man in him. Its the work of , God, the strong God,  the Lord,  Ipse, God himself; as Galatinus and Scaliger render that last word. And therefore well may Moses pray in faith, and we with him, that the Lord would return and reduce the ten thousands thousands of Israel, and bring them to their first estate. 2. As the Lord returns the ten thousands thousands of Israel one to other, so likewise unto himself. So the Prophet, I will gather the remnant of my flock, out of all countries, whither I have driven them, and will bring them again to their selves, their rest in the divine nature, Jer. 23.3. Which promise another Pro∣phet expresseth thus, I will have mercy upon Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land: where is that? it fol∣lowes, And the people shall take them, and bring them to their place, .Esay 14. v. 1, 2. The word  place is one of the names of God; in whom all things subsist, and have their being: and the house of Israel shall inherit them, upon the Lords land, Esay 14.1, 2. When the Lord hath caused his people to return one to other and to himself, he gratiously returns unto them, and resides with them. So the Chald, Parapheast interprets this part of Moses's prayer, Return, O Lord, with thy glory, dwell in the midst of the ten thousands thousands of Israel. Hitherto I have endeavoured to prove my two exceptions a∣gainst the translation of Moses prayer. We have authority also of other Churches. The Tigurin Bible and Vatablus, Pagnin, Mun∣ster, and Tremellius, fat down at the right hand of as also Piscator have, before thy face; and that for good reason, as I have shewen. As for the later, the most Translators diminish the number in the Hebrew text: only Pagnin, the Spanish Bible, and Ainsworth, retain and express it. O Israel! now arise, and take your journey; the clowd of the Lords protection is over thee, and the Ark of the Lords strength is risen up, and scatters thine enemies, and puts them to flight before his face. Ten thousands thousands of Israel have journeyed in the same way of the Lord before thee. Wherefore having so great a clowd of witnesses lying about us, laying aside every weight,Hebr. 12. v. 1, 2. and the sin that doth so easily beset us, in every circumstance, let us run
the race of patience lying before us, looking to Jesus the Author [or Leader] and finisher of our faith [the Ark of Gods strength] who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, de∣spising the shame, sat down at the right hand of the throne of God. Let us choose him for our guide in our motions, in our rest, lead∣ing us out, and bringing us in, turning and gathering us one unto ano∣ther, and to himself; unto whom all the ten thousands thousands of Israel ought to be gathered, Gen. 49.10. 2 Thes. 2.1. Arguments are wont to be brought to perswade us to our du∣ty: Are any needful unto this?Psal. 133. v. 1. If so, behold how good and how pleasant it is, that brethren dwel even as one. The Prophet admires the goodness and pleasure of the excellent way of mutual love. These two motives very seldom meet. For some things are good which have no delight and pleasure in them; as the labour of repentance, sorrow for sin, the throws and pangs of mortification. Some things are delightful which are not good; as the pleasures of sin. But bre∣thren to dwel together in unity, comprehends both. Vis unita for∣tior: when they are as one, they more strongly advance the pro∣fit one of other. How good, how profitable! when many have one heart, and one soul, and one spirit, when the good of one, is the good of all, when every one rejoyceth in the good of another, as of his own, how joyful, how pleasant! This is the pretious ointment, the unction of the Spirit, John 2.20. which descends from the Holy one, from Christ the Head, to the Beard, the aged ones united unto Christ: the dew of the holy Word that renders the heart fruitful. There the Lord commanded ; there's a great empha∣sis in that word, That blessing. And no marvel; For what is that Blessing but the life for evermore? Psal. 24.3, 4, 5. For unity and love invites God and his good Spirit unto men; as when the Disciples were all  with one accord in one place, the Spirit of God came upon them, Acts 2.1, 2. And it is the Apostles Vale to the Corinthians: Finally, Brethren, farewell, (or rather rejoyce,2 Cor. 13. v. 11. as  signifies) be perfect; be of good comfort; be of one minde; live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you, 2 Cor. 13.11.
I will take of the spirit which is upon thee,Numb. 11. v. 17. and will put it upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not alone.] What here the Translators turn, I will take of the spirit, is  that is separabo de spiritu, so Pagnin, I will separate of the spirit: and Vatablus, Segregabo I will sever of the spirit: and so Munster: also the Tigurin and French Bibles. Which is properly so to separate as to reserve what is so separated. So Arias Montanus, reservabo, I will reserve of the spirit. And to the same purpose Tremellius, seponam, I will set apart. In this sense Esau saith to his father Isaac, , hast thou not reserved one blessing for me? Gen. 27.36. This separation and reservation is by way of excellency. Whence the Princes and Nobles are called ; not only because they are separated from the multitude, by reason of high place and dignity, but also in regard of that excellent spirit which is in them. So we read, that Moses, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and the Seventy Elders, are called  the Excellent ones or Nobles of the sons of Israel, Exod. 24.11. where the Chald. Paraphrast hath  the Grandees and Princes, and the LXX hath , the elect or chosen ones, or the choise of the chosen ones. Of such , such choise, such excellent men, men of an excellent spirit, Prov. 17.27. consisted the great Synedrion, the Synagoga mag∣na, called the Sanhedrin, the great Council of the Jewes. The ground of ordaining this Government constituted by God himself, is, that the weakness and waywardness of the people might be born by their Governours. Whence they are called , not only because they are elati or praelati, lifted up and preferred above others; (although that be true,) but also because their principal business is to bear (as  signifies) the burden of the people. Or, if because they are lifted up above others, it is as the clowds are lifted up, which are also called , that they may shower down showers of Blessings upon the earth, as governours ought to do upon the inferiour people. Therefore the excellent spirit was imparted unto these seventy men, that thereby they might be enabled to bear the burden of the people. Whence it is, that the spiritual men are the strong men, and most able for that imployment. We who are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, Rom. 15.1. and not to please our selves; which is one character of an Elder though under another word , Tit. 1.7. And who are thus strong but the spiri∣tual men? Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of meekness. Yea, this spirit is the spirit of love which is so strong, that it bear∣eth all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. and that the rather, because their burden is somewhat lightned by their dear relations of children, whom
they have begotten, 1 Cor. 4.15. and of whom they travel, Gal. 4.19. Especially the burden being divided among so many. The Lord commands Moses to gather to him seventy men of the Elders of Israel, whom Moses knew that they were Elders of the people. The LXX have, , of the Presbyters or Elders of Israel, whom thou thy self knowest, &c. Which Eldership therefore is not to be understood of natu∣ral age in this outward world, but in regard of the wisdom or Christ himself, who enters into the holy souls according to the ages,Wisd. 7. v. 27. Wisd 7.27. (which our Translators turn, in all ages) and makes friends of God and Prophets. The Greek words are ; which, word for word, sound thus; according to ages, She (Wisdom) descending into holy souls, makes friends of God and Prophets. Which is confirmed by the Apostle,Ephes. 4. v. 7. Ephes. 4.7. Vnto every one of us is given grace, , according to the measure of the gift of Christ; that is, of Christ himself, who is that gift, as he calls himself, John 4.10. And Socrates in Plato's Apology for him, saith he was , Gods gift to the Athe∣nians; as every good man is to the place where he lives. It is the spiritual old age, or age of the spirit that is here to be understood: For if in truth, and in Gods computation they were old, whom the world accounts such, who should be elder then Adam & Me∣thusala? Who yet in all the Scripture are never said to be old men: But Abraham, who, as S. Hierom observes, is first said to be an old man, he was the father of the faithful, and had seen Christs day; he is said to die in a good old age. And Jehoshua, Job, Jehoiada, with some others, all children in respect of the two before na∣med, are yet stiled old men and full of dayes; when yet the eldest of them all (if we regard their natural life in this outward world) came short of Admn and Methusala, many hundred years. But lest any one should refer the difference unto natural causes only, and say, that mans vitals were weaker now since the flood, and his nourishment was now less able to support him then be∣fore; let us hear what the Wiseman saith in express terms, That honourable old age is not of much time, nor is it measured by number of years;Wisd. 4. v. 8, 9. but Wisdom (or Prudence, ) is the gray hair unto men, and the unspotted life is the old age, Wisdom 4.8, 9. Which, if it be doubted, because Apocryphal, Solomon will make it good by a Canonical Testimony,Prov. 16. v. 31. Prov. 16.31. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of Righteousness. So So our Translators render it, but amiss; for there is no [if] no condition at all in the Hebrew text; which might amuse them; since many an hoary head is far from a crown of glory, and is found in the way of wickedness. The words therefore are to be understood , as Parables ought to be; and they make this intire
sense, without supplement, The Hoariness shall be found a crown of glory in the way of righteousness. Vnto these , Presbyters or Elders, and such as these, the Lord committed the care and rule of his Church. And ever afterward in Israel, the great Synagogue, which sate at Jerusalem, judged of all controversies among the people. And in after ages, they assumed unto themselves, power in all things belonging to Religion. But its here to be well heeded and remembred, what manner of men they were, to whom the Lord gave this power and authority; Elders of Israel, whom, saith the Lord to Moses, Thou thy self knowest that they are elders of the people; such as had at∣tain'd unto the good old age, old men in Christ, Ephes. 4.13. such as thou knowest to be  with thee, like thee; and therefore it was required that they should be wise, fearing Gad, loving, meek, mer∣ciful, patient, long-suffering; in a word, such as Moses was. These had the separated, reserved, excellent spirit of God put upon them. But in process of time, this good old age of the wisdom was little regarded, and men promoted out of the Priests, Levites and o∣ther Israelites, who exercised the same power and authority, but had not the same spirit and life of God. Whence it came to pass, that their authority was like a sword in a mad mans hand. They abused it to the satisfying their desires and pleasures; and to the suppressing of the truth it self; which is most contrary to the A∣postles rule, 2 Cor. 13.8. We are able to do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. Yea, they so abused their power, that they would suffer no man, though called of God, to teach the people, Jer. 29.26, 27. Shemaiah wrote letters to Zephaniah the high Priest, to this effect; The Lord hath made thee Priest, in stead of Jehoida the Priest, that ye should be Officers in the house of the Lord, for every man that is mad, and maketh himself a Prophet, that thou shouldst put him in prison, and in the stocks. Now therefore why hast thou not reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth who maketh him∣self a Prophet to you? Vpon this ground, the high Priests, , and the Presbyters or Elders questioned our Lord Jesus Christ himself, while he was teaching the people; by what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority? Matth. 21.23. And ac∣cordingly they questioned his Apostles, for their Doctrine and Miracles, as the cure of the lame man; By what power, or by what name have ye done this? Acts 4.7. Nor God the Father, nor his Apostles, however full of the holy Ghost, must teach the divine doctrine, or do any good work, but by license from the Elders. So degenerate was this Government in after ages, from the purity of it by divine institution.
This, or the like Government under the presidency of the separate, reserved, and excellent Spirit of God, is continued unto the Christian Church; even a spiritual Judicatory, a power of judging spiritual things. How does that appear? I answer, our Lord supposeth it; and by supposing it,Mat. 5. v. 21, 22. confirmes it: Let us consider, Matth. 5.21. Ye have heard, that it was said to them of old time, or to the antients, , Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the Judgement. Where, for the word [kill] I wish were put, to murder. For [to kill] is a large word; so that he may be said to kill, who either justly, as the Magistrate, who bears not the sword in vain; or unjustly, as a murderer, or doubt∣fully, whether of the two; as he who kills his neighbour unawares, until he hath stood before the judgement, Numb. 35.24. But so to kill as must here be understood, is wilfully and feloniously to take away the life of another, upon prepensed malice; as our Law∣yers speak. The word therefore to [kill] doth not fully ex∣press the Greek, , not the Hebrew  used in the sixth Commandement, Exod. 20. Deut. 5. The English word to Mur∣der, borrowed of the Saxon, Mordren, signifies wilfully and feloni∣ously to take away the life. But go we on with our Lords speech: But I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his brother [] [without a cause] which S. Hierom would have blotted out, as being not found in any ancient copy; In pleris{que} codicibus antiquis [Sine causa] additum non est, ut scilicet ne cum causa quidem debeamus irasci, saith S. Austin; in most old Greek copies [without a cause] is not ad∣ded; namely, that we ought not to be angry, no, not with a cause. Whosoever is angry with his brother, shall be , obnoxious or liable unto the judgement; but whosoever shall say to his bro∣ther, Raca, shall be obnoxious or liable to the Council, , to the Sanhedrin. By which words, our Lord necessarily suppo∣seth a spirituall Judicatory, unto which every one who is angry with his brother, is abnoxious and liable. Yea, hereby our Lord confirmes that spiritual Council. Otherwise he who is the great Judge and Governour of his Church, who was figured by Moses in his legal Court, should be wanting to his Church, in a matter of the greatest moment; such as is the power of judging spirituall things; such a Government is in the Church. And therefore Arias Montanus speaking of those our Lords words, saith, Hoc loco con∣stituit Dominus Ecclesiasticum Judicium, authoritatem{que} Episcopis, con∣ciliis & omnis Ecclesiae tradit. In this place, the Lord appoints an Ecclesiastical Judicatory, and gives authority to the Bishops, Councils and the whole Church. So he. So that there are or ought to be spiritual men in the Church, who are meet and fit to judge of spiritual things. So the Apostle tells us, that the spiritual man judgeth all things; that is, all spiritual things, whereof he is a competent judge.
But why then is there not such a judgement, such a Council? Sure∣ly matter is not wanting, whereof to judge. What then is the reason? I shall give such an answer, as one of our great Statesmen in the dayes of blessed Queen Elizabeth gave concerning Offices and Places; One told him, he had excellent Plates in his gift, being Lord Treasurer of England; he should therefore do well to pre∣fer some of poor his kindred and friends to them. The Lord Trea∣surer confessed, he had excellent places in his gift, but, saith he, I want excellent men to put in those places. And we may say the like touching Places of spiritual judicature: Surely they are excellent places to be Judges of spiritual things: but we want excellent men to fill up such places. Men of most holy life. The High Priests them∣selves were not admitted to be of the Sanhedrin, unless they were eminent for wisdom and holiness of life. Men of sound doctrine, that is, healing doctrine, such as heals the soul of spiritual maladies. That's properly . Such are the truly Oxthodox men. Men of Christian prudence, able to rule themselves and the Church of God, 1 Tim. 3. Tit. 1. where we have other notable characters of a spiritual Elder. For want of such a Spiritual Judicatory, how far, alas! How far is the present generation from that purity of religion, where∣unto yet almost all pretend! The Christian religion will not allow a bitter or reproachful word, much less a root of bitterness, rash, and unadvised anger, but condemns it as murder; and sum∣mons wrathful persons before the Judgement and Council. We have been reformed, and reformed again, over and over; and we have now long been under the reformation of the Sword; yet where shall we finde, maugre all our preciseness and demure profession, where yet shall we finde the reformation of bitter words, the circumcision of the lips? the reformation of wrath, anger, revenge, hatred, malice, envy, bloody-mindedness; where shall we finde the reformation, the circumcision of the heart? What care and tenderness our Lord supposeth, should be in the Governours of his Church, that not so much as a reproach∣ful or contemptuous word shall pass without rectifying by due correction or censure. That what ever difficulty and doubts shall arise, there may be a present remedy had. We see a specimen of this in that first Council, when doubts arose in the Church concer∣ning circumcision, the Apostles and Elders came together to consi∣der of this matter, Acts 15.6. All this care, diligence and tenderness proceeded from a spi∣ritual fatherly indulgence, yea, from a motherly and nurselike love and affection, Gal. 4.19. 1 Thes. 2.7.11. which Moses discovered in his complaint and prayer, as a legal patern which could not perfect those things, Hebr. 7.19. but left them to an higher dispensation for their accomplishment, even that of the Gospel.
Now under the Gospel because this government is supposed and confirmed by Christ, as hath been shewen, there hath been, and yet is much contention, about the government of the Church, in∣to what hands it should be put. Surely where ever the Spirit of God rules the Governours, that must needs be the best government, and that Church the best reformed Church.2 Sam. 23. v. 2, 3. So saith David in his last words; The Spirit of the Lord spake in me, and his Word in my tongue; the God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel spake to me, Let the Ruler among men be just, ruling in the fear of God. Otherwise, if the Spirit of God, that separate, reserved, and ex∣cellent Spirit rule not the Rulers of the Church, it matters not much who are the Rulers and Governours of the Church. For if that Spirit rule not, it is no more a divine and spiritual government, such as Christs government ought to be, but at the best, humane and pru∣dential. For Christ the Head of his Church, is not only faithful in all Gods house, as Moses was only as a servant for a testimony of those things which were after to be spoken of; but Christ is faithful as a son over his own house, Hebr. 3.5, 6. and therefore he provides the best Governours over it, wherein he hath respect unto the former paterns in the Law spoken of before by Moses. And so as the twelve sons of Jacob gave names to the twelve Tribes; and afterward, the like number of Apostles was appointed by the Lord, who had promise to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel; so, in memory of the Seventy persons, who came with Jacob into Egypt, Gen. 46.27. they ordained so many Elders and Governours over them. And our Lord sent forth the like number of Disciples. Vn∣to those seventy Elders our Lord sent Moses, Exod. 3.16. who re∣ported the Lords message unto them, Exod. 4.29. Vnto these Mo∣ses, by the advise of Jethro, committed the less matters in contro∣versie to be judged, reserving the greater and more difficult to his own cognisance, Exod. 18.22. which proved a burden too heavy for him, whereof he complaining, the Lord ratified the counsel of Jethro, and commands Moses to gather Seventy Elders, such as he himself knew to be such; whom he enabled for the govern∣ment by his excellent spirit of Judgement, which consisted of Priests, Levites, and religious and devout Israelites, as appears 2 Chron. 19.8. This Council judged of all causes divine and humane, civil and capital. Now since so great care and circumspection was taken for the government of the Church under the Law, there is no doubt, but the Lord Jesus is altogether as provident for the government and Governours over his own house, the Church. The Governours are not only Pastors and Teachers,1 Cor. 12. v. 28. Elders and Deacons, as some say; but S. Paul tels us of more then these, and saith, that God hath set
some in his Church; first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after the miracles, then gifts of healings, , not helps in governments, as our Translators render the words, but helps, governments, , not diversities, but kindes of tongues. Whereof he recites some again, Ephes. 4.11. and in both places he mentions first Apostles. And why they may not be as standing Officers of the Church, as any of the rest, I know not. For when the place of Judas was void, great care was taken for the choise of Matthias, in his room, Acts 1.21.—26. And S. Paul cals himself an Apostle, in most of his Epistles, and proves him∣self such, 1 Cor. 9.1, 2. The like is said by others of Barnabas and Silas. They who say, that that and other Offices were temporary, and to continue only for a time, must, if they will be believed by judicious men, prove their assertion out of the Word of God. If the office yet continue in the Church, what answers to it but Epis∣copacy? so S. Ambrose affirmes. And it may as well be credi∣ted, as that under helps and governments are to be understood Elders and Deacons which yet I deny not. But all these are but Mera nomina, names only, unless they be informed with the Lords excellent spirit; which is most necessary for the informing and actuating as the whole Body, so especially the principal members of the Body of Christ. And therefore, in great wisdom, the Spirit of God requires, that the meanest and lowest Of∣ficers in the Church, (who are, as it were, the feet of Christs body, the Church, 1 Cor. 12.21.) the Deacons being to be appointed to their office, the Twelve give the multitude of the Disciples this charge,Acts 6. v. 3. Look ye out among your selves seven men approved by testimony, full of the holy Ghost and Wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business. Whence we may strongly reason, that, if the Deacons must be full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, then much more must the Elders and Officers of the Church, superiour unto them, be filled with the same excellent spirit and wisdom. And whereas the Apostles must appoint the Deacons, as Titus must ordain Elders, Tit. 1.5. These weighty businesses are not to be permitted unto the multitude, no, not of the Disciples, to choose either Elders or Deacons (though this is at this day practised, by what warrant of the Word, I know not,) but to the Apostles, or those who, though called by another name, are yet in their stead; as being best able to judge of these things; . Every man judgeth well of the things he knowes, and of these, he is a competent judge. What ever Governour hath this excellent spirit, he is thereby en∣abled to bear all the weaknesses and waywardnesses, all the murmu∣rings and repinings of the people under them. It is their business: And therefore they ought not to domineer over the flocks; so I would
render , so Castellio turns the words, 1 Pet. 5.3. Gregibus imperantes, domineering or Lording over the flocks; Ut reges Gentium qui dominantur eorum, like the Kings of the Nations who domineer and abuse their authority over the flocks; as Vatablus explains Cleris: Cleros vocat greges qui illis ve∣lut sortè gubernandi obtigerunt. He cals those Cleros (that is pro∣perly lots) who happen unto them as it were by lot to be governed by them. And it is the continued Metaphore or Allegory used by the Spirit of God, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4. Much less must they domineer over their faith, as to enforce men to their opinions, as to rule over their consciences. The Apo∣stle, when most of all he improves his authority over the flock, he most abominates all such dominion, 2 Cor. 1.24. Not that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy; for by faith ye stand. They must leave the conscience free to God a∣lone, the Lord of it,Gen. 9. v. 27. who alone perswades the heart, Gen. 9.27. what some abuse to that end, [Compel them to come in,] Luke 14.23. Beside that, it is unhandsome to cudgel men, and force them to come to a Feast, as the drift of that speech is to be understood; the meaning of the word is, by perswasive arguments to incline men to what they desire; as may appear by comparing Luke 24.29. 2 Kings 4.8. Acts 16.15. and other places. But we need not further descend unto particulars. The excel∣lent Spirit of Christ, which is known by the fruits of it, Gal. 5.22. sufficiently qualifies all spiritual Governours. And this Spirit is that due radical qualification, which some zealous for the Go∣vernment, or rather the counterfeit of it, believe not possible to be obtained in this life, but Dolosè ambulant in generalibus, wrap up their hidden meaning in general terms, and instead of down∣right Scripture language, that God puts his Spirit upon the Go∣vernours, choose rather to speak in Conceptu confuso, that Christ furnisheth these Officers with suitable qualifications for discharge of the office and work committed to them. And since they nor have nor hope for that excellent Spirit, how can they convey that spirit by laying on of their hands in Ordina∣tion? Nihil dat quod non habet. If they have not that excellent Spirit, how can they give it by their hands to those whom they Ordain, as the old Presbyters did; S. Paul saith, 1 Tim. 4.14. Neg∣lect not the gift that is in thee which was given thee by prophesie by laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. And ye read the like Exhortation, Stir up the gift of God which is in thee by the putting on of my hands, 2 Tim. 1.6. O my Brethren! ye who are zealous of Christs government and discipline, let us first sit down in the lowest room, and yield our selves Disciples unto the Father, Esay 8.16. and suffer our selves to be corrected by his discipline, and to be instructed out of his law.
Psal. 94.12. and thereby lead unto Jesus Christ: and bearing his yoke, his cross and patience, that being made conformable unto his death, we may be made partakers of his spirit, his life, and resur∣rection; whereby we shall be enabled to bear the burdens of the weak, and one anothers burdens; whereby we shall be taught to rule our selves, and so become Rulers and Governours of the Church of Christ. So shall we be able experimentally to preach Christ, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wis∣dom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1.28. For this is the end, why the Lord gives those his gifts unto men, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, and so Elders and Deacons, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the mini∣stery; for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all meet or come into the unity of faith and acknowledgement of the Son of God unto a perfect man, to the measure of the stature or age of the fulness of Christ. The Lord vouchsafe that great grace unto us all!
He that gathered least,Numb. 11. v. 32, 33, 34. gathered ten Homers; and they spread them abroad for themselves round about the Camp. And while the flesh was between their teeth, yet it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people, and the Lord smote the people with a very great plague. And he called the name of the place Kibroth Hattaavah: because there they buried the people that lusted.] In which words are these general parts. 1. The Israelites provision for their flesh, and satisfaction of their lusts. 2. Gods wrath and vengeance on those who so lusted, and so satisfied their lusts. 3. The Burial and Monument of those who so lusted. In the peoples provision for their lusts, we have their two acts contained in two sentences. 1. He that gathered least, gathered ten Homers. 2. They spread them abroad for themselves round about the Camp. 1. In the former we must inquire: First, What they gathe∣red: Secondly, How much. 1. What they gathered, ye read, was what God sent, ver. 31. Quailes from the Sea. 2. How much? He who gather'd least, gather'd ten Homers. That we may know the quantity of the Homer, we must know, that there may be an adequation of all measures among all Na∣tions, it hath been the custome to measure by somewhat which in Nature varies not, as artificial measures do, or may do. The Jewes therefore begin their measure of dry things Ab Ovo from an Hens Egge probably of equal quantity in all Nations. The  Log contained 6 Eggs: their  Kab 4 Logs, that is 24 Eggs. Their  Satum 6 Kabs. Their  3a Sata, which Epha is the nearest to our Bushel. The  Homer contained ten Ephas, Ezech. 43.11. We have now found the quantity of an Homer. An Homer containes ten Bushels. Every one who gathered least, gathered ten Homers. What a vast number of Quailes, according to this account, must every man gather? He who gathered least, ga∣thered ten Homers, that is, one hundred Bushels of Quails. That the Lord gathered together such a numberless number of Quails, was miracle enough. The Translators had not need to create any miracle to be wrought by the people. And what would they do with them? It would yet be another miracle that they should keep sweet until they were eaten. Yet further, if he who gathered least gathered ten Homers, that is, an hun∣dred Bushels, how many Homers gathered he that gathered most?
To put an end unto this disquisition; we must know that the word  signifies not only that vast measure before mentioned, but also an heap, and in this signification we read the word used Exod. 8.14. which no doubt had been more fit for this place. He who gathered least, gathered ten heaps. Take notice of mans large appetite; whether  signifie Homers, those vast measures so called; or only heaps, it was too great a proportion for one man to gather ten heaps or Homers. Make no provision for the flesh unto lusts. The sense is full so,Rom. 13. v. 14. and better expresses the Apostles meaning, without two need∣less supplements. For no doubt moderate provision may, yea, must be made for the flesh, if the Apostle be constant to himself,Ephes. 5.29. Ephes. 5.29. For no man at any time hath hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it. It is an honest speech of Seneca, Fateor corporis nostri nobis insitam charitatem; fateor hujus genere tutelam; non nego indulgendum illi; serviendum nego, Epist. 13. I confess, we must favour our bodies; but I deny that we must serve them. And he gives reason there, we ought not to live for our bodies sake, but because we cannot live without our body. Your business is about the Quails to provide meat for the body; my business is about the Manna to provide spiritual nourishment for the soul. Wo to me, if I keep not under mine own body while I endeavour to nourish your soules. And wo to you, if ye over∣charge your own and others bodies and neglect your own soules. Wo to us all, if we long for the Quailes and despise the Manna. For Nimia carnis & corporis cura, magna animi & virtutis est incuria; too much care of the flesh and of the body, is a great carelesness and neglect of the minde and vertue, could the Philosopher say. 2. They spread them all abroad for themselves. Take notice of this peoples unbelief. The Lord had made them promise of flesh for a whole moneth together ver. 20. and they make pro∣vision every one for himself, as if every day were a moneth. He who gatherd least, gatherd ten heaps; how many gatherd they who gatherd most? If we condemn this people, how can we justifie our selves? Our Lord commands us to pray for our daily bread, and that we take no care for tomorrow what we shall eat, and what we shall drink. Yet our provision commonly made is for our childrens children to the third and fourth generation, as if God were our God on∣ly, and not the God of our seed. Moses here presents us with an history of things done in that age, which in after ages were and are done over and over. There is in man an appetite that's infinite which being implanted in mans nature by God himself, it cannot be in vain. And since the whole world and all creatures in it, are infinite, and cannot all of them latiate and fill an infinite desire, it remains that either God
made us this soul, and this appetite for himself to fill, or that it should be empty, ever desiring and never satiated, never satisfied, and so that God should make it in vain; which is absurd and contrary to that known rule that God and nature make nothing in vain. Consider this, O man! And turn thine infinite desire toward the infinite God, who alone can fill it. This desire having lost its guide, right reason, which is subject to the law of God, it rambles up and down among the creatures, seeking here and there for satisfaction, hunting, like Esau, in the field of this world for savoury meat,Eccles. 6. v. 9. which the wisdom findes only at home. This is the wandring of the soul and the breaking of the spirit, Eccles. 6.9. In this scrutiny and search, the Lord, though forsaken, yet for∣sakes not us, but in our Wilderness, he drops down his Manna, his bread of life, his Angels food, his Word. A food that hath in it the delight of every taste, saith the Wiseman, which yet the people despised. 2. Gods wrath and vengeance on those who so lusted and so satisfied their lusts While the flesh was between their teeth, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people, &c. The reason why the Lord smote the people with a very great plague, may well be inquired into; It seems to be contain'd in the first verse of this Chapter, where its said, that the people were , Quasi murmurantes. Our Translators turn it in the Text, The people complained, but in the margent, they were as it were complainers. The meaning is, they were like those mur∣murers and complainers described, ver. 4. the mixt multitude who went up with Israel out of Egypt. The people had first complain∣ed, and were punished with fire, ver. 1, 2, 3. and then the chil∣dren of Israel returned and wept, as the complainers did, v. 4. For surely here was a twofold murmuring, which Munster and others understand to be implyed by the two Nuns [] inverted. And indeed the vulgar Interpreter seems to be mistaken, and they who follow him: for he hath left out  reversi sunt, they returned and wept: which clearly proves a second murmu∣ring, beside the former mentioned, v. 1. Yea, we read of two punishments, and therefore the sin was twofold. This later mur∣muring was the cause of Gods smiting. They murmured for want of flesh. But there was a greater provocation of Gods wrath then the bare murmuring for want of flesh, viz. unbelief. They thought that the Lord was not able to give them flesh, notwithstanding all the miracles which this unbelieving and murmuring people confessed, he had wrought for them. The 78 Psalm v. 18.—22, is a clear Commentary on this text.
Wise men who read Stories, that they may profit by them, they look especially at three things; 1. The act done. 2. The counsel and advise upon which it was done. 3. The issue and event which came upon the doing of it. Ye have heard of the two for∣mer, which are murmuring and tempting the power of God, and that for the satisfaction of their greedy appetite. Ye have both toge∣ther, Psalm 78.18. They tempted  the strong God, and de∣sired meat for their lust. Their Belly was their counsellour, . A fat paunch produceth commonly a lean wit. Now what came of their lewd action, and foolish counsel? The wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people; and the Lord smote the people with a very great plague. Take no∣tice what issue evil actions and foolish councels have. The Apostle, not without just cause, calls lusts deceitful,Prov. 12. v. 5. Ephes. 4. So true is that of the Wiseman, That the counsels, the subtil counsels of the wic∣ked, (so our Translators render , Prov. 1, 5. wise counsels,) are deceit, Prov. 12.5. deceitful and destructive to their authors, as here to the mixt multitude especially who fell a lusting or lusted a lust, v. 4. and fell by their own counsels, according to Psal. 5.10. And that of the old Poet, . Ill counsell's worst for the author of it. The Athenians sent to in∣quire of the Oracle, what would become of the Peloponesian war. The answer of the Oracle was, Thucyd. lib. 2. . Doriacum en aderit sacrum cum peste duellum. The Dorick war shall come, and plague with it. Apollo was not in vain called , not only from his  his oblique circle, but also, because he did , give oblique and doubtful Oracles. This Oracle the Priest so pronounced, that the effect of the war might be understood ei∣ther  famin, or  pestilence. The Athenians understood it  famin: whereupon they stored their City with all pro∣visions which the countrey round about could afford: whereon they fed gluttonously and riotously; and seeking so to avoid  the famin, by their vain counsel, they brought  the pesti∣lence amongst them. The Lord be pleased, in mercy, to avert the like dreadful effects of our gluttony and excess, (for which we are notorious among all nations:) our rioting and drunkenness, our chambering and wantonness, our strife and envie! Note hence how wisely and gratiously the Lord tempers his judgement with mercy. When the people had despised Manna and desired flesh, that he might punish the wicked and the sedu∣cers among them, ver. 4. by their lusts, and satisfie the desires, and withal inform the understandings of those who were in their simplicity deceived, he gave them what might intimate some
spiritual thing unto them. He gave them not the flesh of wilde beasts nor four footed beasts: He gave them fowles of heaven, that they might rather meditate on heavenly things then earthly, rather spiritual things then corporal. He gave them Quails, which foresee the Winter and flie away, as the Stork and other fowles do, that so his people might foresee and avoid the judgement of the Lord, as the Prophet applyes it, Jer. 8.7. 3. The burial and monument of those who lusted. He called the name of the place Kibroth Hattaavah; because there they buried the people that lusted. Sin ordinarily leaves a stain, and gives a name to the place where it was committed. Examples are obvious. Massah, Me∣ribah, Taberah, &c. because there they buried the people that lusted.] The people, populus, , is here singular: who they were, are here explained by the following word, viz. who lusted; which word is plural, , the lusters. So that the Lord put a distinction between the just and unjust, as the righteous Judge of all the world, Gen. 18. Which our Translators here confound. The words were more distinctly to be rendred thus; There they buried the people, the lusters, or those who lusted. Labour not for the meat that perisheth, but for the meat that endures to the ever∣lasting life. John 6. Post concupiscentias tuas non eas: Follow not after thine appe∣tites, saith the Wise man, lest they make thee a scorn to thine enemies. That's the Wisemans reason, to which we may adde that of the text, lest they bring the wrath of God upon thee. Which is the Apo∣stles use which he makes of it;1 Cor. 10. v. 6. These things, saith he, were our examples, to the intent that we should not be , lusters or desirers of evil things, as they also lusted, 1 Cor. 10.6. O let us timely mortifie and kill and bury our lusts, lest we die in our sins, and be buried in them, as these lusters were.
And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses,Numb. 12. v. 1. because of the Ethi∣opian woman, whom he had married: for he had married an Ethiopian woman. And they said, hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? Hath he not spoken also by us? and the Lord heard it.] Aaron in∣deed spake against Moses; yet our Translators here have done him some wrong, in joyning him with Miriam in this detraction, as equally faulty with her, as indeed he was not, as appears by the verb  which is Feminin, she spake. So that, to do Aaron right, the words are to be thus ordered. And Miriam spake, al∣so Aaron against Moses. For in that order the words are placed in the Hebrew. So likewise in the Vulgar Latin, Locutá{que} est Ma∣ria & Aaron, And Miriam (or Marie) spake, and Aaron. The Spirit of God intimates, that Miriam first offended, and drew her brother Aaron into the same sin. Thus Eve first sinned, then Adam, the Serpent prevailing with the weaker vessel. And to be first in the sin, renders the sin so sinful, that after-offenders are excused if not à toto, at least à tanto; their sin comparatively is said not to be, as touching the first sin; Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression, 1 Tim. 2.14. And therefore Aaron was not smitten with leprosie, but Miriam only; though, no doubt, some regard was also had to his high Priest∣hood, as Exod. 32. Nor was Adam so severely punished as Eve; nor she, as the Serpent. Now as the Scripture here notes the first sinner, as most guilty, so likewise elsewhere, as Numb. 16.1. where our Translation joyns the conspirators altogether in one act, but the Hebrew first appropriates the sin to the ringleader of it, as I shall there shew. The judicious Reader may observe many other like examples. It is true  signifies [because.] But does it not also signifie [Super occasiones?] upon occasions? Whereas therefore Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses upon two occasions; 1. Be∣cause Moses had married an Ethiopian woman. 2. Because the Lord had not spoken only by Moses, but also by them, it cleares the text, if we render  upon occasions. And whereas  signifies as well causes as occasions: So Gen. 21.25. Abra∣ham reproved Abimelech upon just cause: but Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses upon occasion only, which were no just causes. Therefore Arias Montanus turns the words, Gen. 21.25. Super cau∣sas, for the causes; but this place, Super occasiones, upon occasions. The first occasion was, Moses had taken an Ethiopian woman. We read of no other wife of Moses in Scripture, but Zipporah, though Josephus understands this of another wife an Ethiopian; whereas Zipporah was a Midianitess. Howbeit this is easily satisfied, in that the Midianites dwelt among the Ethiopians; as the Hebrews were accounted Egyptians, because they dwelt in Egypt, Gen. 50.11.
& Moses also, Exod. 2.19. And the Midianites were esteemed Cushites or Ethiopians, because they dwelt among them. The Apostle tels us, that Moses was , for a testimony of those things which should be spoken af∣terward, Hebr. 3.5. that, by what he made or caused to be made, and what he wrote or taught the people, by it, he might testifie the will of God, as 1 Cor. 1.6. 2 Tim. 1.8. Revel. 1.2. Hence the Tabernacle was called the Tabernacle of witness. And what Mo∣ses did, wrote, or taught more obscurely, with a vail on his face, was to be declared afterward more fully and clearly according to the degrees of divine manifestation, to such as are capable of them. So that all who came after Moses, must, for doctrine and life speak no other thing then he did; and his writings must be the test to prove others by. The first occasion of Miriam her detraction from Moses was the Ethiopian woman; either because he took her to wife, who was a stranger from the Common-wealth of Israel, (though Midian descended from Abraham by Keturah, Gen. 25.2.) or because ha∣ving married her, he yet abstained from conjugal society with her; as the Chald. Paraphrast saith, he put away his fair wife, whom he so cals by antiphrasis. Its probable, the contention began between the women; and the beginning of strife, is like the letting forth of waters, saith Solomon, which spreads it self to overwhelm the name and reputation of Moses. The Ethiopians although properly one nation, Gen. 2.13. (yet that a very large one;) is used to signifie the Gentiles, whose more proper sinnes were intemperancy of all kindes, as Luxury, Drunkenness, Incontinency, &c. And therefore they who live in those sins, are said to work , the will of the Gen∣tiles, walking in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, &c. 1 Pet. 4.3. And when the Prophet compares the people to the Ethiopians, as in regard of their sins, so in respect of their habitual continu∣ance in them, he chargeth them with drunkenness and whoredom, Jer. 13.12.23.27. Hence it is that Bacchus the Heathens god of wine, and excess of wine, hath his name from  the son of Cush. And therefore David not willing plainly to name Saul the son of Kish the Benjamite, 1 Sam 9.1. he implyes him more se∣cretly under the name of Cush the son of Jemini, Psal. 7. in the title, for his unchangeable like sins: As where the Poet not daring to speak out concerning Caelius a riotous Roman, saith, Dic quibus in terris— Tres pateat Caelî (for Caelii) spacium, non amplius, ulnas. Tell in what lands— The grounds of Caelius are but three Elns: Which three remain'd unsold, as reserved for his grave.
Hence it is also that the Ethiopians and Israelites are opposed, as Jewes and Gentiles, Amos 9.7. Are ye not ,Amos. 9. v. 7. as the sons of the Ethiopians unto me, O ye sons of Israel? which our Tran∣slators call Children. When therefore Moses is said to have taken to wife an Ethio∣pian woman, hereby he prefigured him whom the Lord would raise up like unto Moses, who would reject his disobedient, im∣penitent, and incorrigible people, and give them a bill of Di∣vorce, and should grant the Gentiles repentance unto life, Acts 11, 18. and take out of the Gentiles a people to his name, Acts 15.14. so to be called as a wife by her husbands name. This was an occasion of great obloquy and contradiction of sin∣ners against the spiritual Moses, John 7.35. Acts 22.21, 22. The other occasion of speaking against Moses, was the eminency of his gift of prophesie, which occasioned the envie of Miriam and Aaron, and their derision of him: For so that may be understood , what? hath the Lord spoken only, only in Moses? (for so both words signifie only) or, what? hath the Lord spoken only forsooth in Moses? Hath he not spoken also , in nobis, in us? So very often our Translators render [by or with,2 Sam. 23. v. 2. Zach. 1. v. 14.19. Hebr. 1.1.] which should be turn'd [in] as 2 Sam. 23.2. Zach. 1.14.19. & 2.3. Hebr. 1.1. and elsewhere. Such emulation and envie hath alwayes been among those of an inferiour dispensation, against those who have been of a more emi∣nent and higher; which comes to pass by reason of acidia or lazi∣ness in spiritual things. They under the letter of the Law and Pro∣phets, envie and detract from those who are lead by the Spirit of God. How much more when a perverse spirit is mingled with a meer literal understanding? Then Ismael mocks and persecutes Isaac; Shimei curseth David; and the Jewes encourage one ano∣ther falsely to accuse and detract from Jeremy, under pretence of the Law, the Priest, and Prophet, who taught otherwise then Jeremy did, Jer. 18.18. Manifold examples of this kinde we read of the Scribes, learned only in the letter, and the precise Pharisees, ze∣lotical high Priests and Elders, who have contradicted and blasphe∣med the spiritual Moses, as if he were made and had a Devil. And can they who are Christs Disciples hope for better mea∣sure from the evil world? If they have persecuted me, saith the Lord, they will persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also, John 15.20. Wherefore comfort thy self, thou Ethiopian woman married unto Christ by faith and love, and cleaving unto him in one spirit, betrothed unto him in righteousness and in judgement and in loving kindness and mercies, Hos. 2.19. What though the Ismaelites and Shimites, the hearers only, what though the Jewes, viz. the Profes∣sors, that is, Jewes outwardly, Rom. 2.28. What if the adulterous ge∣neration,
by their partial, narrow-brain'd, and strait-hearted literal understanding, censure and condemn the spiritual birth as adulte∣rous, heterodox, erroneous, because they themselves are such? The story of the Ethiopian Noble Woman, who brought forth a white childe, though her self a Blackmore, is well known. She was judged an adulteress by the lying generation, and her birth spurious and base. Yet were there wise men, who found the picture of Andromeda in her bed-chamber, which she beheld in her concepti∣on, and brought forth a white childe like unto it. Nor do thou doubt but, maugre the false judgement of this adulterous genera∣ration, there will be wise men who will be able to judge aright of of the spiritual birth, and thy spiritual conception of it; while thou and we all who are spiritually minded,2 Cor. 3. v. 18. behold, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord with his open face (who is true  the Ruler of men) and are translated into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.18. The Lord, by his Spirit, vouchsafe such conception and spiritual birth unto us all!
And Moses called Oshea the son of Nun, Jehoshua?Numb. 13. v. 16.] Why is  not expressed in the name of Hoshea, but he is called Oshea? It is true, Hierom leaves out the aspiration; but his authority is not enough in a matter of such weight. For although its bu h which some say, is no letter, yet the omission of it, obscures the holy text, and hides that excellent name which signifies a Saviour, and that Saviour who was a principal type of the Lord our Saviour; whole name therefore is here changed from  to  Jehoshua, that is, The Lord, or  the Saviour; as he who lively figured the true Jehoshua, who is , as Jehoshua is also called by the LXX; and the book of Jehoshua is called by the LXX . But our Translators having here rightly rendred  Jehoshua, why do they never turn that name so afterward, but Josua? surely though the Greek tongue cannot express the middle aspiration in  (and therefore the Greek Poet rendred it ) yet our English tongue can, and ought to return it. This is not a meer , or strife about words and names. This name is a most artificiall compound of  and , whence is the name Jesus. Vocabula sunt rerum vehicula words are Vehicles which import and carry things with them. By obscu∣ring this glorious name, Jehoshua the most significant and lively type of the Lord Jesus, is obscured with it. The ancient fathers, and, of later times, Osiander and Castellio have written of this name, and the composition of it. But because; according to that true saying, , He is his name, and his name is himself, as Moses gives example, Deut. 28.58. That thou mayest fear that glorious and fearful Name, The Lord thy God, although we ought to esteem the Etymologie no less then divine, it is the Energie, vertue, and power intimated in that Name, which is here to be regarded in the change of Hoshea to Je∣hoshua. That is the Divine Nature present with Jehoshua, as the Lord promiseth, Josh. 1.5. I will be with thee; I will not leave thee nor forsake thee. Which promise, or the latter part of it, the A∣postle enlargeth unto all who bear the Name of Jesus; ,Heb. 13. v. 5. which its hard fully to express, by rea∣son of the many negatives; I will not leave thee, no, I will by no means forsake thee. In which name, and power, Jehoshua wrought all his great works, lively prefiguring the wonderfull works which the true Jehoshua, , had, doth, and afterward should work, who is Immanuel, God with us, Matth. 1.23. who is therefore said to be the son of Nun, that is, the Eternal God. For so Jesus Christ, yesterday, to day the same, also for ever, Hebr. 13.8. But to evidence this type the more clearly, he is called not only Jehoshua, as here and elsewhere, but also Jeshua, Nehem. 8.17. which differs only in termination from Jesus.
This name was given Hoshea, when he was to enter upon his office of discovering and saving the people from their enemies. And the name of Jesus was given to our Lord, when he entred upon his temporal dispensation, and the reason of his name gi∣ven by the Angel; for he shall save his people from their sins, their true enemies, Matth. 1.21. Which, if it were my business, might be further made appear by particular Analogies between those nations and their Kings which Jehoshua subdued, and those which the Lord Jesus hath conquered and proceeds to conquer in us, which, though a work of time, yet is it well worth the labour. But the work of Jehoshua was not only privative and destructive, but also positive and edifying. Having redeemed the people out of the hand of their enemies, he distributed unto them their re∣spective inheritance. Which also is the work of Jesus the Son of of God, and his essential Word, the Word of his grace, which is able to build us up, and to give us an inheritance in all the sanctified ones, Acts 20.32. Yea, the Lord himself is that living principle of light, life, power and might, by whom the people of God, perform all their workes, which he therefore is said to do in them, Esay 26.12. Yea, without whom, or from whom being separated () as Vine-branches from the stock, we can do nothing, John 15.5. Nor is it unworthy our observation, that, whereas the A∣postle reckons up De industria, studiously and purposely the ex∣amples of faithful men, as from Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, I∣saac and Jacob, and downward to the Prophets; and what exploits they wrought by faith, there is no mention at all made of Jehoshua; nor is he once named, who lead the people into the Holy Land, fought so many battles, conquered so many nations, subdued the land; yet is not Jehoshua mentioned by the Apostle in that large Catalogue of Gods Worthies, Hebr. 11. The true Jehoshua, who is , Jesus is implyed, whereever these are said to have wrought any thing by faith; for faith must have an object on which it must rest; and what is that but the power of God, who is Jesus Christ? 1 Cor. 1.24. O that the Lord had wrought like conquests in our soules by that power! But thanks be to God, who giveth us (believers in his mighty power) the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ! 1 Cor. 15.57. Caleb stilled the people before Moses,Numb. 13. v. 30. and said, let us go up at once, and possess it: for we are well able to overcome it.] Caleb in these words, whether by some inarticulate sound implyed in the great  in , as the Latins by St, or by some signe made with his hand, as Acts 13.16. Obtain'd silence. He encourageth the people to march against the Canaanites, alleaging, that they were well able to overcome the land. But truly our Translators have almost spoyled Calebs military
Oration, by rendring , let us go up at once. What? all at once? Soft and fair. Without doubt Caleb was more wise then to put the people (already discomfited) upon a sudden expedition. Those words are more emphatical, if rendred in their genuine and proper sense; Ascendendo ascendamus, by ascending, let us as∣cend, viz. gradatim, pedetentìm, not , not all at once, not all together. Some there are who conceive, that the great work of salvation is wrought all at once. So they say, they are justified all in an instant; whereas the command is, he that is righteous let him be righteous still. The words are, . He that is righteous, let him work righteousness still,Rev. 22. v. 11. Revel. 21.11. Its a gradual and successive work. It is none of Gods way of destroy∣ing the spiritual enemies, but by degrees; so Exod. 23.29, 30. And to lead men in, successively by little and little, as Jacob lead his sheep, Gen. 33.14. Likewise in the following words, it is a good encouragement that Caleb gives, when he saith, We are well able to overcome it; though he saith not so; only our Translators make him speak so. Calebs words are  Praevalendo praeva∣lebimus, by prevailing we shall prevail. Whereby he not only en∣courageth them, averring, that they are able to prevail; but likewise instructs them, and puts them in a way of so doing. Let not him that believes, make haste, nor hope to do the work of the Lord, all at once: but let us learn of Caleb, to make the ex∣periments of our former victories, encouragements to after enterprizes: So by prevailing we shall prevail; nor shall our labour be in vain in the Lord; but he who hath begun a good work in us, will finish it until the day of Jesus Christ.
But my servant Caleb,Numb. 14. v. 24. because he had another spirit with him, and hath followed me fully; him will I bring into the land whereinto he went, and his seed shall possess it. These words are to be under∣stood as spoken by the Lord Christ, as the Apostle applies the same history unto him, Hebr. 3. and 4; where having compared Christ the Lord of the house with Moses Gods faithful servant in it; wherefore saith he, as the holy Ghost saith, To day if ye will hear His, that is, Christs voice, harden not your hearts, as in the Provocation, as in the day of Temptation in the Wilderness; when your fathers tempted me, that is, Christ. For so the same temp∣tation is expresly applied unto Christ, 1 Cor. 10.9. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted. And the Apostle having applyed part of Psal. 95. to the same purpose, he pursues the same argument, Ʋnion with Christ, men∣tioned Hebr. 3.6. Whose (that is Christs) house are we, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoycing of the hope, firm un∣to the end. He then having quoted the words of that Psalm to his purpose, v. 7.—11. he resumes the same argument, warning them to take heed of an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God, v. 12. and exhorting them to exhort one another daily, lest they should be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, v. 13. This he enforceth by repeating the same blessed effect, the union with, and participation of Christ. For, saith he, we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence stedfast unto the end, whilest it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts, as in the provocation: for some when they had heard, did provoke; howbeit not all, not Moses, not Aaron, not Joshua, not Caleb. Others indeed provoked the Lord, and they shall not see it; but my servant Caleb, because he had another spirit with him, and hath fulfilled after me, him will I bring into the land, whereinto he went, and his seed shall possess it. In which words we have these divine truths contained. 1. Caleb was the Lords servant. 2. Caleb had another spirit with him. 3. Caleb fulfilled after the Lord. 4. Caleb went into the land. 5. The Lord saith, he would bring Caleb into the land, where∣into he went. 6. Calebs seed shall possess it. 7. Because Caleb, the Lords servant, had another spirit and ful∣filled after the Lord, the Lord saith, He will bring Caleb into the land, whereinto he went, and that his seed shall possess it. 8. All those men who have seen my glory and my miracles, which I did in Egypt, and in the Wilderness, and have tempted
me now these ten times, surely they shall not see the land which I sware unto their fathers, neither shall any of them who provo∣ked me, see it: But my servant Caleb, &c. 1. The Lord said of Caleb, that he was his servant. What Ca∣leb was, we read, Numb. 13. What is it to be the Lords servant? Generally, his servants ye are, whom ye obey, Rom. 6. And what is it to obey? what else but pliably and willingly to sub∣mit ones own will to the fulfilling of anothers will? 1. Obedi∣ence must be pliable and willing, Esay 1.19. 2. It must be to the command of another as such. For if the natural bent of ones own will, be to the same act which another commands, without respect had to the command, as such, it is nulla vel minor, either no obedience at all, or less, saith S. Gregory. Because obedience properly respects the fulfilling, not of our own, but of anothers will. For example, Jer. 35.6, 7. Had the sons of Rechab been na∣turally abstemious, and loved no wine, their obedience to their father had been either so much the less, or indeed none at all. When therefore the Lord faith of Caleb, that he was his ser∣vant, it is to be understood that he was obedient, that is, that he was willing and pliable to the fulfilling of the Lords will. That we may the better understand this, we must know, that there is a great difference between doing that which is the will of the Lord, and being obedient unto the will of the Lord. For we may do that which is the will of the Lord: 1. As natural agents, not as vo∣luntary: Thus the Egyptians lent the Israelites their Gold & Jew∣els at their departure out of Egypt, as natural agents: for wil∣lingly they would never have 1. disfurnished themselves; 2. lent their goods to those whom they should never see again; 3. and arm'd their enemies against themselves. 2. As voluntary agents; yet not doing the will of the Lord voluntarily and willingly; but either executing their own evil wils, as Herod, and Pontius Pilate, and the Gentiles, and the people of Israel did what the hand and counsel of God determined before to be done, Acts 4.28. 3. Or doing what is the will of the Lord out of fear; as Laban hurt not Ja∣cob, Gen. 31.29. Pharaoh and the Egyptians let the Israelites depart out of Egypt, Exod. 12. Balaam did not curse but blessed Israel, Numb. 24. 4. Or else they do the will of the Lord out of hope of reward and self-seeking. Thus the false Prophet prophesied for hire. Some Saducies lived orderly out of hope of temporal blessings. The Pharisees made long prayers, and gave almes, and did all they did to be seen of men. All these and many the like do the same thing, which God wills to be done; but none of them can be said to be genuine servants, and obedient unto the Lord. 1. But the first of these we may call serviceable instruments of God; Qui acti aguntur, which are rather used as tools, and wrought by, then work of and by themselves.
2. The second are the enemies of God whom by his power he so over-rules, that he makes them do his work, and serve his ends, and that when most of all they advance their own. 3. The third are the Lords slaves and vassals who would not do any good unless they feared otherwise to be beaten. 4. The fourth and last are as it were the Lords Mercenaries and Hirelings, who do his work, but meerly and solely for wages, otherwise they would do no good. These, all these are as it were the Lords servants extraordinary, his retainers and servants at large. But the true and genuine ser∣vants of the Lord, and such as are in ordinary service, are obedient unto him, pliably and willingly submitting their wills unto the will of the Lord,Ephes. 6. v. 6. doing the will of God , Ex anima, or ex animo, as the Vulg. Latin, from, or out of the soul, or minde, or heart. When their heart is according to Gods heart; as the Lord saith of his servant David,Acts 13. v. 22. I have found a man after mine heart, who shall fulfil, , all my wills, Acts 13.22. And such a servant of the Lord was Caleb, as his name signifies,  Secun∣dum cor, according to the heart, minde, and will of God. Would God we were all of us such servants of the Lord! And that we had, as the Lord saith, that Caleb had, another spirit with him. For our understanding of this, we must know, that the Lord makes a promise unto Caleb and his seed of the Holy Land, &c. The Lord makes a promise unto Caleb and his seed, of the Holy Land, upon consideration of conditions fulfilled on Calebs part. 1. He had another spirit. 2. He followed the Lord fully. Touching both these conditions, there is some doubt may be made of the Translation. As to the former, we may render the words out of the Hebrew thus; but to my servant Caleb,  a Reward, or, because that another spirit was with him, &c. What is that other spirit? and how was it with Caleb? 1. As to the former, the words are  Spiritus alter, an other spirit; that is the spirit of faith, whereof the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4.13. This spirit of faith rests on the wisdom and truth of God, for the performance of his promise, and on the power and goodness of God, as for the effecting his promise, the sub∣duing the Canaanites, and bringing Israel into that land. This is another spirit differing from that of the false Spies, and people which was the spirit of fear, bondage, and unbelief, which other spi∣rit may be rendred a new spirit,Esay 65. v. 15. as Esay 65.15. He shall call his servants by another name;] I rather turn it, A new name, as the LXX there doth, , a new name. All agree, that Esay there prophesies of the times of the Gospel, wherein All things shall become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. Yea, what the Prophet there calls another name, he calls a new name, Esay 62.4. And what S. Luke, Acts 2.4. calls other tongues, S. Mark 16.17. calls new tongues.
And what Moses here calls another spirit, Ezechiel calls a new spi∣rit, Ezech. 11.19. and 36.26. Why had Caleb another spirit? He was now entring into an other, a new estate, the estate of faith in Christ, in whom all things are new, 2 Cor. 5.17. which he received by the hearing or obedience of faith, Gal. 3.2. when he believed in the truth and power of God who promised the holy land to the couragious believers. This was figured by all those wars and victories over the seven nations, under the conduct of Jehoshua. And the dispensation of Christ is described by mortifying, killing, crucifying, destroying; and so con∣quering and overcoming. They that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. The old man is cru∣cified with Christ, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin, Jos. 10.26. Rom. 6.6. This is that death of the Saints which is so pretious in the sight of the Lord, Psal. 116.15. That death whereof the Apostle speaks, For thy sake, we are killed all the day long. Howbeit this death doth not extinguish us, but the sin that is mortified. But we become more then conquerours through him that loved us, Rom. 8.37. For the atchieving of this victory in his new state, there is need of a new spirit, even the spirit of faith, which is the victory that over∣comes the world, 1 John 5.4. This will appear, if we shall con∣sider, that Caleb was ingaged in a war against the seven nations. He therefore had need of counsel and strength: for counsel and strength are for the war, Esay 36.5. And therefore this new spirit was the spirit of faith in the wisdom and counsel, and in the might and strength of God, which ye read both together on the new man, Esay 11.1, 2. There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots.Esay 11. v. 1. (A branch growes not out of the roots of trees, but out of their stock,  therefore were better turnd a sucker, sprout, or sprig, here & elsewhere) and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, &c. 2. This new spirit is said to have been with Caleb, that is, for his help; so what we read, Jos. 1.17. The Lord thy God be with thee, the Chald. Paraph. turns , the Lord thy God be in thy help, to help with counsel; so what we read, 1 Kings 1.8. they were not with Adoniah, the Chald. Paraphrast hath, they were not  in his counsel. To help with might and strength; so where Job saith, I know, this is with thee, the LXX render it, , thou canst do all things, Job 10.13. Thus the Lord promiseth to be for strength to them who turn the battle to the gate, Esay 28.6. Whence we may take notice, that, 1. All men are acted by one spirit or other, which is with them, acts, and leads them in their different wayes.
2. All who walk toward the land of holiness, are lead by Gods good spirit, Psal. 143.10. which either. 1. initiates and enters us in Gods way, as the spirit of bondage and fear, Rom. 8, 15. Or 2 the spirit of faith and power, which goes and leads on towards the ac∣complishing and fulfilling of our journey, 2 Cor. 4.13. And this is the spirit of power. Or 3. the spirit of love, 2 Tim. 1.7. which brings us home, and is the perfection it self; for he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, 1 John 4.16. 3. The Lord observeth, by what spirit we are lead; he took notice of the ten false and lying Spies, how they were acted by the spirit of unbelief and disobedience, Numb. 14.22. He saw also, that Jehoshua and Caleb were lead by another spirit. All men may observe our outward motions, actions, words; which, because most men have learned that abominable Art of Seeming, possibly may not proceed from a right principle. For, although  the mind, and  the word; anagrammatize one the other, and the latter is interpreter of the former; and Caleb saith, I return'd word to Moses ,Josh. 14. v. 7. according to what was with my heart, Josh. 14.7. (whereby he gives a notation of his own name,)  Caleb, Se∣cundum cor, according to the heart,) and although out of the abun∣dance of the heart, the mouth speaketh, yet our Lord who knowes the hearts of all men, took notice, that some, who were evil, yet spake good things. Wherefore since the word (that essential word Christ) is quick (or rather, living, , Vulg. Lat. Vivus, and powerful (or rather operative,Hebr. 4. v. 12, 13. ) and sharper (or more cutting rather, ) then any two edged sword, (or, above every two edged sword, ) and piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, the joynts and the marrowes, () and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart; nei∣ther is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight; but all things are naked, and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, (or rather, concerning whom, is our speech, so the Vulg. Latin, or unto whom is our account, ,) O how needful is the Wisemans counsel, Keep thy heart above all keeping, Prov. 4.23. and that of the Prophet, Take heed to your spirit,Prov. 4. v. 23. Malach. 2.16. 1. This justly reproves the timerous and cowardly spirit of many, who pretend to that other and new spirit of Caleb, as if they were called, chosen, and faithful, Revel. 17.14. yet yield themselves to be beaten and buffered by Satan; and are overcome by every foolish and hurtful lust, which fights against the soul. Who boast, as if they were Christians, and were acted by the other, the new spirit, yet are indeed as yet under the spirit of fear and bondage. Let such as these think sadly of what the Apostle saith;Rom. 8. v. 9. If any man hath not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his; or rather, this man is not hs, .
2. Calebs example as justly reproves the proud and presump∣tuous spirit of those, who, in their own strength, & strength of ima∣gination, which they call faith, go against the spiritual enemies, like those, Numb. 14.40.—45. or those, Acts 19.13.—16. and with like, or worse success. What an honourable testimony does the Lord give of Caleb here? That he was his fervant, that he had a anew, another spirit. And was it written for his sake alone, that he was the Lords servant, and that he had another, a new spirit? Is't not worthy our holy ambition? is it not a patern that may excite and raise our most industrious imitation? How else were all things our examples? O thou Israel of God! How great an honour is it to be a servant of the great God! The honour of the servant, ariseth with his Lord. Such was theirs who being asked who they were, return'd this answer; we are the servants of the God of heaven and earth, Ezra 5.11. How necessary is that other, that new spirit, without which, Is∣rael cannot prevail? without which a Christian is not truly so cal∣led, Rom. 8.9. We have as great need as Caleb had of another, a new spirit. Yea, have we not more need, since our enemies are spiritual, and therefore more mighty, Esay 31.3. Are not the in∣habitants of the holy land, who keep possession against us, exceed∣ing numerous and strong, even manifold transgressions and mighty sins? Are not their Cities walled and great, even the strong holds of Satan, the strong man that keeps his palace, even strong imaginati∣ons, or rather reasonings, ?2 Cor. 10. v. 5. Are not the sons of Anac there? does not pride  compass many like a chain? Psal. 73.6. That's Anac. And are there not , ruling and reigning lusts, Lords that rule over us? Esay 26.13. Are there no Amale∣kites? no glozing and flattering tongues, which lick up the people? they are the Amalekites; that gainful shop-sin, which makes Lon∣don called Lick-penny, that's Amaleck that licks up and devours the people. But come we to the following point wherein there is more difficulty. The Lord saith of Caleb, He fulfilled after me. An harsh expression, wherein somewhat must be supplyed. For our better understanding of these words, let us inquire what is here meant by fulfilling; and how Caleb may be understood to fulfil af∣ter the Lord. The words are , which our Translators turn, He hath followed me fully. So Tremellius, Plenè secutus est me; and he tells us in the margent, that in the Hebrew it is implevit ire post me, he hath fulfilled to go after; so Pagnin, and Munster in the text, and Diodati, Luther, Piscator, all the Low Dutch, all the old English translations. Its strange, they should all so unanimously agree, when yet there is no word in the Hebrew that answers to sequi or ire, to follow or go: Hierom, Qui plenus alio spiritu secutus
est me, who being full of another spirit, hath followed me; he regarded rather the sense of the words, which he conceived, then the order of them. That which deceived them, was the word , after me, which they understood not how to make sense of, unless they supplyed the word sequi or ire to follow or go after me. Surely they are all out and miss of the main drift of Gods Spi∣rit in this phrase which is often used, as Numb. 32.11. Deut. 1.36. Josh. 14.8.9.—14. 1 Kings 11.6. Yet in none of all these places is any mention made of following. Nor took they any notice of the Verb  He fulfilled; whereas indeed therein is intimated the meaning of this phrase, where the object, subject, or thing to be fulfilled, is understood, which is no other then the word and will of God, and Calebs own duty. And so Vatablus explains it, Implevit voluntatem meam sequendo me, he fulfilled my will in following me; which last words might be spared, as I shall shew anon: Munster also expounds it, Implevit subaudi verbum vel voluntatem, meam, he fulfilled, understand, my word or will. Castellio; Suum mihi praestitit officium, he performed his duty to me. To this purpose a learned Jew on the place, be hath fulfilled the word after me. When Caleb is said to fulfil and do the will of the Lord after him, the Lord is supposed to have fulfilled the same will before him. But how is this to be understood? I shewed before that these words are to be understood as spoken by the Lord Christ. That we may the better understand this, we must know, that, what God Almighty wills, he either himself wills and does, or else he wills, that it be done by others, Psal. 135.6. whatsoever the Lord pleased, he did in heaven and earth, in the seas and in all depths. Accordingly the Prophet, my counsel shall stand, and I will do all my will, Esay 46.10. Yea, the things which he himself would, that others should do after him, he himself first does them, Jer. 9.24. I the Lord do exercise loving-kindness, judgement and righteousness in the earth. The son of God came down from heaven, not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him, John 6.38. This will of the Father, the Father himself doth, and the Son doth the Fathers will and word after him. But is not [word] or [will] or [duty] as bold a supplement, as [fol∣lowed?] Surely it is not. For we read no such expression in the holy Scripture, as fully to follow, which this phrase is made to sig∣nifie. But what phrases are more ordinary then fulfilling the word of the Lord, his Law, his Commandements, fulfilling righteousness, &c. But in the sense which our Translators and others make of these words, they render the verb  [fully,] as if it were an Ad∣verb, and adde hereunto [followed,] which is not in the text. But that  may be read alone, as here it is, with supply of [will] or [word] or [law,] such a defect, when the object is so well known, may be well understood, as in other phrases of Scripture. Thus
to over come, is often used alone, and no object named; but suppo∣sed as known. How often read we this phrase in the second and third chapters of the Revelation? To him that overcometh, I will give to eat of the tree of life, &c. He that overcommeth shall not be hurt of the second death. Where, and elsewhere we read an act exhorted unto, without any object added; yet to the perform∣ance of every such act and duty, there is a respective reward annex∣ed. The object to be overcome is the old Serpent and his temptations: Which may be understood from the first enmity put between the holy seed or Christ, and the Serpent and their seeds, as also from the frequent combates between them thorowout the Scrip∣ture. And the like defect may easily be supplied, where Caleb is said to have fulfilled, others, not to have fulfilled, that is; the law, will, or commandment of the Lord, Josh. 14.8, 9. Num. 32.11, 12. 1 Kings 11.6. 1. There is a vacuum, an emptiness and voidness where the word and will of God is not done; such before the new creation, as there was before the old. And therefore; when the Lord had com∣plain'd, Jer. 4. that his people were wise to do evil, but to do good they knew not, he presently addes, I beheld the earth, and so  emptiness and voidness, Jer. 4.22, 23.Jer. 4. v. 23. Disobedience emp∣ties and makes void the will of God, which obedience fulfils. 2. As the Lord propounds his word and will to be done, so like∣wise he sets himself before us as our patern and example, that as he hath done, so should we also do. 3. Hence it appears, that to fulfil the Lords word and will, is a most reasonable service. For what servant will grutch to do what his Master does before him. Caleb the Lords servant thought it just to fulfil the Lords will, which the Lord himself had first ful∣filled: wherefore our Lord faith, it is enough for the Disciple, that he be as his master, and the servant as his Lord, Mat. 10.25. 4. The will, word, and law of God is to be fulfilled. The law of God is practical, and consists of duties to be done by us, not imagi∣ned or fansied to be done already for us. How often may we read this? Deut. 6.25. observe to do all his commandements, and 15.5. and 19.9. Revel. 22.14. Blessed are they who do his Commande∣ments, James 1.22. Be ye doers of the word, not hearers only, &c. 5. Christ hath not so fulfilled the law for us, as to exempt us from fulfilling it after him, in him and through him. For what the law could not do; in that it was weak through the flesh, God sent his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condem∣ned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, Rom. 8.3, 4. Beside, when the Lord saith, as its supposed, that the Lord hath done the work himself, so hence its required to be done by us. 6. This will of the Father, as the Son fulfils after him, so the
believers also in the Father and Son fulfill the will of the Father and Son, after them, Ephes. 5.1. Be ye imitators of God as dear children and walk in love, as Christ loved us, &c. And as the Father doth loving kindness, judgement and righteousness, so doth the Son after the Father, and so ought we after the Son, Matth. 3.15. It becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. So his will is, that we love one another, as he hath loved us; and the like is to be under∣stood of other duties. 7. Hence it appears, that the will of God revealed unto men, is a rule of their life, and is not only positive, as that whose good∣ness depends only upon the authority of God, and therefore good only, because God commands it; as the ceremonial law is therefore holy, because it is commanded of the most holy God. But the law of God to be fulfilled by us, is therefore commanded by God, be∣cause it is in it self, and in its own nature, holy, just, and good, and such as God the Father himself practiseth, Jer. 9.24. that which the Son of God fulfils after him, that which the holy Angels fulfil after the Son of God, Psal. 103.20. Ye Angels mighty in strength, who do his commandments, hearkning to the voice of his word. That which all believing and obedient men fulfil after God. This is that righteousness which David saith, is an everlasting righteousness. And these are the words of God which are for ever setled in heaven, Psalm 119.89. So that they who think slightly of the Command∣ments of God, as if they were arbitrary and left to our discretion to be fulfilled or left undone, they fouly deceive themselves, and that in a matter of the greatest weight; since God himself, the Son of God, all good Angels, all good men have fulfilled after God, what God himself hath done. So that when men neglect to fulfil after the Lord, and rather fulfil their own lusts, they fulfil after their father the devil, and his son of perdition, through the spirit of errour. O ye servants of the Lord who are of another, of a new spirit, the spirit of faith and courage, let us fulfil after the Lord, let us ful∣fil the will and word of God after him. That which much hinders this important duty, is a prejudice conceived against it. We have been wonted unto such doctrine, as mákes void the law of God; as if Christ had so fulfilled the law of God for us, that he fulfilled not the same in us; which is contrary to his own assertion, Matth. 3.15. and 5.17.—20. and his Apostles, Rom. 8.3, 4. 2 Cor. 7.1. Col. 4.12. and many other Scriptures. We conceive this fulfilling our Lords word and will, a strange business and that which is every where spoken against.Esay 53. v. 1. This is no other than was foretold by the Prophet; who hath believed our report (or our hearing, or doctrine, what we have heard of God,) and to whom is the arme of the Lord revealed? The Prophet
Esay 53.1, 2. gives a probable reason of that unbelief in Christ the mighty Arm and power of God; because he shall grow up before him as a tender plant or sprout, and as a root out of a dry ground. Such are the first appearances of divine power; not con∣sidering, that, through faith,Hebr. 11. v. 34. Phil. 4. v. 13. believers , out of weakness they have been inwardly enabled and impowe∣red; so that they are able to do all things through Christ who inwardly enableth them; as the Apostle saith, I am able to do all things , through Christ inwardly en∣abling me. We may observe throughout the Scripture, that God, and and his truth, and power, hath been ownd but by very few, in comparison of the erroneous world; yet ought not this to dishearten such as have Calebs other new spirit; they ought ra∣ther to be strong in the faith, and observe what Caleb saith, Josh. 14.8. My brethren that went up with me,Jos. 14. v. 8. made the heart of the people melt; but I fulfilled after the Lord my God, Josh. 14.8. So we read, that one of Davids Worthies stood his ground when the weaklings fled, 2 Sam. 23.11, 12. And this power and strength of God, every believer ought to shew forth in himself to his ge∣neration, as David prayed, O God,Psal. 71. v. 18. forsake me not until I have shewed thine Arm to this generation, thy power to every one that is to come, Psal. 71.18. This is the extent of our obedience, the accomplishment of the whole will of God; and therefore its required, that it be fulfilled; if it be not, its empty and made void. Beside, the Lord himself fulfils his whole will; and that is it which we must fulfil after him, even to jots and tittles. Unless it so be, I know not how our Lord will be understood to reason with his Disciples and us, Matth. 5.17, 18, 19. where our Lord having said, that he came to fulfil; and that not one jot or tittle should pass from the law till all be fulfilled, he thence infers, whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore, lest we mistake, there is full as much obedience required of us under the Gospel, as was required of those who lived in the time of the law, if not more also. And well may such exactness be required of us, since there is more divine light, strength, and power vouch∣safed unto us under the Gospel then was to them under the law. Yea, and the example of the Son of God in our flesh, evidently proves, that the same life of Christ may be manifested also in our mortal flesh, 2 Cor. 4.10, 11. But not by our own power. O no: 1. Trust not in our own strength. Its said of all these Spies, Numb. 13.3. All these were men; that is, valiant men,Numb. 13. v. 3. as the Jewes understand that phrase in it self. All those who are called , are men in some estimation, saith Rabbi Salomon. Their strength and valour is here intimated to be no other then impoten∣cy
and weaknesse, when it rests in it self. Great men they were, and wise, and mighty, and rich, being the Heads and Governours of the people. But thus saith the Lord; let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor let the mighty man glory in his might; let not the rich man glory in his riches, but let him that glorieth, glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth that I am the Lord, who exercise loving kindness, judgement, and righteousness in the earth; for in these things I delight, saith the Lord, Jer. 9.23, 24. 2. Trust in the Lord. So David puts both together; trust in the Lord, and do good. We finde very often Jehoshua and Caleb joyn'd together, and not without good reason. Jehoshua is a di∣vine compound of the great Name  and , the Lord the Saviour. And although he were before called Jehoshua, Exod. 17.9. by anticipation, yet Moses first named him Jehoshua, the Lord the Saviour, in order to this expedition of searching the land and bringing word back again, Numb. 13.16. Jehoshua therefore was with Caleb; the Lord the Saviour was with the hearty and couragi∣ous man, and he enables us to fulfil all righteousness; as S. Paul saith of the true Jehoshua, ; I am able or strong to do all things through Christ, who inward∣ly enableth me, as was shewen before, Phil. 4.13. 4. Caleb had been in the land. Caleb was one of the Spies, who were to give testimony concerning the land. It was therefore ne∣cessary, that they should have been there. Doth this concern Caleb alone, that he went into the land, or doth it concern us and others as well as Caleb? Surely there is a spiritual land of peace and rest, a better and heavenly countrey, Hebr. 11.16. It is called the Lords land; yea, the Lord him∣self is so called, Esay 33.21. That land which the meek inherit, Matth. 5.5. In the New Testament this true land of peace and rest is understood by the everlasting life, the promised inheritance, salva∣tion, the kingdom of God, and many the like. As Caleb entred into this spiritual land, so likewise do all be∣lievers, Hebr. 4.3. We who have believed, do enter into rest; and the like, v. 10. As Caleb and the other Spies entred and searched the holy land, and brought report unto Moses; even so the belie∣vers and obedient ones, who have entred the spiritual land, they report unto the Congregation what they have seen and heard, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. Who ever is a spiritual Spy, who makes report, how good the holy land is, its necessary, that he have been there; that he may speak upon his own knowledge, as our Lord saith to N codemus, John 3.11. Verily, verily I say unto thee, we speak what we do know, and testifie what we have seen. 1. This may justly give check to the over-forwardness of too hasty novices, who speak much of the holy laud, the heavenly coun∣trey; and the kingdom of God, whereof they have no experience,
they were never there. Qui non est expertus, pauca recognoscit, he that hath no experience, knoweth little, Ecclus. 34.10. And therefore, in reason, he should speak but little. A young man discoursing largely of the World abroad, especially of the lesser Asia, one present asked him, whether he had ever been at Sigae∣um (a Town there, which is , it has the name from silence) when he answered, no; I thought so, quoth the other; for there you might have learned to hold your peace, concern∣ing things whereof you have no knowledge. O how many are there liable to this reproof, who speak much out of their hear∣say, memory, or reading, who can say little or nothing out of their own experience! 2. But much more are they to blame who had been in the holy land, and had eaten of the fruit of it, yea, and brought of it un∣to the Congregation, and gave testimony, that it was a land flow∣ing with milk and honey, Numb. 13.27. That it was a good land which the Lord our God doth give us, Deut. 1.25. (This was the common Veredict of the twelve men, even of all the twelve Spies,) yet when the people believed not, but rebelled against the Lord, and murmured, then ten of those Spies, to humour and please the people, brought up an evil report upon the land, Numb. 13.31, 32, 33. Deut. 1.26, 27, 28. Surely, since all things befel that people as types,1 Cor. 10. v. 11. and were written for our admonition on whom the ends of the world are come; there are some, without doubt, who in these times of the Gospel answer unto these types, as the truth of them. And therefore how much more are these false Spies to blame, who have been in the holy land, and tasted the gift,Hebr. 6.4, 5. that which is heavenly, , and have been made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers  of the age to come (where∣by was signified , the time of the Messiah whereof he is the father, Esay 9.6.) Yet even these men, to please the peo∣ple, or, out of self-love to preserve a good report of themselves among the people, as Oxthodox or pretious men, they discourage, or rather melt the hearts of men: affirming,Deut. 1. v. 28. that their enemies are too strong for them, and that it is impossîble to overcome them? 4. The Lord saith of Caleb, I will bring him into the land where∣into he went. Caleb must fight; and by fighting must cut his way into the holy land; yet the Lord saith, I will bring Caleb into it. The Lords promises exempt not men from their utmost endeavour to perform their duty. Yea, although the Lord adde his oath un∣to his promises, that he will bring us into the holy land; yet, unless we be obedient, and fulfil after him, we shall not come into the land, Deut. 8.1. All the Commandements which I command you this day, shall ye observe and do, that ye may go in and inherit the
land. The Lord hath made promise unto their fathers, yea, he hath sworn, that he will give his people the land. Tis true, yet this pro∣mise, this oath supposeth our obedience, yea, it forcibly infers it, Hebr. 6.12. Be not slothful, but followers of them, who, through faith and patience inherit the promises. What is the Apostles argu∣ment? the Lords oath, as it followes in the next words. For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he sware by himself, &c. So S. Paul having assured the Corinthians, that God would be their father, and they should be his sons and daughters, &c. So far is it, that his promise should secure us, and make us negligent, that indeed the Apostle useth these promises of God, the more to excite us to our obedience: ha∣ving these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all pollution of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 6.18. and 7.1. The Lord saith not, that he will enforce or compel Caleb to enter into the land. The word is of very large use, which here and for the most part signifies, to lead into. The Lord compels not any man to be happy, forceth no man to inherit his heavenly king∣dom. He leads Caleb into the land, he drives him not. No, nor his seed; Of whom the Lord saith, 5. Calebs seed shall possess it. Wherein we must inquire, 1. Who are Calebs seed. 2. What it is for Calebs seed to possess the land. 1. The seed of Caleb are either his off-spring according ing to the flesh, or according to the spirit. 1. According to the flesh we read, that Caleb had three sons, Iru, Elah, (who had also his son Kenaz,) and Naham, 1 Chron. 4.15. and one daughter, Achsah, Josh. 15.16. These were the seed of Caleb according to the flesh. 2. What was the seed of Caleb according to the Spirit? By the spiritual children and seed of men, we understand such as are like them in their mindes, wills, dispositions, actions, wills or good wills. Thus they are the seed of Abraham, who walk in the steps of Abrahams faith, Rom. 4.12. And Abrahams children do the works of Abraham, John 8.39. And thus the seed of Caleb, are they who are like unto Caleb, servants of the Lord, who have another, a new spirit, and fulfil the will of the Lord after him. 2. What is it to possess? The word here used is , hae∣reditabit eam, his seed shall possess it. So that to possess is as an heir haereditario jure, by right of inheritance. But what right have the seed of Caled to the inheritance in the ho∣ly land? This right will appear, whether we consider the seed and heirs of the land, or the Lord Paramount. 1. The seed of Caleb have a right, not by law, but by grace to in∣herit the land. This land they hold by service; so Psal. 69.35, 36. The Lord shall save Sion, and build the Cities of Judah, that they may dwell there, and have it in possession. The seed also of
his servants shall inherit it; and they that love thy Name shall dwell therein. This speaks home to our business; Caleb is the Lords servant; he owns him; my servant Caleb. And these are Calebs seed; and therefore they shall inherit the land. 2. The Lord our God is Lord Paramount, the Possessour of heaven and earth, Gen. 14.22. And the land is his, and according∣ly he layes claim to it, Levit. 25.23. The land is mine. The Lord Jesus is heir of all things; by whom also God made the worlds, Hebr. 1.2. And in the right of the Lord Jesus, Abraham became heir of the world, Rom. 4.13. For whom, and for his seed, the Lord Jesus made a purchase, Hebr. 9.15. And by this right Caleb and his seed receive the promise of the everlasting inheritance. Whence we may observe; 1. That the state of bliss is compared to an inheritance. 2. The state of bliss is obtain'd as an inheritance is obtain'd, up∣on certain terms and conditions. 3. Observe what is the best inheritance that parents can give un∣to their children. What so good as this, to make them heirs of heaven, rich in faith, heirs of that kingdom? ,James 2. v. 5. James 2.5. 4. Our God deals with his holy seed, even the seed of his ser∣vants, according to the law of nature and law of Adam, 2 Sam. 7.19.2 Sam. 7. v. 19. 2 Tim. 1. v. 5., he doth in a sort entayl the eternal inheritance unto the childrens children of believers, to Caleb and his seed. So that Paul writes to Timothy; having (or receiving) the remem∣brance of that unfeigned saith in thee, which dwelt first in that Grandmother of thine, Lois, and that Mother of thine, Eunice; but I am perswaded, that in thee also: So the words sound in the Greek text, 2 Tim. 1.5. A noble, a blessed descent. 5. Of how great advantage it is unto children to have good pa∣rents. This is here evident by the great good, which accru'd by Caleb to his feed. They are by him provided for; by him they are enstated in an inheritance, an eternal inheritance. A good man lea∣veth an inheritance to his childrens children, saith Solomon, Prov. 13.22. This all men know and practice; for it is  the law of Adam, as David calls it, 2 Sam. 7.19. Yea, even evil pa∣rents give good things to their children, and lay up inheritances for their children, if they be gotten so well, that they will last so long, because De malè quaesitis vix gandet tertius heres, otherwise the third heir wil scarce enjoy them. It is a natural and usual providence common to all parents good and evil, to be provident for their children, and to lay up, and, if they can, to leave inheritance for them, 2 Cor. 12.14. Yea, this providence hath so far possessed some, that while they have thought themselves good parents, by their carking and caring for an inhe∣ritance in this world, they become evil men, and lose their inhe∣ritance
in the world to come. And while some approve them∣selves provident parents, and take that of the Apostle for their ground, that he who provides not for his own, especially those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse then an In∣fidel, 1 Tim. 5.8. by their immoderate and inordinate pursuit after the things of this life, and their unbelief and distrust of divine provi∣dence, so it comes to pass, that while they provide for their chil∣dren, that they may not be Infidels, they become worse then Infidels. Whence it appears, that both good and evil men leave such inhe∣ritances. So that Solomon speaks too straitly of a good man, as if it were proper to him. Besides, its possible a good man may not have what to leave for an inheritance unto his children. Surely when the Wiseman called his book , the book of Pro∣verbs, and implyed, that it is a Key to unlock mysteries, to know wis∣dom and instruction, to perceive the words of understanding; to un∣derstand a Proverb and the interpretation, the words of the wise and their dark sayings, its clear, he understood not only an earthly inheritance,Prov. 13. v. 24. but an heavenly. But if so, how can a good man be said to leave an inheritance to his childrens children? For what a man leaves to another to possess, he himself ceaseth to be possessor of it. And therefore Haeres est qui defuncto succedit in jus universum; an heir succeeds one deceased in all his right. If therefore the heir suc∣ceed the good man in all his right, how can this be understood of the eternal inheritance? Yea, how can the good man be said to leave an inheritance to his childrens children? That which a man leaves to another, he disowns and possesseth no more himself. But this cannot be so with the good man: for as he gives, or conveyes to his children the eternal inheritance, so he remains a coheir himself of the same inheritance: And therefore the word  does not sig∣nifie only to leave an inheritance, but Haereditare faciet, he shall make or cause to inherit; or, he shall make his childrens children heirs, as of the inheritance incorruptible and undefiled that fadeth not away, preserved or kept  in the heavens, in vos,Hebr. 10. v. 34. unto you, into you. Indeed there our inheritance lies, Hebr. 10.34. knowing that ye have in your selves a better and enduring substance. O ye seed of Caleb, ye faithful and corragious Israelites! Be we exhorted to inherit the holy land. It is not a strong fansie, but a strong and valorous faith which sets before us, the eternal inheritance, and enstates us in it,Hebr. 11. v. 1. Hebr. 6.12. and 11.1. So the Apostle saith, that faith is , subjectio, the setting before us things hoped for. For faith cannot be the substance of things hoped for: For if faith were the substance of things hoped for, how could the things be hoped for, whereof we have already the present sub∣stance?
But many men are lulled into a carnall security out of a sup∣posed Assurance which they ground, upon an empty aith, which will deceive them in the end, when it will be too late to remedy it or prevent it. Hence it is that what ever their sins are, yo they hold fast their Assurance so, that by no meanes they will depart from that. And to this end, all things are laid, and the Scripture is made to speak to their Security, so that, if they believe, they shall then certainly inherit the Land. And is not that true, that, if we be∣lieve, we shall be saved? Mar. 16. and so inherit the land? Yes, no doubt. But what kind of Belief is this? Surely no other than the obedience of faith. Obj. But is it not said, Joh. 3.18. He that believeth on him, is not condemned, but he that believeth not, is condemned already, &c. So ver. 36. He that believeth on the Son, hath the everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him? Yea, Hebr. 3.18.19. To whom sware he, that they should not enter into his rest, but to those who believed not? So we see, that they could not enter in, because of unbe∣lief. These are Scriptures which mainly fortify mens imaginations, and strengthen their Assurance. This is a subtill Stratagem of Satan, like a Stratagem in war wherein men can erre but once, & that irrecoverably. To discover this, we must know, that these testimonies of Scripture are all misunderstood. As to the first, Joh. 3.18. He that believeth on him, is not condemned;John 3. v. 18. but he that believeth not, is condemned already. What other belief is this, but obedience of faith? This will be cleared out of the next words opposite unto these! But he that believeth not, &c. and who that is, appears by the condemnation for unbelief; because men love darkness more then light, because their works are evill, and he that doth evill hateth the light. The other two Scriptures are mis-translated to serve their turn. 1. Joh. 3.36. He that believeth on the son, hath the everlasting life,John 3. v. 36. what faith or belief is this on the Son, but the obedience of faith  as its clear by the context with the next words; but he who believeth not the Son; the words are, , but he who is disobedient to the Son, he who disobeyes the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him. And as far from their purpose, is the third testimony,Hebr. 3. v. 18, 19. Hebr. 3.18.19. To whom sware he, that they should not enter into his rest, but to those who believed not? The words are, , but to those who were not obedient; and therefore so we must understand the next words: So we see, they could not enter in because of unbelief, that is, disobedience; as the former words declare.
The Lord foresaw and fore shewed in type, how presumptuous and vainly credulous men would be in these last dayes, Ezech. 33.24. Son of man, saith the Lord, they that inhabit those wasts of the Land of Israel, speak saying, Abraham was one, and he in∣herited the Land; but we are many; the Land is given us for an inheritance. Wherefore say unto them; thus saith the Lord, ye eat with the blood; and lift up your eyes toward your idols; and shed blood; And shall yet inherit the Land? Ye stand upon your sword; e work abomination; and ye defile every one his neighbours wife? And shall ye possess the Land? These men claimed inheritance of the holy land, under Abraham; even as many at this day, under pretence of Abrahams faith, claim the eternal inheritance. But its quite forgotten, what the Lord said to like pretenders, who said, Abraham is our father, John 8.39. Jesus saith unto them, if ye were Abrahams children, ye would do the works of Abraham; but now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I have heard of God; this did not Abra∣ham. Ye do the deeds of your father: and ver. 44. ye are of your fa∣ther the Devil, and the lusts of your father , ye have a will or lust to do. Do we not read expresly, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Herein men are wont much to deceive themselves; therefore the Apostle warns us; Be not deceived; Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with man∣kinde, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God. And therefore this kingdom figured by the holy land cannot be inherited unless first we drive out these inhabitants of it. And therefore , which signifies to inherit, signifies also to dis-inhe∣rit and drive out, as often Deut. 9. and elsewhere. As for positive qualifications rendring us fit to inherit the land, I shall name no other then such as offer themselves in the exam∣ple of Caleb and his seed. Remember what means he used to ingratiate himself with the Lord Paramount. 1. He was dear to Jehoshua. We read them often joyned to∣gether, Jehoshua and Caleb. 2. The Lord stiles him his servant. 3. He had another, a new spirit, the spirit of faith. 4. He fulfilled the Lords will after him, of all which I have spoken. Caleb also had his seed. Iru, that name imports watchfulness a∣gainst the temptations of the enemy. A duty which concernes us all; what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch. And indeed  signifies as much; Be watchful: and good reason S. Peter addes; for your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, goes about seek∣ing whom he may drink up,1 Pet. 5.8, 9. 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. It concernes us there∣fore
to be strong in the faith, and to rowze the Lion of the Tribe of Judah (Calebs Tribe) and to implore his aid, his watchfulness over us. The Lion is so watchful, that he never fully shuts his eyes. The keeper of Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps. A watchful Coun∣sellour is so described: , A wise Counsellour must not sleep all night. The Lion also is as strong as vigilant; that's another son of Caleb, , Elah, that is, strong as an Oak. So strong was Caleb, Josh. 14.10, 11. Calebs third son was  beautiful, decent, and comely, as Solomon reckons the Lion among the comely walkers, Prov. 30.29. O that we were so qualified for the inheriting of the holy land! O that we were so adjoyned unto the true Jehoshua! that we were such servants of the Lord! that we had that other, that new spirit, that spirit of faith and valour, like that of Caleb! that we fulfilled the Lords will after him! O that we were such a seed of Caleb, so watchful, so strong, so walking worthy of the Lord to all pleasing! Col. 1.10. The holy land is well worthy of such a seed. Nor is it a strong fansie or imagination, but a strong faith, which sets before us this eternal inheritance. For want of this, the land of Canaan hath fail'd the heirs of it, who have been driven out of it these many hundred years. But all the faithfull ones, the true seed of Caleb are undoubted heires to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled and that fadeth not away. 1. Pet. 1.4. It's a Land of desire, Psal. 106.24.Psal. 106. v. 24. Which may excite and satisfie all desires. Its the Lords Land, who is the desire of all nations; or (to note the full satisfaction of all desires,) the word  Desire is singular,Hag. 2. v. 8. and joyned with  the plu∣rall, they shall come; importing that all appetites, and desires shall be fulfilled and satisfied in the Lords Land, Hag. 2.8. Which the antient fathers understood of Christ, saith Galatinus, lib. 4. cap. 9. And therefore its worthily called the Ornament in all Lands; and that which the Lord hath spied out for his people,Ezech. 20. v. 6. Ezech. 20.6. Remember the joynt testimony of Jehoshua and Caleb against the gainsaying and rebellious Israelites, Num. 14.7.8. The Land, which we passed thorow to search it, is an exceeding good Land: If the Lord bear good will toward us, or, delight in us, he will bring us into this land, and give it us. And certainly he will so do, if we bear good will towards him and delight in him.—Ut ameris, ama∣bilis esto. That we may be beloved, and delighted in, we must be amiable and lovely; Delight thy self in the Lord, and he will give thee the petitions or desires of thine heart, Psal. 37.4. Now the Lord make us perfect in every good work to do his will, working in us that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen. Heb. 13.21.
God keeps his time, though men be out of tune. SERMON X. Numbers 14. ver. 34. After the number of the dayes wherein ye searched the land, even fourty dayes, each day for a year shall you bear your iniquities, even fourty years; and ye shall know my breach of promise. IN the thirteenth and fourteenth Chapters of Numbers, is con∣tained one of the most famous and most remarkable histories of the whole Old Testament. The sons of Israel were now come out of Egypt, had received the law in Horeb, were numbred and mustered, were made rea∣dy to march toward the land of Canaaan. But, as usually it comes to pass, when we are about to travail toward Sion, and set our faces thitherward, then we meet with most opposition from the enemy. The like was prefigured in the manifold obstacles and impediments which hindred this people in their journey to∣ward the land of promise, whereof ye read in the two former books, and in the first part of this book. The greatest obstruction in their way was the diffidence and despair of the people, and afterward their vain confidence and presumption. The Text contains Gods sentence against the Apostates from the faith. Whereof there are two parts: 1. Their punishment denounced. 2. The cause intimated. First, Their punishment denounced; ye shall bear your ini∣quities. Which is amplified by the time; fourty years: and that in proportion to the time wherein they searched the land; fourty dayes, a day for a year.
In both we have these Axioms.SER. X. 1. They search'd the land fourty dayes. 2. They shall bear their iniquity fourty years. 3. After the number of the dayes in which they searched the land, fourty dayes, each day for a year, they shall bear their ini∣quities, fourty years. 4. Thus they shall know Gods breach. They searched the land fourty dayes. Wherein we must en∣quire, 1. What this land to be searched was. 2. What it is to search it, and who they were who searched it. 3. Concern∣ing the time of their search. The land to be searched here mentioned, is not only that which is called strictly the land of Canaan, lying beyond Jordan; but al∣so the land of the Amorites, Deut. 1.20. on this side Jordan. 2. As for the act of searching, it is not undertaken for it self, but for information, as Joseph chargeth his brethren that they were Spies, and that they came to see the nakedness of the land, Gen. 42.9. And the like, Hanuns Princes say of Davids servants, 2 Sam. 10.3. Accordingly Moses gives instructions to the twelve Spies to inform themselves touching the people of the land, whe∣ther strong or weak, few or many, touching their Cities where∣in they dwelt, whether in tents or strong holds; concerning the soil whether it be fat or lean. And therefore the word here turn'd to search, is  rendred by the LXX  to consider; but the word is of larger signification as to search round about ac∣cording to Eccles. 7.25.Eccles. 7.25. I applyed mine heart to know and to search and to seek out wisdom. The words are  as in the margent, I and my heart compassed. I cast about, . The searchers of this land were either God himself, Ezech. 20.6. Or Men; and they either the 12 Spies reckoned up by name, Numb. 13. Or the whole Congregation; of whom the Lord here saith, Ye searched the land; for it was their motion first to send forth Spies to search it, Deut. 1.20. Quod quis per alium facit, id ip∣se facit. That which one doth by another, he may be said to be the author of it. 3. The time of searching the land was fourty days. The num∣ber of fourty is a mystical number; which sometime notes temp∣tation. Sometime 2. tryal of faith and obedience. Sometime 3. Sin it self is thereby signified. Sometime 4. punishment of sin. Some∣time 5. repentance, humiliation, and expiation of sin. And there are examples of all these. Of the first. The Lord Jesus was tempted fourty dayes, Matth. 4.1, 2. 2. The faith and obedience of the people was tryed fourty dayes, while Moses was in the Mount: While the Spies searched the land. 3. Its a time of sin. The Israelites sinned in the Wilderness fourty years, Hebr. 3. 4. For
that sins sake they bare their punishment fourty years. 5. The same number also of fourty, signifies a time of humiliation, repen∣tance, and sorrow for sin. And therefore fourty dayes were allowed the Ninivites for their repentance Jonah 3. The reason why they searched the land, will appear from con∣sideration of the land it self, and the searchers of it; their designe & Gods authority for the searching of it. 1. The land it self flowed with Milk and Honey, and was the glory of all lands, and therefore well worth the searching. 2. The searchers of the land, the principal & chief of the people,  they were all men, that is, the chief and principal men, Numb. 13.3. 3. The peoples designe was, to expel the present inhabitants out of the land; a difficult work, and therefore not rashly to be un∣dertaken, but with industries, Prov. 20.18. with good advice,Prov. 20. v. 18. (or rather, as  signifies, with subtilties and industries) make war. 4. Beside, the Lord, out of confidence that the goodness of the land would answer his testimony given concerning it; and would satisfie their most curious inquisition and search of it, he yielded to their importunity, and ordered the searching of it. All which howsoever most true; yet hereby the Lord approves not of their searching the land, but in these words tacitly reproves them for their searching of it. Does the Lord blame them for searching the Land? Does not he himself appoint Moses to send men, and direct him who they should be? Num. 13.2. It is true; but the Original of this search was the peoples curiosity and their prying and searching providence, Deut. 1.22. Unto which notwithstanding the Lord condescended out of security and confidence, that the Land would prove wor∣thy their approbation. Thus the Lord condescended unto the peoples desires of making themselves a King; though he gave them that King in his wrath, Hos. 13.11. So here its evident, that the Lord layes some blame upon the people for searching the Land. For the onely wise God look'd throw all their pretences, upon the true reason why they searched the Land. 1. They had a longing desire to return back into Egypt, as more then once they discovered: and they hoped by this meanes to find occasion to revolt, as the event proved, Num. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. 2. Though they might like the holy Land well, yet not upon termes of fighting for it. But so much for the literall meaning of these words. Mystice, There is a land which all men ought to search who intend to travel thither, even the land of Righteousness, and upright∣ness,
Psal. 143.10. Thy land O Immanuel, Esay. 8.8. The good land, which the meek shall inherit, Matth. 5.5. Wherein their dayes shall be long who honour their parents. Yea, the Lord himself is that land, Esay 33.21. a place of broad rivers and streames, in which the trees of righteousness are planted, Psal. 1.3. There are also who search that land, even the holy Prophets, who have inquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto us, 1 Pet. 1.10. This land is best searched by travailing in it, as the spies knew the land by their travaills, and reported what they had seen. And as the holy land is a Spiritual land, so must the searching of it be spiritual. The inhabitants of it who hold possession of it against us, are many; The Hittite, who does what good he does, out of Servile fear: as Simon, was compelled to bear the cross, otherwise he had not born it. He is like the Horse and Mule without understanding; whose mouth must be held with bit and bridle, lest they come neer unto thee, Psal. 32. The Girgashite, differs litle from a stranger unto God; onely, some assumed showes of holyness he has; like those, Mark. 7.3.8. of the Pharisees and all the Jewes; whose art of seeming, our Lord discovers; well hath Esaias prophesied of you, Hypocrites; This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrins the Commandements of men &c. For ye lay aside the commandements of God, that ye may keep your own traditi∣on. Neer to these dwels the Amorite, Locutuleius, a religious pratler, who talks much of God, and is exceeding mouth-holy; God and goodness is neer to their mouth, but far from their reins. Unto such a wicked one, saith God; what is it unto thee to declare my statutes,Psal. 50. v. 16, 17. and that thou takest my covenant upon thy mouth? But thou hatest discipline (or chastisement) and hast cast my words behinde thee. The next neighbour to the Amorite is the Canaanite; who, what good he does, he does it for reward. Such are Curvae in terras ani∣mae & coelestium inanes, crooked souls, bowed down to the earth, and void of heavenly things: such as look only after their gain; whence  is a Merchant, Hos. 12 7. Of such the Lord saith, they have their reward, Matth. 6.2.5. And which of you shut∣teth the dores for nothing? Malac. 1.10. The next is the Perizite, Qui sine muris habitat, a negligent, a careless nation, like the people of Laish, Judges 18.27. Laish pre∣figuring the roaring Lion, that strong one keeping his palace, when all his goods are in peace, till a stronger one comes; when they say peace, then comes Dan the judgement.
The Hivite who boasts of a false gift; a pretending gifted man. The Jebusite, who, by Apostasie, or spiritual pride, treads all under his feet, even Christ himself, Hebr. 10.29. Such inhabitants keep possession of the land; which, it's much to be feared, we shall finde, if we seek them in our selves. And let us be exhorted so to do, the land is worth our search. But who believes the true spies, who assure us that the land is a good land, and that we are well able to overcome it? O how incredulous, how unbelieving men are in the testimonies of the most true and faithfull God, and his witnesses! He tells his people, that he had espied them out a land flowing with milk and honey, the glory of all lands, Ezech. 20.6. His witnesses tell us, that its a good land, and we are well able to subdue the inhabitants. But who believes them? Nay, they bid stone such with stones, Num. 14.10. Yet take heed of condemning these, lest thou thy self be found guilty of the same thing. One of his witnesses assures thee, that the Lord hath shewed thee, O man, what is good,Mic. 6. v. 8. and what doth the Lord require of thee but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self, to walk with thy God, Mich. 6.8. And another, that the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost; for he that in these things ser∣veth Christ, is ,Rom. 14. v. 18. well-pleasing to God and approved of men, Rom. 14.17.18. These and such as these divine testimonies, the Lord seals unto us, and perswades our hearts, that these and the like sayings are faithfull and true. Yet who so far believes these testimonies of the true and faithfull God, as to be obedient unto him and do them? So that the Lord complaines, Num. 14.11. How long will it be yer they believe me? and his witnesses, Esay, 53.1. Who hath believed our report or our hearing, which we have heard of God? and to whom is the Arm, strength, Christ of the Lord revealed! Yea, though men search the land, yet it is, as it were by a Map, by reading of it, they scarce travail one step toward it.John 5. v. 39, 40. As the learned Scribes could tell where Christ should be born, but themselves went not forth, Matth. 2. Ye search the Scriptures, &c. (, the word ap∣pears by the context to be Indicative, not Imperative;) but ye will not come unto me, that is, believe in me that ye might have life, John 5.39, 40. Signe. The way lies Southward toward the perfect day, Numb. 14.17. Who will believe that we travail thitherward, when our faces are toward the North, and the dark land? As for means conducing hereunto; the Spies who searched the land went from the Wilderness of Zin to Rehob; that is, from the bushy and thorny way, to largeness and latitude, v. 21. That, no doubt, is the way through straits and difficulties. We went through fire and water say such travailers, and thou broughtest us to a arge
place,  a place of refreshment, Psal. 66.12. that's meant by Re∣hob here, 2 Esdr. 7.7. Therefore Rehob was the inheritance of the Tribe of Asher, Josh. 19.24.28. Judges 1.31. that is, bliss and hap∣piness, as Asher signifies. The afflictions and sufferings of Christ, must precede our sal∣vation by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5, 6. through the narrow to the broad. God shewes the worst first: Cut off the right hand, &c. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, &c. The common method of the world is quite otherwise, whereby we are first assured of life, salvation, the holy land; and then commanded to perform these hard duties afterward. 2. They shall bear their iniquityes, the word we turn iniquity is, , which is, commonly here understood Metonymically, as the effect put for the cause. But I see no reason but hereby we may understand the iniquity it self, or the guilt of it. For howsoever the Lord, at the intercession of Moses, had remitted the everlasting punishment, Num. 14.20. Yet might they be made to feel the burden of their sin, according as the Lord threatens in my text. And Num. 27.3. The daughters of Zelophe had, though they acquit their father of the conspiracy of Korah, yet they confess, that he died in the wilderness, and, died in his own sin. He bare his iniquity, according to Gods sentence in the text; although I deny not, but that the Metonymical meaning also hath place here, when they are said to bear their iniquity, in that their carkasses fell in the wilderness, Hebr. 3.17. 3. According to the dayes wherein they searched the land, even fourty dayes, each day for a year, they shall bear their iniquities even fourty years. The reason of this seeming great excess of punishment, is, be∣cause sin is not to be looked at according to the time wherein it is acted, but 1. According to the person offended. 2. According to the holy and just law violated, and the just penalty of that law. 3. According to the means of grace offered, whereby the sin might have been avoided. 4. According to the obligation of the person offending. The Lord proportions and measures out the punish∣ments of sin, according to the nature, extent, and degree, of continu∣ance in sin. Thus he dealt with Tyre and Sidon, with Sodom and Gomorrha, and with his own people. The most just and merciful God in his punishments usually goes less, and not to the full extent of his threatnings. Chronolo∣gers, who have exactly counted the years of Israels punishment in the Wilderness, they finde it to fall short some moneths of full fourty years. And the holy people, who ought to be like their God, being commanded not to exceed fourty stripes, for the greatest fault, Deut. 25.3. They Commonly, out of equity, remitted at least
one; St. Paul among his sufferings testifies this practice of the Jewes, 2 Cor. 11.24. But in bestowing of rewards, the mercifull God usually ex∣ceeds his promises, Esay 35. Where the Lord foretells what miracles the Son of God should work, in the dayes of his flesh, we read not of casting out Devills, nor curing the lepers; both which we read frequently done by him. The Lord promised David, that after he should sleep with his fathers, his Son should sit upon his throne, but he brought that to pass while David was yet a live, and his eyes seeing it. 1. Hence it appears, that the sin of a day, may bring on us a years punishment, yea many years; yea, an eternity, if not timely repented of and forsaken. 2. The quadragesima of sin may bring a quadringentessimum, yea a seculum, yea a seculum seculorum, of Judgement. 3. Hence it followes, that there is an everlasting punishment remaining for incorrigible and impenitent disobedient men. This is evident from hence, because the Lord remitted and par∣doned this people their sin, as appears, Num. 14. ver. 20. Yet here the Lord denounceth a punishment against the same sin∣ners. 4. Its clear therefore, that, when God hath forgiven sin, as to the everlasting punishment, He may and often doth reserve a tem∣porall. This is evident as out of the text, so by Nahans transactions with David, 2 Sam. 12. And the reason is; because there is no sin, unles timely repen∣ted of, but its deadly. So saith the Lord, Jer. 46.28. I will cha∣stise thee in measure and not leave thee wholly unpunished. 1. By this means he works further repentance and humiliation in the party sinning. 2. It renders the sinner more cautious and wary for the time to come; because the rod of Gods correction is upon him. 3. It declares, that there is a God that judgeth the earth, Psal. 58.11. 4. It is for example unto others that they may hear, and fear, and do no more wickedly. 5. We learn hence, that the Purgatory and temporal punishment for sin, may be safely admitted in this life. 6. Hence its evident, that some are judged here, that they may not perish with the world, 1 Cor. 11. for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be sa∣ved in the day of the Lord. 1. This reproves their erroneous judgement who think, that, because God punishes men here a long time, therefore he will pu∣nish them for ever. 2. Those who conclude, that they may sin impunè, because they see no hurt come of it for the present. Its impossible, but that they should be punished for it either temporally or eternally.
4. The Lord saith to his people in covenant with him, ye shall know my breach of promise. The words thus translated contain in them these two (I cannot call them divine truths, but) false Axi∣oms: 1. The Lord breaks his covenant and promise. 2. The Lord will make his people in covenant with him, know his breach of promise or covenant. Both which as they are most false and absurd, so must this translation be, which contains them both, (to say the best of it) be most absurd and false. These words are variously rendred by divers Translators. The Vulg. Lat. and Pagnin turns them thus, Cognoscetis ultionem meam, my vengeance. Munster, Irritationem meam, my provocation. Vata∣blus and the Tigurin Bible, Prohibitionem meam, my prohibition or forbidding. Coverdale, that ye may know what it is, when I withdraw my hand. Two other Translations, ye shall know my displeasure. A fourth, ye shall feel my vengeance; , nothing to the purpose. The Hebrew word here used signifies neither vengeance nor provocation, nor prohibition, nor with∣drawing the hand, nor displeasure. How be it I finde no Transla∣tion so far from the truth as our last, and that of Diodati. But if the word  signifies none of these; what does it signifie? The word signifies a Breach. So Tremellius, ye shall know, Abruptionem meam, my breach. So Piscator turns it, and explaines the phrase; ye shall know how great evill it is, when a man breaks himself off from me. Or thus; That ye may know, how great evil it is, when I break my self off from any one. But the former exposition is the more genuine: For this people had broken themselves off from their God, and shaken off the yoke of obedience. Ne{que} Deus quemquam deserit nisi qui prius Deum deseruerit; God forsakes none but such as forsake him first. The word  which signifies a breach, must suppose some∣thing to be broken; a breach must be of somewhat. The Lord calls it his breach;  my breach. It must therefore be of some∣thing in God, whether counsel, or purpose, and will. And these and like words may be understood as well passively as actively. The Pharisees and Lawyers frustrated the counsel of God against themselves, Luke 7.30. And I am broken by their whorish heart which hath departed from me, saith the Lord, Ezech. 6.9. God breaks not his covenant and promise with his people, but his people break their promise and covenant with their God. Its na∣turally known, that when covenants and bargains are made be∣tween men, he who fails the stipulation and performance of his promise, is said to break his promise and covenant; not he with whom the other deals falsely and deceitfully. For when one of the parties confederate, hath broken his bond and covenant, the o∣ther is left free.
Thus the Lord layes the blame of covenant-breaking upon his people, Deut. 31.16, 17. Josh. 7.11. Judges 2.20. 1 Kings 19.10. and elsewhere very often. The Lord assures his people of his keeping covenant with them, Deut. 7.9. He is called the faithful God that keepeth covenant, and mercy with them that love him and keep his Commandements, to a thousand generations, Psal. 105.8. and 106.45. and 111.5. Dan. 9.4. Nor ever doth he break his pro∣mise or covenant, unless his people first break with him. In which sense we understand, Zach. 11.10. and other like Scriptures. Whence it will follow; 1. That which is said to be broken off from somewhat, it hath been whole and one with that from which it is broken off. And therefore since the Lord speaks here of his breach of his people from him, surely his people had been one with him. How else can they be said to forsake him, depart from him, &c. Deut. 5.9. Ezech. 6.9. It is a truth in Philosophy , Omne continuum est unum, what ever is continued is one. And such the Lord made the man, of one minde, one will, one heart with himself, 1 Cor. 6.17. He who is joyn'd unto the Lord, is one spirit, the Syriac interpreter adds, with him. 2. There is no doubt a Breach made between God and man. 3. God here and elsewhere complaines of this Breach. 4. Since the Lord complaines of his Breach, doubtles he can∣not be the cause of it. 5. The apostate, evill, unbelieving heart of man turning from God, makes this Breach. 6. Gods counsells being conditional, may, by our default, become frustrate, 1 Sam. 2.30. I said indeed that thy house and the house of thy father should walk before me for ever; But now the Lord saith, be it farre from me; For them that honour me, I will honour; and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed, According to this condition, Paul and Barnabas speak to the contradicting and blaspheming Jewes; It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you; but seeing ye put it, or rather thrust it () from you, and judge your selves not worthy () of eternal life, lo we turn to the Gentiles.Acts 17. v. 46. Thus the Gadarens rejected Christ, Luk. 8.37. 1. Hence it appeares, that they are much out, who conceive, that God makes no other then absolute decrees. 2. Who believe such absolute decrees as are no where extant in the word of God. 3. How justly does this reprove, I fear, the most of us, of our fickleness and inconstancy; how yelding, how easy, how pliable are we to any the least temptation, to break off union with our God? How does our vain fear melt our hearts? How does our hope of some seeming good, carry our souls away from the chief good? How does worldly sorrow break our hearts off from our
God? How does any outward pleasing and delightfull object take us and win us? according to that of the Poet; Hinc metuunt, cupiunt{que} dolent, gaudent{que}— Hence men fear, desire, grieve and rejoyce. These are the four Cardinal affections by which the chariot of our souls is moved, and removed from our God. So fearfull and cowardly was this people.Dut. 1. v. 28. The false spies had discouraged their heart, or rather melted their heart: For so what is solid and strong by faith, vertue or prowess and courage, is weakned, dissolved and melted by fear, fainting and unbelief, Gen. 45.26. For fear is the betraying of those succours which reason offereth Wisd. 17.12. Hushai makes good this metaphor of the holy spirit here used, 2 Sam. 1.7, 10. He who is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a Lyon, shall melt. So fearfull and cowardly are all they, who have an evill heart of unbelief in departing from the living God. They believe not, but betray those succours which the great God the Lord of Hosts offereth them. Where of he complaines, how long will it be yer they believe, for all the signes that I have shewed among them? Num. 14.11. They fear their many transgressions, their strong and mighty sins, Amos, 5.12. that they can never be over-come. Is there any thing too hard for God? That's the question. Not whether the enemy be too strong for thee. And therefore the Lord there expostulates, How long will this people provoke me?Num. 14. v. 11. And how long will it be yer they believe me, for all the signes that I have shewed, the word is  which I have wrought or done among them? yea, which I have done,  in interiore ejus, in the midst of them, in their heart: As they confess, Esay 26.12. O Lord! Thou hast wrought all our works in us. And therefore so much more exprobable is their base fear, and unbelief. The Lord expects that men should reason à pari, from like reason, the most natural argument. God hath wrought these signes and wonders for me; therefore he is able to do the like; and therefore he will do it; because he bath promised so to do. Thus valiant David argued, 1 Sam. 17.37. God that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion and out of the paw of the bear; he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. So S. Paul reasons, I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. And the Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will pre∣serve me unto his heavenly kingdom, 2 Tim. 2.17, 18. And so he reasons in behalf of the Philippians;Phil. 1. v. 6. being confi∣dent, or having been perswaded of this very thing, that he who hath begun a good work in you, , perficiet, will thorowly finish or perfect it, until the day of Jesus Christ; Phil. 1.6.
The timerous and cowardly hearts of men, will not suffer them to reason thus. Therefore their base fear excludes them out of the holy land, Revel. 21.7, 8. He that overcomes, shall inherit all things, and I will be to him a God; and he shall be to me a son.Revel. 21. v. 7.8. But to the fearfull, and unbelieving and abominated ones, and mur∣derers and whoremongers and sorcerers and idolaters and all lyars (these have a portion; but not in the holy land; no but) their part or portion is in the lake that burneth with fire and brim∣stone, which is the second death. How easily is the heart broken off from God by hope and trust in any creature? St. Paul well knew this; and therefore warnes Timothy, charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertaine riches, or as in the Greek , in divitiarum incertitudine, in the uncertainty of riches, but in the living God, 1 Tim. 6.17. If they trust in riches, if they be joynd to them, they are broken off from the living God. They cannot serve God and Mammon. And therefore David blaming such, man, saith he, walketh in an image, Surely they are disquieted in vain: He heapeth up,Psal. 39.6.7. and knoweth not who shall gather them. And now Lord, what wait I for? my hope it self is in thee, Psal. 39.6, 7. Such an heart-breaker is sorrow, Prov. 15.13. By sorrow of the heart, the spirit is broken. For ,2 Cor. 7. v. 10. that sorrow that is according to God, worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of; but the sorrow of the world, worketh death, 2 Cor. 7.10. It breakes the spirit off from the God of life. But delight and pleasure in any seeming present good, O how violently and suddenly it breakes off the heart from the chief good. Unto such an one the Lord speaks in the judgment, Psal. 50.16,Psal. 50. v. 16, 17, 18.17, 18. Thou hatest instruction (disciplin or correction) and hast cast my words behind thee. How comes this to passe? If thou sawest a thief (what ever temptation comes to steal away the heart) then thou consentedst (or wert delighted, or pleasedst thy selfe) with him, and thy portion is with the adulterers. For the heart goes a whoring after the eyes, Num. 15.38. and the lustfull man becomes patranti fractus ocello; His lascivious eye breaks off his heart from the most holy God, and melts it into weakness. Reuben the beginning of Jacobs strength, the excellency of dignity, and excellency of power, by this means becomes unstable and weak as water, Gen. 49.3, 4. Of this Apostasie the Lord complains, Ezech. 6.9. I am broken with their whorish heart which hath departed from me. O Israel! Haec fierent si testiculi vena ulla paterni viveret in nobis? Would these things be, if the spring of holy life, so vigorous in our holy Fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, were derived unto us? O Israel! Thy God hath never broken his promise with thee, he is the faithful God who keepeth covenant & mercy with them that love him
and keep his Commandements, to a thousand generations, Deut. 7.9. But thou hast broken promise and covenant with thy God many fourty dayes, as this people in the Text did; yea, many of us more then fourty years. Wherefore return, O Israel, unto the Lord thy God; for we have fallen by our iniquity, Hos. 13.1. and may most justly expect a proportionable punishment for our sins, who knowes how soon? unless it be prevented by a propor∣tionable humiliation and repentance. As when Jonas had pro∣claimed from the Lord, yet fourty dayes and Nineveh shall be de∣stroyed, Jonah 3.4. See what effect this wrought, ver. 5. The people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on Sackcloth, from the greatest of them, even to the least of them. Nor do I doubt, (if I may speak a word in season, on this Quadragessima Sunday, as it has been anciently called,) but we have altogether as reasonable grounds for a Quadragesimale Jeju∣nium a fast of fourty dayes, as the Ninivites had. When ever it was, or by whomsoever it was first instituted, sure I am, he wanted not a patern in the holy Scripture. Our Lords example unto us is above all other, who fasted fourty dayes and fourty nights, Matth. 4.2. which was prefigured by Moses, Exod. 34.28. and Elias, 1 Kings 19.8. who appeared with him in his transfiguration, Matth. 17.3. What if we produce a downright precept of Christ for Christians fasting? Ye shall finde it recorded in three of the Evangelists, Matthew 9.14, 15. Mark 2.18, 19, 20. Luke 5.33, 34, 35. where the Disciples of John and of the Pharisees move this question to our Lord; why do the Disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, but thy Disciples fast not? Our Lord answers this question; 1. Why, for the present, his Disciples could not fast; They were children of the Bride-chamber, and as yet the Bridegroom was with them, therefore they could not fast. 2. He gives command to his Disciples for after∣time, that they should fast; and gives reason for it. The dayes shall come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken away from them; and then shall they fast in those dayes. We read no where, that our Lord ever repealed or annulled this precept. This precept therefore must stand firm, at least while the reason of it stands firm. Let us therefore inquire concerning the marriage between Christ and his Church: and whether the heavenly Bridegroom be with us yea or no? There were three special times observed in marriage, not only among the Romans, Lacedemonians, and other nations, but also among the Jewes, 1. of espousing and be∣trothing, when the stipulation and promise were mutually made between the Bridegroom and the Bride, whence the names of spon∣sus and sponsa, and our English word Wedding from the Dutch Medden to promise; this time the Greeks called ; this
is the time of espousing; of which we read, Hos. 2.19, 20. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, &c. 2. There was an interval or time after their betrothing, before the parties came together, which they called : of this we understand, Deut. 20.7. and 21.13. Judges 14.7, 8. Matth. 1.18. Hos. 3.3. thou shalt abide for me many dayes. 3. There was a time of coming together and cohabi∣tation when the mariage was consummated; this time was called . Of this time the Lord speaks, They shall be my peo∣ple, and I will be their God in Truth and Righteousness, Zach. 8.8. of which our Saviour speaks, John 14.23. If a man love me, he will keep my words; and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with him. Whence it will not be difficult for us to discern in what condition we are towards the Bridegroom; whether our Lord be come unto us and make his abode with us; or whether we stand at a distance from him, while his Ambassadours woo us, and beseech us (O wonderful condescent!) that we will be reconciled unto him, 2 Cor. 5.20. Surely where the Bridegroom is, there his life and spirit is, there his joy and consolation is, and they twain are but one. For, he who is joyned to the Lord, is one spirit with him, so the Syriac, 1 Cor. 6.17. And he who saith, he abideth in him,Esay 62. v. 5. he himself ought so to walk even as he walked, 1 John 2.6. And as the joy to the Bride∣groom, is over the Bride, thy God shall rejoyce over thee. Is the heavenly Bridegroom thus gratiously present with us? are we thus acceptably present with him? let our lives give answer to this question? The Lord is with you  in your being with him, 2 Chron. 15.2. If the Lord be not thus present with us,2 Chro. 15. v. 2. we have great need to fast and mourn and pray, O Lord, which for our sakes didst fast fourty dayes and fourty nights, give us grace that we may use such abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the spirit, we may ever obey thy godly motions in righteousness and true holiness, to thine honour and glory, who livest and reignest world without end. Amen.
When ye be come into the land of your habitations which I give unto you.] So ver. 18. when ye come into the land whither I bring you.Numb. 15. ver. 2. Ver. 18.] The words are in the Participle  I am giving you;  I am bringing you. This seems a very slight exception against the tran∣slation; but if we shall consider, that the Spirit of God, by gi∣ving and bringing into the land, spiritually understands the confer∣ring on believers the eternal inheritance, which is the true holy land: And how prone men are, out of self-love and a strong fan∣sie to assure themselves of bliss and happiness, without due quali∣fications and conditions required thereunto, and to be performed on their part, it will appear to be the great wisdom of God, by such suspension of acts, to retain us in our obedience; which the good God excites us unto, collaterally concurs withal, and blesseth with good success. So that, as we cannot act without him, so neither will he act without us. As to the words before us, there are many examples of this kinde in Pagnins translation, which Arias Montanus thought wor∣thy his Animadversion, who here instead of Do, I give, puts Dans, I am giving: and in place of ingredi facio, I make you go in, puts ingredi faciens, I am making you go in. So Tremellius hath here, ego daturus sum, and ego sum introducturus. Nor am I ashamed for the reason named, to follow so eminent examples when I endea∣vour the amendment of our last English translation. All the congregation shall offer one yong Bullock for a burnt-offering,Numb. 15. ver. 24. for a sweet savour unto the Lord.] What they turn a sweet savour, is  a savour of rest, as the Translators themselves acknow∣ledge, where the words are first used, Gen. 8.21. with allusion to Noahs name, who offered that acceptable saccrifice. But if they acknowledge that to be the meaning of the words, why then do they not so render them in the Text, but rather cast that proper sense into the margent? Its answered, that the Greek Interpre∣ters turn the words , a savour of sweet smell; and that S. Paul hath the same expression, Ephes. 5.2. where he saith, that Christ loved us, and hath given (or rather delivered up ; Vulg. Lat. Pagnin, Vatablus, Tigurin Bible, tradidit. Ca∣stellio, dedidit) himself for us, an oblation and sacrifice to God, , for savour of sweet smell. It is true indeed, that the LXX so express the words; howbe∣it not as a translation, but rather as an exposition of them. For so, although the burnt flesh of beasts cannot be understood to render a sweet savour, yet, what is spiritually understood by it, the con∣suming and abolishing of the sin, cannot but yield unto the Lord, a most pleasant and delightful savour, which is properly rendred the Savour of rest, by Pagnin, Odor quietis, & of our English, Ainsworth.
For whereas sin brings unrest, grief, trouble, and labour, to the most holy God, whence its called , & the like; and hence he is said to cry like a travelling woman, Esay 42.14. and to be pressed down as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaves, Amos 2.13. and to be grieved, Hebr. 3.7. and sundry other like; hence it will follow in reason, that the removal of these grievances, must needs be accepted with favour before the Lord (so the Chaldy Para∣phrast) as a savour of rest. Thus the Lord saith, that the Charets which went toward the North, quieted his spirit in the North countrey, Zach. 6.8. For the Spirits, that are created for venge∣ance, in their fury, lay on sore strokes; in the time of destruction they powre out their force, and appease the wrath of him that made them, saith the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 39.28. Thus Christ taking away the sin, becomes a savour of rest unto his Father, Ephes. 5.2. And he alone it is who can give quietness, case, and rest unto those who labour, are weary, and heavy laden, Matth. 11.28. Yet he complains of us, that we have made him to serve with our sins, and wearied him with our iniquities, Esay 43.24. O what a divine work then is it, to procure quiet, rest, and ease even unto him, who alone can give ease, rest, and quiet unto our soules! Yea, if he gives quietness, who can make trouble? saith Elihu, Job 34.29. Sin and iniquity is that which grieves and disquiets our God; that Davus qui turbat omnia, that Achan which troubles Israel; that Jonah which causeth the storm; that Sheba which lifts up his hand against David, the love of God and our neighbour; that scorner which makes all the strife. Now cast out the scorner and contention shall cease, Prov. 22.10. Cut of the head of Sheba, that Septiforme peccatum, the seven capital sins; the son of Bichri, the spaun and issue of the Devils first-born. Take away that accursed thing which is  in interiore tuo in the midst, in the heart of thee, O Israel, Josh. 7.13. and peace shall be re∣stored unto Israel. Cast Jonah over-board; and there will follow a great calm. Offer up thy daily burnt-offering, die daily to thy sin, and the Lord thy God will smell a savour of rest, and will give rest unto thy soul. There is yet one exception more against the translation of the 30 verse of this Chapter. But the soul that doeth ought presump∣tuously.Numb. 15. v. 30.] Why presumptuously? The words are , Manu elatâ, with an high hand; and so the Translators themselves ren∣der it in the margent. So Pagnin turns the words, Manu excelsa, with an high hand. Tremellius, Elatâ manu, hand lifted up. So Va∣tablus, and the Tigurin Bible. So Piscator also, and the Spanish and Italian Translations. Hereby is signified not only pride and presumption, but also as it were a daring of the great God, Non reconditâ manu, sed apertâ ex∣ertâ{que} not with an hidden, but an open and stretched-out hand; as if
a man bare an Ensigne, or erected a Standard of impiety and bla∣sphemy against God, that he might draw or invite others into the same audacious enterprize. So Tremellius. To like purpose the Chald. Paraphrast renders the words, , Capite oper∣to, according to the Greek Proverb, , boldly, prowdly: so that hereby is intimated a kinde of , or  a fighting against God; and therefore the hand lif∣ted up is here mentioned; as when Amalek fought against Israel, its said  the hand was upon or against the throne, that is, he lifted up his hand against the throne of the Lord, which is heaven, Esay 66.1. and against God himself, who sitteth thereon, Matth. 23.22. and against the Church of God; for so Jerusalem is the throne of the Lord, Jer. 3.17. though those words be of doubtful understand∣ing, whether they have in them the force of an oath, as they may be referred unto God. For so an oath is signified by lifting up the hand, Gen. 14.22. Revel. 10.5, 6. and both the Thargums incline to that meaning. However this may be the sense of that place, yet the hand lifted up is a form of speech, which imports rebellion, as Sheba lifted up his hand against David, 2 Sam. 20.21. Jeroboam against Solomon, 1 Kings 3.26. On the contrary, by giving the hand, is signified the yielding and submission 1. To a Superiour in place and authority, as 1. Chron. 29.24. its said, that all the Princes and the mighty men, and all the sons likewise of King David, submitted themselves unto Solomon the King; which is in the Hebrew, they gave the hand under Solo∣mon the King. 2. Also the yielding to the conquerour, as when the Captive Jews confess, Our necks are under persecution; we labour and have no rest; we have given the hand to the Egyptians and to the Assyrians to be satisfied with bread, Lam. 5.5, 6. Nor was this practice uncouth among the Heathen, or unknown to the Poet: Aen. lib. 11. Oremus pacem, & dextras tendamus inermes. Let's beg peace, and yield our unarm'd right hands. 2. If these words  be rendred presumptuously, I know not how we shall put difference between this phrase, and that, Exod. 21.14. if a man come presumptuously:Exod. 21. v. 14. the word is , if a man be proud, or come proudly. So Deut. 1.43. , & superbè egi∣stis, Ye dealt proudly; which is turnd also presumptuously. The like is, Deut. 17.12, 13. the man who will do  in superbia, in pride: and 18.22. all which places they turn presumptuously. Our English tongue is not so strait and penurious, but that it well may answer these different forms of speech: so that there was no necessity to confound both under one word; which indeed answers properly to neither. 3. This phrase with an high hand is opposed to  in errore, or ignorantia, ver. 27. in errour or ignorance. Whereby is not to
be understood an universal exclusion of all knowledge, but of such only as is of some particular duties, and of some circumstances: Since what may be known of God, is manifest in men, Rom. 1.19. and our duty unto God in some good measure. For our good God hath shewen to thee O man, (even to all men) what is good,Mich. 6. v. 8. to do judgement () to love mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with thy God. To sin therefore with an high hand is not only knowingly, but wilfully; whence Castellio turns the words, Qui volens fecerit, he who doth ought wilfully or with full will; which he explains, crimen alioqui capitale commiserit; who willingly or wilfully commits a crime otherwise capital. The sin in it self is capital; he therefore who adds to his knowledge of the sin, fulness of will, yea, his whole endeavour also and strength, he sinnes with an high hand. Howbeit because Omnis peccans est ignorans, every man who sins, is ignorant; the ignorance of these men is affected, and follows a will preceding their ignorance, according to that, Nolunt intelli∣gere ut male agant; they will not understand, that they may do evil. And therefore Job puts this among the characters of profligate wicked men, That they say unto God, depart from us;Job 21. v. 14. we desire not (the word is  we will not) the knowledge of thy wayes, Job 21.14. For such sinnes as these, ignorance cannot be pleaded: For whereas in order to the will, three sorts of ignorance are mentio∣ned in the School; Affectata, crassa vel supina, & invincibilis, Mag. Sent. lib. 2. distinct. 22. Affected ignorance is such as Job speaks of, in the fore-named place; which indeed rather aggravates the sin very much then excuseth it in the very least. As for gross and supine ignorance, it followes negligence and want of inquiring after what is to be known, and might be known by due diligence; which is therefore called gross and supine; be∣cause it proceeds from sloth, idleness, and listlesness to labour; which is often found in gross and fat men, whose souls are at ease, and lie still, and are loth to arise; whence it is also called, Supine ignorance; which word though it signifie the posture of the body layd down, and looking upward toward heaven; yet according to the School, it notes the posture of the minde downward, as that which is In souls bowed down to the earth and earthly things; prefigured by the Ca∣naanites, who have their name from  curvari, incurvari, deprimi, to be bowed down, and depressed toward the earth; such souls as cannot, or indeed rather will not raise themselves to the consideration of things above, heavenly things. Of which the Prophet speaks, They are wise to do evil; but to do good, they know not, Jer. 4.22. This gross and supine ignorance preceding those things which a man is bound to know, doth not simply excuse the act of the will from sin in toto, or altogether, but somewhat in or à tanto, as they speak; be∣cause
so doing, he commits a sin against the law which commands ands him to enquire what is right and just: Awake thou that sleep∣est and arise from the dead, and Christ shall enlighten thee. And, be not unwise but understanding what the will of the Lord is, Ephes. 5. But this ignorance excuseth somewhat, and à tanto; because the contempt of the command, and authority commanding, is, by reason of ignorance, so much the less: The less knowledge, the less contempt, and the less contempt; the less sin. So that it rests, that the invincible ignorance preceding the act of the will, whether positive or negative, whether juris or facti of the law or the fact, simply excuseth from sin both in tanto and in toto, in whole and in part, if I may so English that distinction. This invincible ignorance is that which remains after a man hath used all diligence due and possible, and hath done all things ex∣pedient which he is bound to do, for the removal of it. And this is the ignorance which excuseth. Howbeit, because many things are known by nature which re∣quire duty; and he who knew not his Lords will, but did things worthy of stripes,1 Cor. 4. v. 4. shall be beaten, (though) with few stripes, Luke 12.48. And, although a man know nothing, or be not con∣scious or guilty to himself, (, saith the Apostle) yet thereby he is not justified; doubtless it is most safe, not to stand upon strict termes of commutative justice with our God, but to leave our selves and our condition unto his goodness, who knowes us and what we know, better then we our selves do. It was S. Pauls case. I was, saith he, before a blasphemer and a persecu∣tor and injurious; but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. There had been no need of mercy, maugre his igno∣rance, if there had been no sin, 1 Tim. 1.13. And that sin seems to have been that which he names, blasphemy, persecution of the truth, and injury unto the professors of it, all which he might have known to be sin, according to Mich. 6.8. and according to Gama∣liels reason.Acts 5. v. 39. If the counsel be of God ye cannot dissolve it, , lest ye be found even fighters against God; sinners with an high hand. 1. Hence, upon the whole matter, we may infer, that the Hea∣then cannot plead invincible ignorance, Mic. 6.8. Rom. 1.19. no, not of the Gospel, Psal. 98.3. Rom. 10.18. if the Apostle reason right. 2. Hence also it appears, that sins are not equal; which is evi∣dent from the words before us, where it is supposed, that some sins may be committed out of errour and ignorance, others with an high hand. Yea, sins of the same kinde, yet differenced by the per∣sons offending, are not equal, Levit. 4.4. with ver. 13, 14. There is as great an expiation required of the Priests sin, as of the sin of the whole congregation. I which case Duo cum faciant idem, non est idem, when two men do the same thing, yet it is not the same.
1. Whence also they are justly blamed who pretend ignorance of those things which they may and ought to know, 2 Cor. 4.3. 2. They also who say, they know the will of God; and think it a great indignity that any should question their intellectuals; yet they practise not what they pretend to know, and so betray their morals, or rather immorality, and consequently their ignorance. Such is disobedience in Gods esteem, Rom. 1.21, 22. and the wic∣ked man how knowing soever, is yet Solomons Fool. The Scripture here speaks of the Soul; the soul that doth ought, &c. though the person of the man be understood; because Animus cujus{que} is est quisque; every mans soul is himself, or at least the better part of every man, (of which I have spoken elsewhere more large∣ly,) as also because the sin originally proceeds from the soul; and it is the heart lifted up, which lifts up the hand. Wherefore O ye immortal souls! your errours, your ignorances are too many: Adde not, O adde not thereunto your wilful trans∣gressions, your sins of an high hand, your mighty sins, as the Pro∣phet calls them, Amos 5.12. Stand not out against the Almighty God, but yield your selves unto him, and give the hand. It is the advice which Hezekiah gives to Israel, to turn again to the Lord God of their fathers, not to harden their necks, but to yield them∣selves to the Lord; (the Hebrew words are, , give the hand,2 Chro. 30 v. 8. submit your selves to the Lord, &c.) And the Posts passed from City to City, to carry the Kings Decree, and to perswade the people. But what was the event of this good counsel? They laughed them to scorn and mocked them, 2 Chron. 30.6.—10. But diverse of Asher, and Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled themselves, &c. Verbum Domini ad te, This counsel, this word of the Lord is to thee, O Israel! The Counsellour, as Christ is called, Esay 9.6. the Power and strength of the Lord, as Christ is called, 1 Cor. 1.24. (that's Heze∣kiah,) he exhorts us to turn unto the Lord God of our father A∣braham, Isaac, and Israel, that we harden not our hearts, that we sin not against him with an high hand, but submit our selves and yield our hand to the Lord. And the Posts, the Ambassadors carry this Decree of the Lord from City to City. These Ambassadors for Christ, beseech us, yea, as though God did beseech us by them, they pray us, in Christs stead, that we will be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.20. that we give our hand unto him. But alas! I well foresee, that these Ambassadors and their ex∣hortations, as often heretofore, will have a like event to those; there will be who will laugh them to scorn, and mock them. And for this, the wrath of God is come and will come upon the present generation, in variety of Diseases, Consumptions, burning Agues, Plagues, fire and sword, wherewith the Lord pleads and will plead with all flesh, Levit. 26. Deut. 28. Esay 66.16. For thus the Lord dealt with Israel according to the flesh; they mocked the messen∣gers
of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, till the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no healing; therefore he brought upon them the King of the Chal∣dees, 2 Chron. 36.15, 16, 17. And the like spiritual miseries the Lord threatens to the despisers of his Word, in these last dayes, Acts 13.41.Acts 13. v. 41. Behold, ye despisers, and wonder (, and see, which is left out in our translation) , and vanish: for I work a work in your dayes, which ye will not be∣lieve, though a man () if a man declare it unto you. It fol∣lowes, Hab. 1.5. For lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, even the  quasi daemones, as S. Hierom renders that word, even the devils, who bring with them their spiritual maladies, as insensibility, the plague of the heart, a reprobate minde, hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness. But blessed be the Lord! The Ambassadors of peace labour not altogether in vain: For divers of Asher, the blessed ones, even the blessed of the Lord, that's Asher, Gen. 30.13. Manasseh, such as forget their own people and their fathers house, Gen. 41.51. Ps. 45.10. and Zebulun, such as have the Lord for their habitation, Gen. 30.20. Psal. 90.1. These believe the Ambassadors of Christ, and finde in these sickly times,Prov. 13. v. 17. that a faithful Ambassador or rather ( legatus veritatum) an Ambassador of truths is health, Prov. 13.17. These procure healing to the land. And when others sin with an high land, these submit themselves unto the Lord, and give the hand unto him. Thus Babel in these last dayes shall be laid waste; the confused thoughts shall be brought under the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. by the true Zorobabel who scatters Babel, Zach. 4.7. and Babel shall give her hand and submit her self, Jer. 50.15. Let us be such Zebulonites, such Manassites, such Asherites; let us humble our selves, and give the hand unto the Lord, as they did, and the hand of the Lord will be with us, as he was with them, and he will heal our land, if we pray every one unto him; Lord keep thy sereant from sins of pride,Psal. 19. v. 13, 14. () sins of an high hand, let them not rule () in me: Then I () shall be perfect, and pure from much transgression. The words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart shall be to well pleasing before thy face, O Lord my Rock () and my Redeemer, Psal. 19.13, 14.
Now Korah the son of Izbar the son of Cohath, the son of Levi,Numb. 16. v. 1. and Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab, and On the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, took men.] Here is a mistake of the Translators, like that, Numb. 12.1. For as there, so here, where the Spirit of God puts difference between the Ring-leader and principal Offender, and others drawn in who were less faulty in this Rebellion, by joyning  [and Corah took] together, as the Nominative and the Verb; our Translators confound this difference by ma∣ming the Verb  common to all, putting it in the end of this verse. For the Scripture as here, so elsewhere layes the princi∣pal blame on Korah, Num. 27.3. the company of Korah, the gain∣saying of Korah, Jud. v. 11. Ecclus. 45.18. Hereby they do some wrong to Dathan and Abiram, though otherwise blame-worthy; as they also do some injury to Aaron, though he were not blame∣less, as was noted on Numb. 12.1. But our Translatours are not alone in this errour: For the word  [he took] hath troubled most Translators. Diodati puts it in the end of the first verse, and makes it common to the other conspirators, adding a supplement larger then ours have, viz. they took with them certain men. The French Bible puts it at the end of the verse, and renders it Firent, entreprise, and tells us in the mar∣gent, that in the Hebrew it is, he took, to wit, certain with him to perform his enter prize. Ainsworth and Piscator put the Verb after the Geneologie of Korah, Nam zu sich den Dathan. But the Copulative following [and Dathan] hinders that construction. What Ainsworth saith in favour of it, seems to be gratis dictum, for the reason already alleaged; as also because [men] which he adds, is not in the holy text, but a supplement, and that a needless one. Others leave this Verb quite out, as Vatablus, the Tigurin Bible, Luther, and the Low Dutch translations; also of our En∣glish, Coverdale and two other. How then shall we dispose of this Verb ? and how shall we render it? surely 'tis best to follow the clue of the holy Scripture, and to place it where the Spirit of God hath left it. So doth Munster, Arias Montanus, Pagnin, and the Spanish Bible. As for the signification of , which they render [took,] it imports Schism, Faction, and Sedition; and is accordingly under∣stood by the learned Jews, Sal. Jarchi, and others; and there∣fore the Chaldee Paraphrast turns the Verb by  & di∣visus est Core, &c. And Korah was divided, which Pagnin expres∣seth well, Tulit seipsum ad partem, he took himself aside or apart, which Arias Montanus corrects without just cause, as elsewhere. The Bishops Bible so called, as also that of Geneva herein agree with Pagnin, and turn the Verb, he went apart.
The Spirit of God aliud agens as relating an antient history, points us to a mystery of iniquity, the Source and Fountain of Marah and Meribah, the bitter waters of schism, sedition, and mis-leading of the people. For whereas antiquity, old customs of the Church, and the ancient Fathers are wont to be alleaged for the patronage and defence of Schismes, Rents, and Innovations; nor is there any false Prophet but usually he takes covert, or shel∣ters himself and his false doctrine under the authority of one or other, or all these three; these three were prefigured by these three first notorious Schismaticks and false Teachers. For what was Korah but Calvus (as his name signifies) an old Bald-pate, Antiquity? what signifies Dathan, but long custom? As for Abi∣ram, whats he, but an high father, as it were another Abram, and of the same original and authority also in his own and the peo∣ples conceit, who are seduced by him? These reverend old Fa∣thers and Patrons of Errour, Heresie, and Schism, both infected their own age, and became paterns also unto after ages. 1. They so corrupted their own times, that the Princes and people fell to them, Numb. 16. 2. They became paterns also unto after ages; as S. Jude speaking of the Apostates of his and after times, he shews whose examples they followed, and sends a woe after them,Jude. v. 11. ver. 11. Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and are poured out (, Effusi sunt, so Pagnin) or run greedily after the errour of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gain-saying of Kore. Yea, these Grand-fathers of iniquity as they served the Father of lies in their own respective generations, so they were in after∣times as it were revived and born again: yea, and in our times live again. There is a  a regeneration of them, who corrupt and infect the people, as they formerly did. They know the peoples humour well, and the people theirs, and so they claw one another, Jer. 5. ult. Of such also the Apostle speaks, 2 Tim. 3.8, 9. As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, even so these resist the truth,2 Tim. 3. v. 8, 9. men of corrupt minds (, cor∣rupted according to the minde,) of no judgement concerning the faith. But they shall not proceed very much, (.) For their madness () shall be manifest unto all, as that of theirs () also was. By which words, S. Paul shewes plainly, that these who in the times wherein they are said to have lived, and deceived the peo∣ple, the same should have their times again, wherein they should deceive the people again. For as David, Elias, and others have had their times in the flesh to teach the people, and instruct them in the truth of God, as also their times in the spirit. Thus David in spirit must serve an after-generation, Ezech. 34.23. and John the Baptist is Elias, as he who came in the spirit of Elias. Luke 1.17.
So on the contrary, Cain and Balaam, and Korah, and Dathan, and Abiram, and Jannes, and Jambres, have had their times in the flesh, and must have their times in the Spirit also, to serve him who deceives the nations. And there is good reason for this cir∣cle and resolution. 1. Satan is a lyar from the beginning, and a great Apostate; and he is the same he ever has been heretofore, as subtil, as malitious, as operative and active according to the power permitted unto him; read 2 Thess. 2.8, 9. Revel. 13.11, 12, 13. 2. False Prophets and schismatical Teachers acted by this ly∣ing spirit, flatter the people, whom they call blessed,Esay 3. v. 12. and so cause them tolerre, and swallowed up the way of their narrow paths; and se∣duce them into the broad way. Thus the conspirators tell Moses and Aaron, that all the congregation was holy, and the Lord was among them, Numb. 16. v. 3. And the people is as easily brought into a good opinion of themselves, as they are prone to revolt. 3. God himself hereby tryes the people, Deut. 13.3. and pu∣nisheth their leaders by putting a lying spirit in their mouthes,2 Thess. 2. v. 10, 11.1 Kings 22, 23. And the people; because they received not the love of the truth, that they may be saved; even for that cause, God sends them  the efficacy or operative power of errour, that they should believe a lie, &c. 2 Thess. 2.10, 11. And this the Lord doth, that the truth in these last times, might answer to the types of the former. For so Cain was a patern and father to all Apostates from God, their , their guide and leader, who made a broad way for all his followers to walk in. For so ye read of the way of Cain, Jude v. 11. And Balaam the oldness, cor∣rupter, and devourer of the people, as his name signifies, he hath his followers, even those who bring the people into bondage, who devour them, who take of them, 2 Cor. 11.20. And Korah, Dathan, and Abi∣ram have those of their issue, who plead antiquity, old customes of the Church, and ancient Fathers, to patronize and father their schisms, heresies, and errours. But as the impiety of Korah was most notorious, who with∣drawing himself and betaking himself apart, by his lewd example and seditious counsel, won upon the Princes and the people; so was the piety of the sons of Korah most notable; with whom, nor au∣thority of the Princes, nor example of the multitude, nor the most endeering relation, nor honour, nor dignity, nor seeming obligation of gratitude toward their parents, could prevail so far, as to make them sin against their God. Nor was this piety toward their Father in heaven, lost or unre∣quited: For when their father upon earth with his name and family, according to his earthly desires and designes, was swallowed up of the earth, their heavenly Father gave them a lasting name, a name of renown which stands upon record in holy Scripture, in eleven
Psalms, most of them consolatory, bearing in their titles, The sons of Korah; for Samuel the Prophet, and Heman the singer, were of Korah's posterity, 1 Chron. 6.33. A memorable example and powerful encouragement unto thee, O thou Israel of God, to call no man Father upon earth, since one is our Father in heaven, of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named, Ephes. 3.15. Patrizate, Be ye followers of God as his dear children; depart from the tents of your wicked parents, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins, Numb. 16.26. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you; and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Al∣mighty, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
And behold the Rod of Aaron for the house of Levi, was budded,Numb. 17. v. 8. and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded Almonds.] The Lord in these words determins the difference between the Rebels of the Tribes of Levi and Reuben, and the faithful and obedient of the house of Aaron. Herein I except against the translation of three words. 1.  which they turnd a Rod. Which although in the la∣titude of the word, it may so signifie: yet in this place of Scrip∣ture, the word  cannot conveniently be so rendred; but ra∣ther a staff, such as the Princes of the people, in their several Tribes, were wont to carry as an Ensigne of their place and au∣thority, Numb. 21.18. Which yet was not proper to the Princes of Israel, but common also to the Governours of other nations, as to the Moabites, Jer. 48.17. So , to bear a Staff, is put among the characters of a Magistrate, saith Theophrastus. So Homer speaks of a Magistrates staff, Iliad. —Now again the Grecian Judges bear it (the staff) in their hands, as also they who have received lawes from Jupiter. And the ancient custom of this nation is well known, that the Lord Chamberlains and other great Officers of the kingdom, have been wont to carry white staves, the Ensignes and tokens of their high places of authority. Beside, the use of the Rod is for correction, 1 Cor. 4.21. shall I come to you with a Rod, or with the spirit of meekness? But the staff is for supportation, as that whereon we rest, as  signifies. Whence  cui inclinamus, quo nitimur, whereon we lean. Whence by metaphore, it signifies what is strong, whereon we relie; as the staff of bread, Levit. 26. Ezech. 14. In both places the LXX have , a prop or stay. So where the Prophet saith, the Lord hath broken  the staff of the wicked, and the scepter of the Ruler, Esay 14.5. the Chald. Par. hath  robur, the strength; which signification will not agree to a Rod, but rather to a Staff. Nor am I alone in this judgement. For Martin Luther, Pis∣cator, and two Low Dutch Translations have the word Staves. So likewise Coverdale. 2. Whereas its said of this staff of Aaron, that it was budded, and brought forth buds.] What difference is there between bud∣ding, and bringing forth buds? they both seem to be the same. Some to increase the miracle, understand by the former [] that it brought forth leaves; by the later [] that it brought forth buds, against the course and order of nature, which puts forth buds before leaves. Others, otherwise. What if by the former, we
generally understand the shooting forth sprigs, by the later, bringing forth buds, then, flowers, lastly ripe Almonds? 1. The word  is of large signification, and is turnd by the LXX ; which last is rendred by Ours, to grow, Hos. 14.7. Beside, 2. The Apostle speaking of the same miracle, useth the word , Hebr. 9.4. which Pagnin turns by Frondere to branch or bring forth sprigs; which word the LXX put first in the description of this miracle. 2. The word , which our Translators turn, [yielded,] sig∣nifies maturare, to ripen or make ripe; also ablectare to wean, Gen. 21.8. And with good analogie: For when the tree brings forth its fruit, it requites the pains and cares of the husbandman. And when the fruit is ripe, it drawes no more moisture, it sucks no more juice, but is, as it were, weaned. I believe that the signification of ripening or making ripe, well befits this place; and that for these reasons. 1. Hereby it holds proportion with other types, in that it pre∣figureth unto us the three spiritual ages, the three degrees of growth in our Christian life, as in a like resemblance of the Vine, Gen. 40.10. wherein were three branches; and it was as though it budded, & her blossomes shot forth,Gen. 40. v. 10. and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe Grapes. The word is , coquere fecerunt, they made ripe their Grapes; as Arias Montanus renders the word, which Pagnin turns to the same purpose, Maturaverunt, they ripened Grapes. For Christ is the true Vine; and all in him, are the branches, John 15. One branch budding figureth babes in Christ; another blosso∣ming, represents yong men in the flower of their spiritual age; the third bringing forth ripe Grapes, signifies old men of mature and per∣fect age in Christ. And the same three degrees of growth in our spiritual age, are held forth unto us in that Parable, Mark 4.28. The Earth brings forth fruit of it self; first the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear. As also more plainly delivered by the Apostle, 1 John 2.12, 13. in children, yong men, and old men. And by the Schoolmen in their Incipientes, Proficientes, and Per∣fecti; Beginners, Proficients, and Perfect men. And the same de∣grees are intended in the words before us. 2. And one of our old English Translations hath the words thus, Aarons Rod for the house of Levi, was budded, and brought forth buds, and brought forth blossoms, and bare ripe Almonds. The Authors also of our last translation themselves so ren∣der the word, Esay 18.5. Afore the Harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sowre Grape is ripening in the flower, &c. The words are  Uvamaturescens, the sowre Grape ripening. Adde hereunto the judgement of R. Salomon, who understands wearing, in the sense which I have already given; and Kimchi, bringing Almonds to maturity and ripeness.
3. It sets forth the glory of Gods power; who, as he turnd the dry and sapless staff into a moyst; and made the green and moyst bough to bud and blossom, so he chang'd the buds and blossoms into fruit, and that mature and ripe fruit. And thus Almighty God in a short time performs the work of a long time; as the Wiseman saith of Enoch, , he being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time, Wisdom. 4.13.Wisd. 4. v. 13. Where the Zelotes being over-voted by the more Orthodox party, who had put [made perfect] into the text; lest any one, lest even Enoch who walked with God, and was translated, lest he should be made perfect, they qualifie the word in the margent, by sanctified or consummated. And what is sanctified, being applied to Enoch, but separated from sin? what is consummated, but perfect? the same thing expressed by another word. Did they so love sin, as the Poets say, Jupiter loved Ganymed, that they would have it transla∣ted with Enoch into heaven? But come we to the effects of this miracle. Hereby the Priest∣hood is confirmed unto Aaron; as by a like signe of the Vine and its branches, whereof I have spoken before, Pharaohs Butler was confirmed in his office. Yea, not only Aaron was hereby established in his Priesthood, but also succession in that office, was confirmed to his posterity by the buds and blossoms. Yea, whereas all the staves of all the Tribes, were of the Al∣mond tree, but Aarons staff alone budded, blossomed, and brought forth ripe Almonds; hereby the Lord declared, by a wonderful signe and miracle. That, although all the Tribes (which are also called  staves or rods: as the staff of Manasseh, Numb. 2.20. Targ. the Tribe, and so of the rest) grew out of that one stock of Israel; yet none of them all should minister unto him in the Priesthood, except only the Tribe of Levi. And hereby withal the Lord ta∣citly threatned a speedy execution of judgement against any person of any other Tribe, which should invade the office of the Priest∣hood; according to the signification of  to make haste; whence the Almond tree hath its name. So the Lord reason'd touching the Rod of an Almond tree which Jeremy saw, Jer. 1.11, 12.Jir. 1. v. 13, 14. Thou hast well seen, for I will hasten my word to perform it: And what was that word? even his menace of judgement signified by a seething pot, the face thereof was toward the North. So our Translators render that place; which translation seems contrary to the Hebrew text, as appears in the margent; and contrary to the scope of the place, as the context proves. The words are , from the face of the North (which they turn towards the North;) and the Lord saith, out of the North, evil shall break forth upon all the inhabitants of the land. If the face of the Pot figuring the evil, be toward the North, how can it come from the face of the North, from which it is turned?
By reason of this judgement threatned to be speedily executed on all & every person who should dare intrude into the Priests office, (which was afterward accordingly executed upon King Ʋzziah, 2 Chron. 26.18, 19.) the sons of Israel cry out, Behold, we die, we perish, we all perish: whosoever cometh any thing neer unto the Tabernacle of the Lord, shall die. Shall we be consumed with dying? For which, the Lord provides a remedy in the following Chap∣ter, Numb. 18.1.—7. This may justly terrifie all ungodly men from invading the office of the Priest. — Procul, O procul este profani; Hence, hence ye profane rout. Hereby the Lord declares the confirmation of the Priesthood un∣to the Tribe of Levi; that is, unto those who cleave unto him by faith and love, of what Tribe soever otherwise they are. And this might be intimated by the scattering of the Levites among all the Tribes, as common to them all, Gen. 49.7. Numb. 35. And there∣fore all those, whom the great high Priest, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, hath loved and washed from their sins in his blood, he hath made Kings and Priests unto God even his Father, Revel. 1.5, 6. And therefore this business concerns thee and me, and whoever are believers and lovers of our God: For such as these are an holy Priesthood, yea, a Kingly Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.5.9. Let us begin betimes, as the Almond tree first flourisheth, and e∣ver continue in our growth, as that tree last sheds her leaves, saith the Naturalist; a figure of the dignity and duration of the spiri∣tual Priesthood, saith Philo Judaeus. Let us not be too slow, too tar∣dy, lest judgement hasten: Remember whence  the Almond tree hath the name, Jer. 1.11, 12. Let us not continue still in the bud, in the word of the beginning of Christ (O ye trees of righteousness, Esay 61.3.) as the Apostle speaks, Hebr. 6.1. but let us go on to per∣fection, budding and flourishing; and bringing forth ripe fruit, even the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God,Gen. 47. v. 10. Phil. 1.11. The Almonds are reckond by Jacob, among the best fruits of the land, which he calls  songs of praise. For such fruits of the holy Spirit most praise God. He, who offereth these, he honoureth God, Psal. 50.23. and 63.4. And hereby we finde acceptance with the true Joseph. What though we seem to our selves dry and barren and with∣out sap of grace, as he saith of his staff———It shall never bring forth leaves and boughes, nor shall it ever flourish more. Alas! can these dry bones live? Can a Virgin (the signe of barrenness) bring forth a son? With God all things are possible. Lord be it unto me according to thy word, Luke 1.38. Gal. 4.19. All things are possible to him that be∣lieveth, and now is our salvation neerer then when we believed, Rom. 13.11.
By faith and love we are engraffed into the true Almond tree; as the Apostle, by like reason, speaks of insition into the good Olive tree, Rom. 11. There is as well a growth into Christ, Ephes. 4.15. Grow up into him in all things, as a growth in him. 2 Pet. 3.18.2 Pet. 3. v. 18. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; to him be glory both now and for ever. Or rather ac∣cording to the Greek text, , and the Vulg. Lat. in diem aeternitatis, unto the day of eternity. Amen.
All the best of the Oyl,Numb. 18. v. 12. and all the best of the Wine and of the Wheat, the first fruits of them, which they shall offer unto the Lord, them have I given thee.] These words contain part of the Priests por∣tion▪ Against this translation, lies some exception. For as for the word  which the Translators turn the best of the Oyl and the best of the Wine; the word doth not signifie the best, but the fat. And although nor Oyl nor Wine, nor Wheat, according to our English idiom and property of speech, can be said to be fat, or to have fat in them, which we rather appropriate unto flesh; yet is there in all these a kinde of lentor, unctuosity, and clammy substance, which may be said, in a large notion, to be the fat of all these. Nor is the earth properly fat, yet they make no scruple to trans∣late, the fatness of the earth, Gen. 27.28. and, the fat of the land of Egypt, Gen. 45.18. Nor hath Wheat either fat or kidneys; yet they doubted not, (though Pagnin did, who rendred , kidneys, Granorum, Granes,) to turn those words, Deut. 32.14. The fat of the kidneys of wheat. And what though the Targum here turn  by  and ver. 29. by  bonum or optimum, the good or the best. Ours profess, to write a translation, not a Paraphrase. Nor yet will I deny but  may very well explain ; since what is called the good of the land, is presently called the fat of it, Genesis 45.18. Only it had been to be wished, they had herein followed most other translations; especially the Bishops Bible, which hath [fat] in the text, and the [chiefest and best] in the margent. Where∣as on the contrary ours put the exposition the [best] in the text, and [fat] the proper meaning of the word, (as very often elsewhere) they cast into the margent. for other two words.  and , its true, they are of general use; yet 1. the former signifies rather new oyl, and that which is new drawen; from  luxit, splenduit, to shine from the clearness and brightness of it. But 2. as for  however sometime rendred generally, wine, yet properly it notes new wine; and most Translators so render it in this place. So Luther Most; so Piscator, and all the Low Dutch Translations; also the Spanish, French, and Italian Bibles; Castellio also, Vatablus, Munster, and Tremellius, and the Tigurin Bible. But herein our Translators are the more excusable; because they had not any one old Eng∣lish translation whom they might have followed, so far as I have yet seen. 3. Howbeit, it were to be wished, that this difference were observed between the new and the old oyl and wine; otherwise, how shall we distinguish them in our English, when they differ in the Hebrew? as Prov. 21.17. He that loveth  wine and oyl, shall not be rich: and elsewhere.
4. More especially in the place before us, as also ver. 17. the Lord requires the first fruits, as of other creatures, so of oyl and wine; and consequently the newest of them, as of every opening of the matrice of all flesh, verse 15. as the firstlings of cattle, verse 17. The firstling of a Cow, or the firstling of a Sheep,Numb. 18. v. 17. or the firstling of a Goat thou shalt not redeem.] What here the Translators turn a Cow, is , and thats a Bull or Bullock; for  in Hebrew, ac∣cording to the Chaldee Idiom, is , whence  in Greek, and in Latin Taurus, a Bull, or Bullock. And so they themselves render, Deut. 33.17.  Primogenitus bovis ejus, the first∣ling of his Bullock. Howbeit they are not alone in this mistake; for the French, Spanish, and Italian Translations, as also one of our English, render  here a Cow which is a Bull. All the other Translations that I have seen, the Chaldee, Latin, Eng∣lish, High and Low Dutch, render the word  either a Bullock or Ox. Which I suppose, they understand not, as in English its com∣monly taken for a guelt Bull. For so their absurdity were little less then the other; but according to the latitude of the Greek , or the Latin Bos, which reacheth to the whole kinde. Be∣sides, as for libbing or guelding the male cattle, the Jewes had no such custome of mangling any beast; or, if any were so used, they reputed it as a blemished beast, and unlawful to be offered up for a Sacrifie; as I may shew hereafter if the Lord will. Meantime we hence learn; that the Lord requires the best and first fruits of all, (whereof I shall have shortly a proper occasion to treat,) and it is no doubt most reasonable, that Prima primo danda,, Optimó{que} optima, that the first and best be given to him who is the first and best; yea, rendred rather then given; since no good befals any one of us which we receive not from him. , every good and every perfect gift is from above,James 1. v. 17. and cometh down (the Greek word is in the Participle , descending) from the Father of lights. And therefore all things what ever we are said to give unto God, are rather from thankfulness then from bounty, and that thankfulness is given by him also. David speaks home to this purpose in few words, Who am I, and what is my people,1 Chro. 29 v. 14. that we obtain strength to offer willingly after this sort? for all things are of thee, & from thine hand we give unto thee, 1 Chron. 29.14. Hereby he thankfully ac∣knowledgeth, that he and his people had dominium sui actûs, their power of giving willingly to God, from God; and what they return to him, they first receive from him: which he proves, because  emphatically, all things are from him, and through him and to him are all things. To him be glory for ever. Amen. Rom 11. ult.
And the Priest shall take Cedar-wood and Hysop,Numb. 19. v. 6. and Scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burning of the Heifer.] These words con∣tain mostwhat the ingredients of the Sin-water, (whereof I have spoken somewhat on Numb. 8.7.) or water of separation, so called v. 13. of this Chapter; whereof the Lord in this Chapter deli∣vers unto Moses, the composition and use of it. What is here turnd Hysop, I believe, is mistaken for another plant or herb. Which question, although I shall, upon the whole matter, leave to the learned Physitians and Herbarists to determin; yet, since it comes in my way, and its proper to my business, viz. to endeavour the amendment of our last English translation; and since the word  in the Hebrew is often turnd Hyssop by our Translators, I shall desire their leave to enquire a little into it; and to shew my reasons for my dissent from them herein. 1. The  Ezob, whereof mention is so frequently made in Scripture, under the name of Hyssop, seems to differ from that herb known by that name, almost toto genere, as much as a tree differs from an herb. For so its said of Solomon, that he spake of trees from the Cedar tree that is in Lebanon, even to the Ezob that springeth out of the wall, 1 Kings 4.33. Where the Scripture puts Ezob, what ever it is, among the trees. A tree therefore it is, and therefore Hyssop it cannot be. For the word  here used is a name common to all trees, but not to herbs, such as Hys∣sop is well known to be. For herein, beside other distinctions, , a tree may be differenced from  and , an herb; that  is of a woody and strong substance; whereas , an herb is weak and tender, and so called when it first growes out of the earth; but when it is growen, its called , which containes, , Grass, Potherbs, Corn, Pulse. Of the two former  and  Moses speaks, Deut. 32.2. My recei∣ved doctrine shall drop as the rain,Deut. 32. v. 2. my speech shall distil as the dew, as rain upon the tender herb, and drops upon the grass. Such a difference between an herb and a tree, our Lord inti∣mates in his parable of the mustard seed, which, when it is growen, is the greatest among herbs, () and becometh a tree () Matth. 13.32. On which place, Tremellius re∣lates a story out of the Talmud, of one Simon the Son of Halap∣tha who said, he had in his Farm a mustard plant so great, that he could climb up to the top of its boughes, as it were upon a fig-tree. He adds another story to the like effect, whereby he con∣firmes the protasis of our Lords parable. 2. The grownd o their judgment, who affirm Ezob to be all one with Hyssop, is the likeness of their sounds; which yet are not so like, but that they may have as broad a difference between them, as there is between a Woolf and Vulpes a Fox, and between
a Goose and an Hen, and many like effects of the Confusion of tongues. And a like similitude manifestly deceived and unposed upon our Translators, when they rendred  anethum Annise, Matth. 23.23. Wo to you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites; because ye pay tithe of mint , and anet or dill; which ours render Annise,Mat. 23. v. 23. being deceived merely by like sounds of  anethum and Annise. In which translation, I note as well an Ecclesiastical policy in turning  decimatis, ye pay tithes, as a mistake in turning  Annise. For  might have bin as fully expressed by rendering it, ye give tithe, (as they turn it, Luk 18.12. , decimas do, so Hierom, I give tithes of all that I possess,) Or, its as good English, that we waive both expressions of debt and bounty, and turn the word, ye tithe mint and dill. But in policy the Translators thought fit tacitely to in∣sinuate unto the people, that, when they tithed or gave tithes, they did no more then pay their due debt, and therefore they turnd the word  ye pay tithe. I believe, some will make ill use of this my observation, to a worse end then I intend it. For I do not hereby deny, that tithes ought to be given, yea payed, as the Translators turn the word, though it be not so truly turned in this place. For if I should deny this, the very next words would confute me, as they may, all those who oppose Tithes. Let them read our Lords words judiciously. Ye tithe Mint and Dill and Cummin, and omit the more weighty things of the law, judgment, mercy and saith; These things ye ought to have done, (namely, judgment, mercy and faith;) and not to leave the other, (that is, tithing of Mint, Dill and Cummin,) undone. I never in my ministry hitherto have preached for tithes, or any other maintenance of the ministers; though the holy Scripture, yea, the New Testament be full of arguments leading that way, (and men who read Scripture, might be con∣victed, did not self love blind them.) But because they are repu∣ted covetous who speak of such a subject; as also because I have endeavoured to win the peoples souls unto God, and not sought mine own gain, as God is witness, I have therefore forborn that argu∣ment. Howbeit I know not how it is possible for any man, how opposit soever he be unto Tithes, to avoid that reason which is immediately and undenyably deduced out of our Lords words. Adde what the Apostle saith, 2 Cor. 11.7.—15. and any indiffe∣rent man will observe, that what places out of St. Pauls Epistles, they use against the ministers maintenance by Tithes, or other like way, they understand and urge fallaciously by a known fallacy à dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter. Because he took no main∣tenance of the Corinthians, therefore none of any other; If follow∣eth not. By occasion of that place in S. Matthew mistranslated, I have
made somewhat a long, but, I hope, not an unprofitable digressi∣on. Let us now proceed unto a third argument. 3. If Ezob be not that which we call Hyssop, what then is it? There are diverse conjectures what Ezob should be. Some say, its Adiantum, Maidenhair, or Ruta muraria, Rue of the wall. Others, Parietaria, Pellitory of the wall. Which conceits seem to be groun∣ded on what I cited before out of 1 Kings 4.33. where Ezob is said to be  Egrediens in pariete,1 King. 4. v. 33. growing in, or by, or a∣gainst the wall, not out of the wall, as ours render it. And so it is true, that the herbs above named grow out of the wall. But I rather think, that by Ezob is here to be understood Liba∣notis or Rosmarinus, which we call Rosmary; as being that, unto which the description, vertue and use of Ezob very well agree. As for the description, 1 Kings 4.33. it contains the genus or common nature of Esob, and the subject place where it best grows and thrives. As for the genus or common nature, its reckoned a∣mong the trees, and the lowest of them; as appears by the com∣parison of it with the Cedar, which is the tallest. And as a tree, its of a woody substance, as  the word used in the place above na∣med, signifies Lignum wood, as also Ezechiel 15.2. &c. where our Translators turn the words thus; Son of man, what is the Vine tree more then any tree,Ezech. 15. v. 2. &c. shall wood be taken thereof to do any work? or will men take a pin of it, to hang any vessel thereon? Behold it is cast into the fire for fewel; the fire devoureth both the ends of it; and the midst of it is burnt, will it prosper for work? It is evident unto any understanding man who shall attentively consi∣der this place, that the Lord speaks not of the Vine tree, as our Translators turn it, but of the wood of that tree now sere and dry; and such as in other trees now dry and seasoned, they make timber, and apply to some work, as here the Prophet instanceth, to make a Pin; which men are not wont to do, while the tree is green; nor usually while it is green, do they burn it. But as for the Vine, when the wood of it is now dry, men use not it for any work, nor make a Pin of it, but then burn it, as good for nothing else. As our Lord speaks of the Vine-branch, which had been in him the true Vine,John 15. v. 6. but now not bringing forth fruit, nor abiding in him, he is cast forth as a branch, and , it hath been dried or withered, and men gather them and cast them into the fire, and they are burned, John 15.6. For as the Vine, so the Fig tree and some other trees typifie the Church of Christ, which ought to be filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are in Christ Jesus, Phil. 1.11. And if they be unfruitful, they are unprofitable and good for nothing; the Fig-tree cumbers the ground, and makes it idle, and unprofitable, Luke 13.7. so the Greek word signifies,Luke 13. v. 7. ; why does this Fig tree (not only become unfruitful it self, but) makes the ground about it unfruitful also?
By what hath bin said touching the genus or common nature of Ezob, it appears to be a tree; and therefore not Hyssop, which is an herb, as was shewen before. And therefore its more probably to be understood of Libanotis or Rosmary. As for the subject place Ezob is said to grow  in, by or against the wall; not out of it (as ours turn the word) as indeed Hyssop sometime doth; but the Ezob or Rosmary tree growes and thrives best by, or against the wall, as common experience proves; whereas Hyssop prospers best other where in our Gardens. So that the description of Ezob, both according to the common nature of it, and the particular place of growth, agrees to Rosmary, not to Hyssop. 2. As for the vertues of Ezob, although I acknowledge, it is the Divine Power which works the cure of diseases; for God sends his word and heals, Psal. 107.20. Yet according to his divine wis∣dom, he makes choise of such expedients and means, as, in their nature ingendred by him, conduce to the working of such cures. Thus in the cleansing of the leprosie, the great Physitian prescribes among other ingredients, Ezob, Levit. 14.4. And Ezob, which I take to be Rosmary, is of great vertue it self toward the cure of that disease, saith Gegorgius Venetus; who ascribes also to the vertue of the same Plant, the healing of the Epilepsie or Falling-sickness, which he saith, is Morbus daemoniacus, a disease imblasted by the foul spirit. Its also a soveraign remedy, saith he, against the bi∣tings of Serpents, and many other maladies. Its exceeding pro∣fitable, and wholesome against all infirmities of the head and brain. And therefore it is not in vain called by the Italians Ros∣marino coronario; because the women made Garlands and Crowns of it, as soveraign for the head. So that well might Junius Eng∣lish Herba salutaris, the wholesome herb, Rosmary. Hereunto I might adde many more vertues of our Ezob or Rosmary, delivered by the Herbarists. But I come to the use of Ezob. 3. The use of Ezob, in holy Scripture, was to sprinkle the blood of the Sacrifice, and the Sin-water, or water of separation. For of it, together with Cedar-word and Scarlet-wool, was made the Asper∣gillum or aspersorium; which we may render the Sin-water-stock; so that a small handful of Ezob consisting of three stalks four Inches long, was tied to a Cedar-handle of a foot and half long; and that was the aspergillum. Hence its easie to judge, whether Hyssop or Rosmary were the more fit and proper for such a pur∣pose. Hereunto I shall adde the testimony of Georg. Venetus; Inter plantas, Rosmarinus nobilissima est, & magis, quàm existimatur, ex∣cellens, quamvis multitudine & frequentiâ vilescat: Est enim semper virens, nulli nocens, & multis infirmitatibus inimica, &c. & tantò in majora mala praevalet, quanto majori gaudet tutelâ & favore coelesti, à
quo omnis virtus consovetur. Among Plants, Rosmary is the most noble, and more excellent then men suppose, although by rea∣son of plenty and store of it, it be little esteemed: for it is al∣wayes green, hurting no man, and an enemy to many infirmi∣ties, &c. And it prevails so much the more against greater e∣vils, by how much the more it enjoyes the tuition and influ∣ence of heaven, wherewith all vertue is cherished. Georg. Ven. Har. Mundi Ton. 7. cap. 27. And Tom. 2. de lege Se 5.5. de prae∣cept. Probl. 260. Hyssopus aut Rosmarinus Regina plantarum est & sacratissima, confota à maxima intelligentia vel virtute superna. It is the Queen of Plants, and most sacred, being nourished and che∣rished by the greatest Angel and supream power. Behold now the wisdom, love, mercy, and goodness of thy God, O thou Israel of God! Adam [the Red-earthy man, as  Adam signifies] had sinned; and his wife, taken out of him, had sinned, and been deceived, and was first in the trans∣gression, 1 Tim. 2.14. Yea, Israel the Church of God figured by Eve, who was taken out of Adam, had sinned by making to them∣selves other gods; though the most high God had brought them out of Egypt, the house of bondage. For whereas they had seen the Egyptians (of all nations most idolatrous,) worship a Bull which they called Mevis, in honour of Osiris, reputed the Sun; and also a Cow which they called Apis, in honour of Isis, whom they took to be the Moon; although the Lord hath executed judgements upon the Egyptians gods; yet they being delivered from the Egyptians, and their gods, they notwithstanding fea∣red, lest, though the Constellation of Aries (under which, accord∣ing to the learning of the Egyptians, Egypt is) prevailed not over them, yet they thought it needful, according to the principles of that science, to implore the help of a superiour Constellation, and so to draw down the influence of Taurus, whose molten image they made. And Jeroboam afterward having been in Egypt, set up two Calves which he had there seen worshipped, according to the paterns mentioned before, 1 Kings 11. and 12.28. A sin full of extream folly, and (which is also great folly,) unthank∣fulness; such as was afterward committed by Amaziah with whom the Lord thus expostulates; Why hast thou sought after the gods of that people, which delivered not their people out of thine hand?2 Chro. 25 v. 15. 2 Chron. 25.15. That sin of Israel, though punished by the hand of the Levites, by shedding of much blood, yet was it not fully expiated; for the Lord threatned afterward to visit their sin upon them, Exod. 32.34. and the Jews say, that in every after-judgement upon their nation, there was a limb of the Calf. Howbeit, the merciful God found out an expedient for the purging these sins, by a Sin-water, or water of purifying made of Red Heifer, Ox, or Calf.
Sin savours of the nature of Redness, and Blood; whence it is called by the name of Blood, Hos. 4.2. Bloods touch bloods.Hos. 4. v. 2. And E∣dom the sinner who sold his birth-right for Red broth, figuring the humane nature, hath his name from Redness. Thus the first man is of the earth even the Red earth, earthy, 1 Cor. 15.47. And Mars who is called  from  the earth, is called by Homer , the murderer, hath his name  Ruddy; as he who stirs up to shed blood, and under whom, Ruddy, and Red men are born. The sin committed by occasion of the Ox, must by the Ox, or Heiffer, or yong Cow, be expiated; and the earthly Red must be purified by the heavenly. And therefore some have conceived, that the name Adam is not only from the Red earth; but from  Aleph, which letter intimates somewhat of the Deity, and  which signifies blood, as importing unto us, humane flesh and blood sprinkled with the Divinity, as being made in the image of God. And therefore, for the expiation of Adams, Edoms, Israels sin in worshipping the golden Calf, yea, for the purging the sins of all men, a red Calf or Heiffer must be chosen, representing not the Ruddy manhood of flesh and blood only, but some other more noble, better, spiritual, and heavenly manhood. Concerning whom, saith the Spouse, my Beloved is white and ruddy, Cant. 5.10. white, in regard of innocency, and ruddy in respect of charity, ardent, fer∣vent, and burning love. And as Adam was Red, by whom sin entred into this lower world; so there must be a Ruddy heavenly man, the man from heaven, heavenly, who must expiate and purge out the sin out of this inferiour world. Such a White and Ruddy man, pious antiquity hath delivered unto us in his character, and such as have described his Physiognomy. Such also David his type is said to be, 1 Sam. 16. No mervail therefore, if to figure out the expiation of sin contracted by the Red earthly man, a Red Heiffer be made choise of, to represent the white and ruddy heaven∣ly man. This Heiffer also must be perfect and without blemish, which ne∣ver hath born yoke. For such is the Christ of God, even the per∣fect one, without spot or stain of sin, which never bare the yoke of servi∣tude unto sin. Yet though innocent, harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners, he must notwithstanding be slain; because without shedding of blood, there is no remission, Hebr. 9.22. And slain this Heiffer must be without the Camp. And, that Jesus might sanctifie his people, by his blood, he suffered without the Camp, Hebr. 13. For he came not to call the just, who are within the Camp, which is the Camp of the Saints, Revel. 20.9. but sinners, which are without; yea, to seek and to save what was lost. This Heiffer must be burnt by the fire taken off the Altar, kind∣led from heaven: For the heavenly man came to send fire on the
earth, even the heaven-born fire of love; which might extinguish the iniquity which burns like a fire, Esay 9.18. and so—Extingueret ignibus ignes, quench the infernal, with the heavenly fire, saith the Poet. With the ashes of this burnt Heiffer, all, who were defiled, were sprinkled: For nothing so sanctifies and purifies our Ruddy polluted humanity, as the daily mortification and burning up the Holocaust, the iniquity as the dross, by the holy fire of divine love sent from heaven into our earthly manhood by the Christ of God, the man from heaven heavenly. And therefore was the female chosen, being the weaker; lest we should imagine, that expiation could be made by any beast or earthly man. The influence whereby the purging of sin, is made, is from the Divine Power; to intimate this unto us, not the stronger, but the weaker sex, the Red Cow must be slain. And what spiritually is the Ezob or Rosmary? what else but the holy faith, whereby the heart is purified? Acts 5.9. Of this Ezob, three stalks or sprigs made the Aspergillum or Sin-water stock, where∣with the sprinkling was made. And the faith, wherewith we are sprinkled, is threefold, or, there are three branches of it, Faith in the Father, Son, and holy Spirit. And thus the Prophet foretold, Esay 52.15. that the Christ of God (now abased and brought low, even to the dust and ashes of his humiliation, ver. 14.) should sprin∣kle many nations.Acts 17. v. 31. Mat. 28. v. 19. And indeed and truth God giveth or offereth faith unto all, , Acts 17.31. having raised up Christ from the dead. And having received also power in hea∣ven and earth, he sprinkleth all nations, and authorizeth his Apo∣stles and true Ministers to sprinkle them, by baptizing them , into the name, (nature, and Being) of the Father, the Son, and the holy Spi∣rit, and sprinkles answerably unto them, a sprinkling with wa∣ter, Ezech. 36.25. with Blood, Numb. 19.4. with Oyl, Levit. 14.16. a known figure of the Spirit; which are the three witnesses upon earth, 1 John 5.8. And these testifie of three spiritual estates gra∣dually differing one from other; whereinto we are baptized and sprinkled from the pollutions of the World, the Flesh, and the De∣vil; and so we become partakers of the divine nature, having eska∣ped the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4. And thus the Israel of God, abased and brought low even to dust and ashes come forth of the Furnace of humiliation being refined and purified from their dross, and are arayed in white robes. Who are these, and whence came they? saith one of the Elders to S. John. And he answered, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 17.14. (the Lambs blood is a white, an innocent blood,) and become like unto him who is white and ruddy, Cant. 5. For if the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the
ashes of an Heiffer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purity of the flesh, (so the Greek text hath ,Hebr. 9. v. 13. which signifies purity, not purifying, as our Translators render it,) how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot (or fault) unto God, purge our con∣science from dead works, to serve the living God? The sprinkling of this blood cures the bitings of the old Serpent; cleanseth the leprosie of sin; expels that Morbus Daemoniacus, that disease inflicted by the foul spirit; dissolves all the works of the Devil. Let us therefore draw near with a true heart (, in plenitudine,) in fulness of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and (,) having our body washed with pure water, by that clean man,Hebr. 10. v. 22. Numb. 19.18. who hath promised to sprinkle clean water, (the water of his spirit) upon us, Ezech. 36.25. And let us hold fast () the confession of our hope without wavering, (the Translators turn it [faith,] which should be turn'd [hope,] according to all Greek Copies, I have yet seen: Beside, the Apostle in ver. 22, 23, 24. hath the three Theological Graces, in their order.) For he is faith∣ful that hath promised: and let us consider one another, to pro∣voke unto love and to good works, Hebr. 10.22, 23, 24. The Lord so sprinkle us, and purge us with the true Ezob, (the Herbarists call Hyssop, Gratia Dei,) from the leprosie of our sins, and strengthen us to do his holy will through Jesus Christ our Lord!
Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the King of Edom;Numb. 20. v. 14. Thus saith thy brother Israel, Thou knowest all the travail that hath befallen us.] The word  doth not signifie Travail, but the Adjunct of it, or the travailler, labour, Exod. 18.8. which they turn there travail; all the travail that found them in the way. Not so pro∣perly: Since travailling is the act of him who journeyeth; but la∣bour and trouble is his adjunct; which findes him in the way wherein he travails, as the LXX render the word there, , labour. So likewise the word may be understood here; as also weariness, the effect of travailing and labouring. So the Transla∣tors themselves render the word, Gen. 19.11. Esay 7.13. Mal. 1.12. Who bears the image of the earthly man, and is not sensible of an heavie burden? such is the burden of cares and thoughts, what shall we eat, and what shall we drink? That earthly man is Edom, as the name signifies. This earthly man, this Edom, the Animalis homo, the natural , properly the souly man ears in his journey towards the heavenly Canaan, where he shall  the image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.49. And therefore not without cause, here Israel saith to Edom, Thou knowest all the weariness that hath found us. Howbeit the Lord will not permit Israel to meddle with Edom the earthly man, so far us to hurt him, Deut. 2.4, 5. For no man hath hated his own flesh, but nourisheth it, and cherisheth it, even as also the Lord the Church, Ephes. 5.29. Yet Edom fears, that Israel will hurt him; as the Lord foretold, Deut. 2.4. And therefore Edom saith, Thou shalt not pass thorow me, or into me, , Numb. 20.18. The earthly man fears to be restrained of his liberty by the word of God. Hereof Israel secures the earthly man, v. 19.  tantum non verbum; only the word shall not be; that is, I will not trouble thee with the word. And hard expression, youl say; but its as hard, what the Translators give, if read without their supple∣ments. But fear is suspicious. And therefore Edom will not trust Israel; but comes forth to meet Israel with much people; the words are  in populo gravi, in or with an an heavie people. Edom the earthly man is an heavie burden, &  hard to be born. Such are the ceremonies proper to the earthly man, Matth. 23.4. Whereof S. Peter saith, it is a yoke that neither their fathers nor they were able to bear. He speaks of Circumcision, Acts 15.10. For they who are circumcised, are debtors to do the whole law, Gal. . But droop not, despair not, O Israel, but proceed in thy jour∣ney toward the heavenly Canaan: the true Jehoshua, the true Je∣sus, who is thy Leader, he invites thee; Come unto me all ye who labour and are heavie laden, and I will give you rest; all
ye who are weary of the burden of the earthly man Edom, and much more weary of the burden of sinful earthly man, when Esau dwels in Seir, that is, the Devil, Gen. 36.8. for so the Devils are called , Levit. 17.7. Come unto me, faith Jesus, and I will re∣fresh you, taking off your burden, by mortifying and killing the man of sin; and correcting and chastising the earthly man; and raising up the heavenly man, in you; who after God is created in righteousness and holiness of truth.Mat. 11. v. 29, 30. Take my yoke (even the cross and patience) upon you; and learn of me; that I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall finde rest unto your souls. For my yoke (the cross and patience) is sweet or good , (so the Vulg. Lat. jugum meum suave, and so the Syriac;) and my burden (the burden of my law and doctrine) is light unto those, who, by the Spirit of life, are freed from the law of sin and death, Rom. 8.2. Thus having born the image of the earthy, we shall bear also the image of the heavenly. Would God that were come to pass un∣to every one of our souls!
The people spake against God,Numb. 21. ver. 5.6. and against Moses, &c. Our soul, say they, loatheth this light bread. And the Lord sent fiery Serpents a∣mong the people.] It is the common fault of young travailers to∣ward the holy land, that, when, out of obedience to the voice of God, they have left the flesh-pots of Egypt (the delights and plea∣sures of sin) they presently look for some refreshing, some joy, some consolation, when contrary to their hopes, they come into a desolate and disconsolate, howling wilderness (a for lorn estate) which they complain of, Numb. 20.5. and call it an evil place. The words are emphatical ,Numb. 20. v. 5. there's an empha∣sis upon every word, this, this evil, this place, this very evil place. And yet if all were quiet and they had no further trouble, this estate were the more tolerable? But now they meete with strong opposition from Arad the Canaanite, 1. who makes war upon them, who lead a way some of them captives. Such is Arad the wild Ass, the untamed and wild nature yet unsubdued in us; which inclines or declines and bends us unto the earth and earthly things, (that's the true Canaanite) these figured out the motions of sin working in our mem∣bers and warring against the law of our mind, and bringing us into Captivitie to the law of sin, Rom. 7.23. And who is there of us, who has not had his time (have not some of us yet our time?) of wildness and untamedness when we are ingaged in the like journey towards the holy Land? For Ishmael the wild Ass among men,Gen. 16. or the wilde Ass-man, , he is born before Isaac, yea, and he who is born after the flesh, will persecute him who is born after the spirit; and so it is now, saith the Apostle, Gal. 4.29. And there is no helpe for this, untill Ishmael the wild Ass be cast out of dores, ver. 30. Arad also signifies a Dragon, even that red Dragon, called the Devill and Satan, who, like Arad here, takes men captive at his ,  Tim. 2.26. And who is there among us, who may not complain, that more or lesse he hath been , possessed, in a sort, and obedient unto him, who worketh in the sons of disobedience? Ephes. 2.2. Who is there of us, but is, or hath been like that Demoniac, who had his dwelling in the Toombs? Mar. 5.2.3.4. who hath not sometime lived in dead workes? What is now to be done for the taming of this wild Ass, but to bring him unto Jesus? Matth. 21.2. What is to be done for the freeing our selves from the captivity of Arad, but to binde our selves with vowes and promises unto our God, that, if he will give Arad, or whatever force of Arad holds us captive, into our hands, we will Anathematize and render it accursed; which is the proper meaning of ,Numb. 21. v. 2, 3. which Ours turn more generally to destroy.
When Israel hath atchived this noble exployt, Edom, the earth∣ly man, which must not be destroyed, Deut. 2.5. may yet, yea, must be circumvented; the earthly man of flesh and blood must be limited, and the Israel of God must set bounds of moderation about him, Num. 21.4. This is a long work, and hard to be done;Numb. 21. v. 4. and therefore its said, that the soul of the people was much discouraged, word for word; The soule of the people  was shortned, or straitned. And why should so choyse a motaphore be waived, and cast in∣to the margent, and a worse put in the Text? the Transsators themselves turn the same word so, Mich. 2.7. Is the spirit of the Lord straitened? Besides, there is good reason from the contrary passions of the soul; whereof some contract and shorten it, as fear and grief and the compounds of them: whence Anxietas, and Angustia, and the like names of straitned and shortned affections. Others dilate and enlarge the soule; as love and joy, whence Latitia joy, saith Aquinas, is quasi latitia, largness. And the Apostle useth the same metaphores, O ye Corinthians! Our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged; yet are not straitned in us; but ye are straitned in your own bowells. Now for a recom∣pence, be ye also enlarged. The Apostles heart was enlarged, and not straitned toward his Corinthians; they had much room in it. Their heart was straitned towards him; they had no place for him in it. A metaphore so illustrious and significat should not have been omitted, or changed by our Translators. Out of this Anxiety, this shortness and straitness of soul, the people spake against God and against Moses, wherefore have ye brought us out of Egypt, to die in the wilderness? For there is no bread, neither is there any water; And our soul loatheth this light bread. In which words we eave those two parts and Axioms. 1. The peoples slight opinion of Manna, The call it light Bread. 2. Their disaffection, or ill affection toward it, answerable to their slight opinion of it, Their soul abhorred or loathed that light Bread. 1. The people call Manna light bread, wherein we must in∣quire, 1. What's meant by Bread in this place. 2. What we are to understand by light, as light bread. 1. The word here turnd Bread, is , which signifies all kinde of food, as I have often shewen. Here is understood by it Manna, and so the Chald. Paraphrast turns it here. Manna according to the Israelites question, Exod, 16.15. and so as the LXX also turn it there, (, what is it?) is from , what is it? They called it Manna; for they knew not  what it was. 2. Others otherwise; they said ,
It is the gift of God, which he promised to give us. 3. Or, it is the Portion. So  also signifies. Or 4. and lastly, it is a meat prepared for us. And that also is the signification of , such a prepared meat as needs not our dressing. I cannot except against any of these meanings; But I shall, for memory sake, reduce them all to a question, what is it? to which the answer is, A gift of God, a portion of meat prepared. This Manna, this gift of God, this portion of prepared meat, the people had a slight opinion of, whence they call it, with an Em∣phasis,  this light Bread. And so divers of our old English Translators turn that word; as also the Spanish, Italian, and French Bibles. Howbeit this last having [Bread so light] in the Text, hath yet another and better signification in the margent, [Bread of so little esteem.] For although [Light] may signifie the same, with what is [of little esteem,] yet being applied to Bread, it rather heightens the estimation of it, then any way depretiats or under values it, as Cajetan well obeserves; which is the peo∣ples main drift here. And therefore Vatablus and the Tigurin Bible, as also Munster and Castellio have expressed it by, Vilis, base, or of no worth; Tremellius by Vilissimus, most base and worthless. So Piscator turns it, Nothing worth. Luther and the Low Dutch turn it, vain or empty. And what was this Manna spiritually, whereof this people had so vile and base an opinion?Wisd. 16. v. 21. what else but Christ himself? The Wise man calls it  the substance of God; for what our Translators turn sustenance, is , Wisd. 16.21. , &c. Thy substance (he speaks of Manna) declared thy sweetness unto thy children. And whereas we read, Exod. 16.16. this is the thing which the Lord hath commanded; the words are ,Exod. 16. v. 16. this is the word, namely, the essential word: For that word speaks of himself, John 6.30. when the Jews had said, our Fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, as it is written; He gave them bread from heaven to eat. Our Lord tells them, Verily, verily I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from heaven, but my Father giveth you that true bread from hea∣ven; for the bread of God is he  who is coming down out of heaven,John 6. v. 33.48, 49, 50, 51 , and is giving life to the world. And ver. 48. I am that bread of life. Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, and are dead. This is that bread that is coming down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and nor die. I am that bread that living bread, that is coming down from heaven; if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. So it pleased the divine wisdom to use imperfect and incompleat acts, [de∣scending] and [giving,] thereby to imply a continual showring down of the heavenly Manna, according to the appetite and de∣sire of those who gather it. Crater superior perpetìm se deplet in cratorem inferiorem.
This is that which the Apostle cals the spiritual meat. If Bread, if living Bread, if the Bread of God, and that coming down from hea∣ven, and giving life to the world, could this Bread seem vile and contemptible? Ignoti null a cupido. This Bread was hidden, and not well known: It was hid, 1. In the outward Word: 2. In the Sacraments: 3. In men who receive both. For the Manna was given with the dew falling with it. So the preaching of the Word is compared to the falling of the dew, Deut. 32.2. With which preaching of the Word, Christ is given unto us, Rom. 1.16. The Gospel of Christ is the power of God unto salvation. And 10.8. The Word, the essential Word is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that Word of faith which we preach: And ver. 14. How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a Preacher; and how shall they preach except they be sent? Gal. 3.2. This only would I know of you, Received you the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? Thus the Manna was hidden in the dew, and so called hidden Manna, Revel. 3.17. and the inward Word, the spiritual meat was hidden in the outward Word. 2. This Manna is hidden also in the Sacraments; and there∣fore they are called Signes and Seales; Signes, and therefore there must be somewhat signified by them; Seals, and therefore some∣thing also must be sealed by them. 3. This Manna is hidden also in us, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not that Christ Jesus is in you, except ye be castawayes? But that which most of all bid the Word it self and the Sacraments and sacra∣mental signes and seals from this people, yea, and themselves from the true knowledge of themselves, was their own sin and disobedi∣ence. According to which, Daniel confesses, Dan. 9.13. that they had not turned from their iniquities, that they might understand the truth. The same reason the Wiseman gives of the igno∣rance of wicked men, Wisd. 2.21, 22. Their own wickedness hath blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they know them not; nei∣ther hoped they for , (not the wages,Wisd. 2. v. 22. as Ours turn it; which is the hirelings hope; but, which is the hope and expecta∣tion of the childe) the reward of righteousness (or holiness) nor , esteemed the honour of blameless souls. For these on like reasons, this people had a slight opinion of their Manna, and called it vile, base, or contemptible bread. Whence we may take notice, that Etiam optima pessimi, maxi∣ma minimi possin aestimar, that even the best and greatest things may be worst and least esteemed. The Manna, the food of An∣gels, Wisd. 16.20. is here accounted vile and despicable bread. Yea, Christ himself who is the true bread, which comes down from heaven, is slighted and undervalued.
2. They testifie their disaffection, or ill affection answerable to their slight opinion, and say, Our soul loathes this vile, base, contemptible bread. By the soul is commonly understood the verson; but because anima or animus cujus{que} is est quis{que} every mans minde or soul is himself, or the best part of himself, when affections and actions are attributed unto the soul, surely they are understood to be more intense and more vehement; as when the Lord saith, my soul shall abhor you, Levit. 26.11. and Zach. 11.8. my soul loathed them: the same word is there used which is here, , which we turn, to loathe. For the word signifies largely the passion or affecti∣on of Aversation, and that in extremity; and therefore the Greek Interpreters turn the word by  to abhor and abominate, Levit. 20.23. And here by , to be extreamly offen∣ded withal. And being here applyed to food, as bread, it signifies the greatest aversation, as of loathing and abhorring, which is ex∣pressed by Nauseare, when the stomach is turnd, and a man is ready to vomit. Thus disaffected were the people to their Manna, their spiritual meat. If we inquire into the reason of this, we have it before, in their slight opinion; Or, indeed their vitious appetite corrupted their judgement and opinion, as they themselves speak-out, Numb. 11.5, 6. We remember the Fish which we did eat in Egypt freely; the Cucumbers, and the Melons, and the Leeks, and the Onions, and the Garlick. But now our soul is dryed away; there is nothing at all beside this Manna before our eyes. O what a perverse judgement, what a vitious appetite hath the carnal man, what a false estimate, in regard of spiritual and heavenly things! How hot and eager is he toward the earthly; how lunt, how cold, yea, how contemptuous is he toward the heavenly? See both these in Edom, in him who is as a father and patern of earthly and carnal men, whom degenerate Israel here followes. As soon as Esau sees the Lentil Pottage, Gen. 25.30. he cryes out, Feed me,Gen. 25. v. 30. I pray thee, with that red, that red. Our Translators mention it but once, and so lose the elegancy in the Hebrew. His appe∣tite was so violent, he had not the patience to stay the naming of it; and having bought it, he flies presently upon it, with such an im∣petuous appetite Homer as often describes in good fellowes; . Lust sharp-set, and without curb of reason and the fear of God, renders a reasonable man an arrant unreasonable beast. As for the spiritual and heavenly good things, the earthly man hath no esteem of them at all. We may perceive this in Esaus de∣spiciency and contempt of his birthright; which he betrayes, in that which they call Notoreïtas facti, the notoriousness of the fact it self, in that he undervalued it, and sold it at so low a price, that he truckt
it away for a Mease of warm broath; and that the coursest that could be made, Lentil pottage; And in his scornful expressi∣ons, when he sets his birthright to sale, as a thing of nought, a dead commodity of no worth at all. And that's signified by  ad quid hoc? to what purpose is this? And the  [and] in the beginning of his speech, argues his indignation, as Numb. 16.11. And seek ye the Priesthood also? And what is Aaron, &c? Such a contempt, indignation, and loathing, Esau bewrayes, And what is this Birthright to me? Tell me, he that can, what is it good for? Prophane Esau! Now look into thine own self, O man! and judge impartially, touching thine own false estimate, thine own lusts and desires, whe∣ther thou hadst not rather be some great thing upon earth, then one of the Church of the first-born who are written in heaven, Hebr. 12.23. Whether thou desire not rather to satisfie thy greedy appetite with the fruition of thy present good things, Luke 16.25. (which are as the Leeks, Onions, and Garlick of Egypt,) then enjoy the fatness of Gods house; the pleasures that are at his right hand for evermore. I commend this example of the Israelites despiciency and loathing of their Manna to their serious consideration who slight and un∣dervalue the outward Ordinances, who lightly esteem and loathe the Sacraments, especially that of the Lords Supper. What else do they then what this people did? They esteem the heavenly Man∣na, a light, a contemptible, a despicable bread. How does that ap∣pear? The very same Res substrata, the very same thing, the very same spiritual Grace, was exhibited unto that people which is also offered unto us, though under another outward form; so the A∣postle tells us, they did all eat the same spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10.3. And both that and this, the one and the other, were of divine in∣stitution: He who gives the spiritual meat, gives also the forms and signes under which it is exhibited unto us. And therefore it is a like sin, to undervalue the one and the other. Or, if there be a difference between them, to despise the later, is the greater sin; be∣cause against a greater light, against a more clear Gospel mani∣festation. Nor let men sooth and flatter themselves, that they have the same spiritual meat, that same inward and spiritual grace in them, which they undervalue not, but highly honour, though they neg∣lect and slight the outward signes. When men slight the outward signes, they slight also the in∣ward grace; yea, and him also who gives the grace, and ordained the signes. What think we of the sons of Eli? 1 Sam. 2. The Scrip∣ture cals them sons of Belial, and saith, They knew not the Lord, ver. 12. The sin of the yong men was very great before the Lord, ver. 17. What was their sin? they were lascivious persons, v. 22.
an heinous crime, especially in Priests. But what was their crime in regard of Gods Ordinances? that ye finde ver. 29. The Lord saith to Eli, Wherefore kick ye at my Sacrifice, and at mine offering, which I have commanded in my habitation; and honourest thy sons above me? &c. And ver. 30. Them that honour me, I will honour; and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. The Lord saith, That they who despise his sacrifice and offering, despise him. Thus in the text before us, the people are said to speak a∣gainst God, (as the other words, so these) when they call the Man∣na, light, vile, or contemptible bread. And what shall we think better of those, who lightly esteem the Ordinance of God, as his Sacraments? Surely, according to the testimony of the Lord him∣self, they disesteem him, despise him. And what came of this peoples despiciency? 2. What was the punishment of this great sin? By reason of this great sin, the slighting and abhorring of their spiritual food, the Lord sent fiery Serpents among the people. And what mystically are those Serpents, but the evil spirits, the Devils, whose Prince is the old Serpent called the Devil and Sa∣tan? Revel. 12. For so despisers are delivered over to the Devil, Acts 13.41. compared with Habac. 1.5. But here is consolation for the penitent and believing soul. What if the Serpent have bitten thee? What if the Dipsas the thirsty Serpent sting thee, and seek , 1 Pet. 5.8. to drink thee up, and endanger thee to be swallowed up of wine? Esay 28.7. What though the Serpent endeavour to stir up the fire of concupi∣scence in thee? Is it not a promise to the believers, that the flame shall not kindle upon them? Esay 43.2. Look upon the brazen Serpent, the signe of the Son of man. The Lord Jesus hath been reputed a sinner, yea, the worst of sinners, yea, a Devil; yea, he was said to be acted by the Prince of the Devils. And he hath been lifted up by Moses (figuring the ri∣gour of the Law) as one accursed; not simply on a Pole, as Our Translators turn ; no more then on a Mast, as Diodati turns it, Antenna; but as on a Banner, or a Signe, (so most of our old English Translations;Numb. 21. v. 9. Col. 2. v. 15. so Luther, and the Low Dutch) as an En∣signe; so the Spanish, Vandera; and Vexillum a Standard, so Ar. Montanus. But being lifted up, he also lifts up, and spoyles (, he devests or unclothes) the Principalities and Powers, the evil spirits. The Serpent is of himself , naked, as well as subtil, Gen. 3.1. but he clothes himself with change of raiment, ac∣cording to their qualification and capacity, with whom he hath to do; as they say of the Chameleon, and the Polypus rupi concolor, changeth colour according to the Rock to which it cleaves; so he shapes himself and his ministers, and as the Apostle tels us, that he appears (to the religious) as an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14.
And therefore the Lord uncaseth this grand Hypocrite, and his Legions, discovers them in their nakedness, and as they are, (as Malefactors were wont to be crucified naked,) and makes a shew of them openly, triumphing over them in himself, Col. 2.15. He is now lifted up as an Ensigne to the Nations. Now is the judge∣ment, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. And the Lord himself hath prophesied, that if he be lifted up, he shall draw all men unto him, John 12.32. He speaks to thee and me, and every one, Me vide, that is, Confide, look up and trust in me. O ye penitent and believing souls, who ever have been bitten and poysoned by the Serpents venim; let us look up unto him, whom we have pierced; who ever believeth in him, shall not perish, but have eternal life, John 3.14, 15. There is no other Name in which we can be saved; he hath triumphed over the Serpents; and gives us also power to triumph over them, to tread upon Serpents and Scorpions, and all the power of the enemy,Matth. 3. v. 7. & 23 33. and nothing shall be able to hurt us, Luke 10.19. Let the Serpents and generations of Vipers () look unto other helps and means for cure of their venomed souls: Let us look unto our Maker, and let our eyes have respect unto the holy one of Israel, Esay 17.7. The word used Numb. 21.9. is , to look intentively. And let us , look stedfastly with the eyes of a pure heart, Matth. 5.8. Let us look wishly with wishes and prayers unto the Lord, for his help and power; as Jehoshaphat did, when the serpentine brood assaulted him, saying, O our God! There is o might in us against the faces of this same great multitude, coming upon us: And we know not what we may do;2 Chro. 20. v. 12. but our eyes are upon thee.
And he [Balaam] went to an high place.]Numb. 23. v. 3. There are many translations of this word, . Hierom renders it, Velocitèr, Ha∣stily: the LXX, , the straight way; the Tigurin Bible, Ad excelsa, to the heights, or high places. But if it be so,  is to be understood, which is here needless. The Targum hath, , Unus, unicus, solus, solitarius, alone, solitary; and so Pagnin and Munster, and Castellio, Suecedit, he goes apart: so the Spanish and French Bibles; so Tyndal, and most of our old English tran∣slations; and our last also hath [Solitary] in the margent: which I believe, is better (as usually) then that which they have put in the text, for this reason. As Balaam had learned, by tradition from his forefathers, the rites and ceremonies wherewith the God of Israel was worship∣ped: as appears by his choise of clean beasts, Bullocks, and Rams; as also by their number, seven Bullocks, and seven Rams; for that number was sacred, and commanded by God himself, Job 42.8. and observed by David and Ezechiah, 1 Chron. 15.26. 2 Chron. 29.21, 3. And by the kinde of sacrifice, Burnt-offering; all which are evident thorowout this History: So no doubt but he had al∣so understood, in some measure, how and in what manner, the Lord had been wont to reveal his Oracles unto the Patriarchs of old; ziz. In solitude and retyredness. For so we shall finde, that God hath not been wont to speak to the holy Fathers in a crowd, nor to whole nations or people; but to some one or few men apart, in the silence of the night, in Fields, in Deserts, in Mountaines, in Vallies. So he revealed himself to Abraham, to Isaac, to Jacob, to Moses, to Samuel, to David, to Solomon, to Elias, to all the Pro∣phets. Such a solitude and loneliness, together with such sacrifices, ac∣cording to his own institution, might Balaam think, would win up∣on Gods favour; and that so far as to obtain leave of him, to curse his people. But though Balaam knew the outward services of God, yet he knew not the nature of God, nor his princpal and pri∣mary will;Hos. 6. v. 6. Prov. 21. v. 27. that he wills mercy and not sacrifice (which is only his se∣condary will, and only in order to the former,) and the knowledge of God, rather then burnt offerings, Hos. 6.6. Yea, he knew not, that the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination; how much more when he bringeth it with a wicked minde? Or rather, even be∣cause he bringeth it with a wicked thought or intention? Prov. 21.27. Such as Balaams here was, who came with a wicked thought and intention to curse the people, and so, by cursing to con∣sume them, as Zach. 5.4. Whereas, on the contary, the blessing of God encreased them. As for his solitary walking, that known saying, , that a solitary man is either a god or a wilde beast; Balaam verified
the later of himself, proving it and his name proper to himself in regard of Gods people, , that he was  a wild beast and a Devourer of them. O Israel! retire unto thy God, In adytum, in secretum, in fun∣dum cordis, into the inmost retyring closet of thy heart: Ex quo nem quisquam exit, quin sit intus manere melius; Never any man goes out thence, but it had been better for him to have stayed within. But should we so retire our selves from the outward world, that we should go into the Wilderness, or some desolate or lone∣ly place, that there the Lord may reveal his will unto us? Doubtless there is not the same reason of all men. For how∣ever the outward figure of mens bodies, may be like one to another, yet the inward dispositions of the minde are extreamly differing; so that, Quot homines, tot sententiae, so many men, so many mindes.Matth. 19. v. 12. And our Lord saith, ; that is, not as our Translators turn the word, All cannot receive this say∣ing, but, all do not receive this saying; (a very great difference.) And every man hath his proper gift, saith the Apostle. However therefore the Lord hath propounded a common salvation unto all the sons of men, Jude, v. 3. whereof all men are capable, and hath prescribed common means which all men must make use of, if they will be saved, as repentance, faith, and obedience of faith; yet several and particular means may be made use of also, accord∣ing to the great variety of dispositions and inclinations of men; as also according to the divers ranks and orders of men. Where∣as therefore some men are of a more free and lightsome spirit, they are rather inclined to an active life, to live in vita communi, and in luce, as Tully speaks, to live sociably among men. Others of a more sad and melancholick spirit, are inclined rather to retyred∣ness and contemplation. And such as these, were some of the ancient Monks and Eremites, as Antonius, and others; who sequestring themselves from the world and wordly imployments, have con∣secrated themselvs unto God, dwelling alone remote from others, leading a solitary life. Hereby I approve not the late superstitious and forced Monchery, but a pious solitude and holy retyredness (if it be possible) from the tumults and troubles of this present evil world; which I con∣ceive not only not unlawful, but expedient, yea, necessary for some men. And therefore most what religious men having spent much of their life past in wordly imployments, desire, in their declining years, to retire themselves unto greater privacy. Howbeit a change of place is not so necessary as a change of minde. He who fulfils not the lusts of his flesh, who mindes not earthly things; who, though he live among men, among riches, among honours, yet is as a stranger to them, and esteems them on∣ly as they are, and uses them as if he used them not; such an one
is an Eremite, and lives a monastick life, even in a throng, and is a stranger to the world; converseth with himself and with his God, and becomes daily more and more like unto him. More especially, this may be observed in regard of diverse ranks and orders of men. For such chosen vessels as the Lord would make Radices communitatis, publick persons, and such as should instruct others, unto these he speaks a part; these he takes a side from the multitude, and puts his fingers in their ears; teacheth them first obedience; then toucheth their tongue, and enables them to teach others; according to Christs method of curing the deaf man who could hardly speak, Mark 7.32, 33. Of such S. Au∣gustine is to be understood, Epist. 76. Non erit bonus Clericus, qui non fuit bonus Monachus; He will not be a good Clerk, who hath not been a good Monk. For can we think, that the only wise God will reveal his pretious truth to such as conform themselves unto the lusts of vain men? symbolize and please every base hu∣mour of fantastick, foolish, and dissolute companions? O ye,Esay 46. v. 8. who by profession, are Monastick men! Consider and remember this, and shew your selves men. Bring this upon your heart, O ye transgressors! Retyre unto your heart, and hear God speaking there. Be not ashamed to learn this Lesson from Bala∣ams practice, who retyred himself, and went alone when he hoped to hear God speak unto him. Were we exhorted unto an outward solitude, men of all ranks would go out into the wilderness as they did to hear John the Bap∣tist: But when we are called to an introversion, into our wildred heart, to hear the voice of God crying there, (that's John,) how few, alas how few desire so to retyre themselves? And the reason is; Its a reflex act, and more difficult then one dirict. And therefore In sese nemo tentat desendere, nemo; No man assayes to sink into himself. Yet is this the most expedite means and way for to meet and hear our God. I have heard of many, and known some who have travailled far in the world, and made great search after the true religion, that they might meet with God, and hear him speak unto them: yet these at length have returnd ashamed, that they had sought that so long and so far off, which they might neerer and sooner have found at home, even in their own hearts. All endeavours are in vain or to little purpose before such re∣tyrement: And therefore Moses perswades Pharaoh to let the people go into the wilderness, that they might serve the Lord. Pharaoh was content that they should offer sacrifice in the land of Egypt, Exod. 8.25. But Moses tells him, they knew not with what they shall serve the Lord, till they came into the wilderness, Exod. 10.20. The Divill is content that men hear Gods voyce, so it be in Egypt; whereby the straits of sin are typically signified, Mich. 7.15.19. Revel. 11.8. But Moses is instant and earnest
with Pharaoh, that the people may go out of Egypt; otherwise they shall not know his will. And it is our case, (O thou Israel of God?) Unless we forsake all that we have and depart out of Egypt, we cannot know the Lords will, or be his Disciples, Luk. 14.33. And therefore the Apostle perswadet  go out of this spiritual Egypt into that wilderness, that we be unconformed to this world, that we may prove and know that good that acceptable and perfect will of God. Such retyrement never wants answerable effect. For if the Lord met Balaam, who went solitary to meet him with a mischievous purpose and put a word in his mouth; how much more when we return unto our heart, with pious intentions to meet the Lord and know his will and do it; how much more will he reveal him self unto us in our mouth and in our heart? O that this were come to pass unto every one of our soules!
Christ Conquering and to Conquer. SERMON XI. Numbers 24. ver. 17. There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall arise out of Israel;Numb. 24. ver. 17. and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth. VVE have in this Verse, part of Balaams prophesie touching the Epiphany and manifestation of Christ the King born; There shall come a Star out of Jacob. 2. The growth & increase of that King; A Scepter shall arise out of Israel. 3. The administration and government of that King in subduing the enemies of his kingdom. 1. The Moabites in par∣ticular, He shall smite the corners of Moab; and 2. More general∣ly, he shall destroy all the children of Sheth. We have warrant to understand this Paragraph of Christ the King, out of Matth. 2. where we read of some accomplishment and fulfilling of this prophesie. The words contain these Axioms or Sentences. 1. A Star shall come out of Jacob. 2. A Scepter shall arise out of Israel. 3. That Scepter shall smite the corners of Moab. 4. It shall destroy all the children of Sheth. 1. A Star shall come out of Jacob. Concerning this Star I have long since spoken; and therefore I shall not repeat any thing; only we may take notice, that, by it, the Wisemen were lead unto Christ now born; and by a like Star of faith and hope, according to the interpretation of divers of the Fathers, we must be guided unto Christ, if we will be wise also, wise to our salvation, 2 Tim. 3.15.
This Star is said to come out of Jacob. What we turn to come,SR. XI. is not  which is proper to a Star, as Oriri, to arise, and shine forth. Though the LXX have , Orietur, shall arise,Matth. 2. v. 9. but  Incedere, to go; and so S. Matthew 2.9. describes the motion of it, , the Star went before them until coming it stood over where the childe was: which, nor Star, nor motion, nor station, were natural, but miraculous and divine. This King being born, and declared by his Star, so to be, must have the ensigne of his Royall Majesty, thats a Scepter; And that the next words present us with all. 2. A Scepter shall arise out of Israel. 1. And what is a Scepter? The word here used is  which properly signifies a Rod or Wand or Staff growing out of the root or stock or branch of a tree. 2. Because the Tribes of Israel were wont to be distinguished by such Staves, Num. 17.2.3. Its taken also for a Tribe, Gen. 49.28. All the Tribes of Israel are twelve; which proceeded from Jacob, as so many branches from one and the same stock. 3. And because all Tribes and families proceeding from one stock, had one common Governour,  the word here used is taken for the Governour and Goverment it self, whereof it is a signe. It signifies the gover∣nour, so Gen. 49. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah; The LXX render it , the Prince or Governor. Thus what we read, 2 Sam. 7.7. spake I a word with any of the  the Tribes of Israel; for which we have, 1. Chron. 17.6. spake I a word to any of the  the Judges of Israel? 4. Its used also for the Government it self, as Esay. 10.5. Assur the Rod or Staff of mine anger, and 14.5. The Lord hath broken the Scepter, the Chald. Par. turns it  the power. So Zach. 10.11. the Scepter of Egypt, is in the Chal. Par. the dominion of Egypt. Christ hath his Scepter, his Insigne principatûs, his ensigne and token of Soveraignty, Anthority, and Power. This Scepter of Christ is either First, of Grace and clemency, a golden Scepter, which was figured by that of Ahashuerus (the prince and Head; a type of Christ, as Esther was of the Church,) Esth. 4.12. Or Secondly of severity and Judgment, an Iron Scepter, Psal. 2.9. Revel. 12.5. A rod of iron; According to the different parties he hath to deal withall. Such is that known character of a just Prince; Parcere subjectis, & debellare superbos To spare the lowly, and subdue the prowd. The Chald. Par. interpretes this Scepter by the name of Messiah; the Messiah shall be anointed; as Homer calls  a King who bears a Scepter; and the Syriac hath here for a Scepter, a King. But why must the Mesiah have a Scepter? God the father who invests him and honours him with soveraign authority, he in wis∣dom, strengthens him and arms him with a Scepter of power and
dominion. From this Idea, as from the patern in the Mount, all in∣feriour powers are established: So that there is not any just au∣thority setled in any Commonwealth, but it hath a coercive power annexed unto it; otherwise the authority it self would become contemptible, and be despised. This was intimated by the known fable of the Frogs desiring a King. If therefore Christ our Lord have authority, he must also have his scepter, his coercive power and strength, to preserve and vindicate his authority from con∣tempt. Wherefore the Lord having given to his Christ a throne, be gives him also a scepter. The Lord said unto my Lord, (Chal. Par. To his word) sit thou on my right hand, &c. There's his throne. Then followes, The Lord will send the Rod or Scepter of thy kingdom out of Zion. This is the original of all Kingly authority and power, and the ensignes of them. For what many say; that, when a throne, or scepter, or other ensignes of Majesty are ascribed unto God, its by , and taken from the customes of Princes, no doubt its a great mistake. For what ever is eminently good and excellent, is first in God, and then descends unto the creature, though not Formaliter and Univocè, yet  in a due proportion; so that the  of whatsoever is good here below, is to be sought in God, as being first in him, as in its Fountain and exem∣plary cause, not vice versâ. For that of S. James is most true, Every good giving,James 1. v. 17. () and every perfect gift is from above, descending from the Father of lights, James 1.17. 1. By way of application; I cannot here omit what Origen, Procopius, and Eusebius observe concerning this Star and Scepter; that by the Star, was intended the Divinity of Christ, by the scep∣ter, his humanity; and in the LXX, instead of a Scepter shall arise out of Israel, we read , a man shall arise out of Israel. And the Star stood over him, Matth. 2.9. as the holy Spirit, in form of a Dove, coming upon him, Mat. 3.16. We read of many prodigious and presaging lights appearing be∣fore, or at the births of some who proved eminent persons; but nor any one, nor all are comparable unto that great light, that day-star, which enlightens every man coming into the world, John 1.9. Whom the Father gives for a light unto the Gentiles, and to be his salvation unto the end of the earth,Luke 2. v. 32. Esay 49.6. , a light for the revealing and uncovering of the Gentiles, who were enveloped and hidden in darkness, Luke 2.32. as indeed we all are, until the divine light shine unto us. But however this observation be ingenious, and there be a truth in the thing, yet not in the word; as being grounded on the LXX, which turn , a man, whereas the Hebrew word hath no such signification; and therefore Symmachus instead
of  a man, put  a scepter, as indeed it signifies. 2. Note here the rise, growth, and increase of Christs king∣dom in us, from Jacob, to Israel, from a star to a scepter, from light to strength. Jacob is a type of the weak Church. For a figure of this, Jacob took his brother by the heel, but was so weak, that he could not hold him, Gen. 25. Who shall remain unto Jacob,Amos 7. v. 5. (if thou in∣crease the famine,) for he is small or little, Amos 7.2.5. Israel is the strong Church, the Church prevailing with God, according to the etymologie of that name which the Angel gives him, Gen. 32.8. Thy name shall be no more called Jacob, but Israel:Gen. 32. v. 28. For thou hast been a Prince with God, and men, and hast prevailed. 3. We have here intimated the two eminent vertues of the King Christ grown up and ruling in his kingdom, light & strength: light in the star, and strength in the scepter. These ye have together, Psal. 43.2. Thou art the God of my strength; O send out thy light. And 84.11. The Lord is a Sun and a Shield. And 132.17. The horn or strength of David, and the Lamp or light of his Anointed; which Zachary understood of Christ, Luke 1.69. Thus S. Paul calls Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. Both which are sometimes woven into one Phrase, as when Christ is called the Sun, and compared to a Gyant or strong man to run his course, Psal. 19. And he appears to S. John, as the Sun shining in his strength, Revel. 1.16. And S. Paul coucheth both as closely, when, Rom. 13.12. he exhorts us to put on the Armour of light; which in the next words he varies; Put on, saith he, the Lord Jesus Christ, v. 14. as the same thing. Hitherto we have considered the two former Axioms; 1. A part: 2. Compared one with other. In the same method let us proceed in handling the two following. Whereof the former is; That Scepter shall smite the Corners of Moab. Wherein we have this Kings administration and government of his kingdom, in sub∣duing the enemies of it, in particular, the Moabites. Wherein we must inquire; 1. What are the corners of Moab. 2. What it is to smite the corners of Moab. 1. What are the corners of Moab. Moab is here compared unto a building; whereof the great strength lies in the corners, as in Gods building which is his Church, 1 Cor. 2.9. Christ is the chief corner stone, Ephes. 2.20. And accordingly the most of our English translations have cor∣ners or coasts: but the Messiahs wars are not with buildings, but with men. And therefore by the same metaphore, the Princes of Moab are called the corners of it. So the Chald. Par. hath  the Princes, which in the text are called corners; and the Greek hath , Captains or Leaders, whence the Vulg. Latin hath Duces, the Dukes; so Luther and Piscator, and the Low Dutch. The word  is used both wayes. And thus, according to our Translators, the word , which signifies principality, and
a beginning, signifies also a corner; as where they turn , a vessel knit at the four corners,Acts 10. v. 11. Acts 10.11. which Pagnin renders, Quatuor initiis, at the four begin∣nings. The word , which is here turnd, He shall smite, is pro∣perly, he shall smite thorow; and so it is rendred in the eighth verse of this Chapter. He shall pierce them thorow with his arrows; and here also in the margent. So Arias Montanus, and Pagnin; so Diodati and Ainsworth. Howbeit, because the word is used both wayes, I shall also speak of it in both senses. What was here foretold, was accomplished in the history by David, the type of the Messiah, who smote Moab, 2 Sam. 8.2. What reason is there why the Lord, 1. Smites the Princes of Moab; 2. Why he smites them thorow. 1. There is reason why the Lord smites them; viz. Because they were enemies, deadly enemies against Jacob and Israel. 1. E∣nemies they were against Jacob, but deadly enemies against Israel: For Israel is the Church increasing, with the increases and strength of God, Col. 2.19. And therefore as the seed of God increaseth and thrives in us, so doth Satans opposition increase also. Whence we read in the Parable, Mat. 13.26. That, when the blade sprang up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the Tares also. And there∣fore Numb. 23.7. Balac King of Moab saith to Balaam, (as he re∣ports his words,) Come, curse me Jacob, and defie Israel; which the LXX render, . Balac desires curses against Jacob, but cursings and bannings, overcursings, , Supermaledictiones, cursings over and over, against Israel. But why does Balac rage and inveigh more against Israel then against Jacob? were not Israel and Jacob one and the same people? Tis true, they were so; but different degrees of the same people. In the name of Israel is understood a perfect man, one who prevails with God. And therefore, by how much the more strong and powerful he is, by so much the more vehement & impetuous opposition he may expect. While a man is only as Jacob, imployed only in inferiour actions, and as yet weak (for so Jacob is a figure of the Church in its weakness, as Israel in its strength) while we are as Jacob, as yet weak, its to be expected that we suffer opposition and cursing: but when we grow up in strength, and become strong as Israel, we must then expect Super maledictions, cursings upon cursings. Increase of grace is alwayes accompanied with proportionable increase of oppo∣sition, and contradiction of the adversary, Numb. 33.11. They re∣moved from the Red Sea, and encamped in the wilderness of Sin, &c. The Red Sea, or Edoms Sea (for thence it had the name, as I have shewen) signifies that suffering which is incident unto flesh and blood, or Edom the earthly man; of which S. Paul speakes,
1 Cor. 10.13. But Sin signifies Bushes and hatred; when therefore we proceed from our conquest of that temptation which is inci∣dent unto man, we become hated of men who are as thornes in our sides. Thence they went to Dophkah, that is, pulsation, knocking, and smiting, when their inward hatred breaks forth to knocks and blowes. And the like significations have the following places of the Israe∣lites journeyes, if well observed, by comparing spiritual things with spiritual. For by how much we draw nearer to the heavenly Ca∣naan, by so much the more hatred we must look for from our out∣ward and inward enemies. The Spouse in the Cant. 4.16. therefore calls for, not only the South winde, but also the North winde to blow upon her Garden: she desires both at once. And why not only the South winde? for from the South, blow fruitful breathings; whereby we under∣stand the inspirations of the holy Spirit, & increase of graces there∣by,Jer. 1. v. 14. whereas Ab aquilone pandetur malum, evil shall be opened from the North, Jer. 1.14. The Spouse knowes well, that there is no in∣crease of graces to be hoped for without increase of opposition and contrariety. And therefore by how much the sweet breathings of the Spirit proceed from the South, by so much the more vehe∣ment opposition must be expected from the North. The Apostles and Disciples of Christ found this by experience, Acts 2. when they received the spirit and the mighty rushing winde, the spices flowed; they declared the wonderful works of God: but what then? did the North winde cease, when the South winde blew? No, did not the storm and tempest of persecutions arise more fiercely? did not the hatred much more increase? While the Apostles & Disci∣ples were yet but Novices in Christs school, they suffered some accusation from the Pharisees; as for plucking and rubbing the ears of corn; for eating with unwashen hands, &c. But when they appea∣red full of the holy Ghost, good God! how the North winde arose! what storms and tempests did it raise in the hearts of gainsayers! for as our God gives greater gifts unto his people, so he permits greater oppositions against them; and as their graces are greater, so the greater are their sufferings. Ubi magnitudo gratiae, ibi magnitudo discriminis; where there is greatness of grace, there is greatness of danger. saith S. Hierom. Men can well endure such as grow up together with them, who are subject alike to the same infirmities with themselves, while yet they live under the law, and they can mutually pardon one anothers weaknesses; but when the grace of God that brings sal∣vation to all men (,) hath taught some of them to deny ungodliness and wordly lusts, and to live soberly,Tit. 2. v. 11. righteously, and godly in this present world; when these begin to grow up higher, and to overtop the rest, then the lower Shrubs speak evil of them, 1 Pet. 4.4. Then the discipline of some Church
or other (sure I am, not of the true Church of Christ, which en∣courageth unto growth in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18.) and to abound more and more, 1 Thess. 4.1. like the Gardners Sheers, soon crops and cuts down such surmounting proficiency, under the name of Heresie, or erroneous judgement; because it exceeds the scanty measure of their Articles or confessions of faith; which they will not suffer to be examined by the Word of God; but require (most unreasona∣bly) that the Word of God should be tryed and examined by their Articles and confessions of faith. Hence it is, that weaklings who are yet under the Law, and like themselves, may escape their Ec∣clesiastical censures; , but (not yea, as Ours render ,) all who are willing to live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2 Tim. 3.12. Some opposition will be made against Jacob, the heavenly man, as yet weak, while he contends with his Edomick earthly-minded brother, and strives and strugles with him, (as in the womb of Rebecca, Gen. 25.23.) and layes hold on his heel, and would hinder him from being born and brought forth by consent, James 1.14, 15. For his earthly-minded brother is yet too strong for him, and treads him under his foot. But much more opposition is made against Israel, the heavenly man now growen up with the increase of God, Gen. 32.6. We read Psal. 83. of a multitude of Nations plotting and consulting against Israel; and their main designe is, as appears, ver. 4. that the name of Is∣rael may be no more in remembrance. Ye have ten of the conspira∣tors against Israel, ver. 6.7.8. and then Selah added: which im∣ports a beating down of the earthly thoughts, and a raising up the hea∣venly meditations on what goes before. Accordingly Edom notes the earthly-minde. Ismael is the hearing without obeying God. Moab the refusing the correction by the Law; which is bastardy, Hebr. 12.8. Hagarens, the estrang'd nature. Gebal, the evil bor∣dering upon the good, Rom. 7.21. like a Second in descant which makes the greatest disharmony. Ammon the secret sin. Amalek the flattering tongue, licking up and devouring the people. The Phi∣listine, earthly, sensual spirits. Tyrians, spirits domineering and oppressing. Assur, the besieging sin, , sin which easily besets us in every circumstance,Hebr. 12. v. 1. Psal. 83. v. 5.8. and way-laying us. And all these have been an Arm to the sons of Lot. So much the Hebrew words signifie, as it is acknowledged in the margent. Only the Translators here, as commonly elsewhere, turn , Children, which are Sons. Hence the reason will appear, why the Lord smites Moab: All these have consulted together with one heart, and have made a covenant against the Lord, v. 5. For if against the people of the Lord, then against the Lord himself: for they who are in cove∣nant, have common friends, and common enemies, Acts 9.4, 5. Whereas therefore they become an Arm to the Sons of Lot, that
is, to the Moabites, and Ammonites; therefore Christ himself, who is the Arm of the Lord, Esay 40.10. and 53.1. John 12.37, 38. is stretched out for the protection and salvation of his Israel, and to smite the Princes of Moab; and that according to his cove∣nant. For since the Moabites were enemies against Jacob, yea, mor∣tal enemies against Israel, the Lord had obliged himself by his covenant to be an eemy unto their enemies. For so he promiseth, Exod. 23.22. concerning the Angel of the Covenant; if obeying thou shalt obey his voice, (that is, continue in obedience, and, by obeying,Exod. 23. v. 22. thou shalt learn to obey,) and do all that I shall speak, I will be an enemy to thine enemies, and I will distress thy distresses. That the Lord therefore should smite the Princes of Moab, it was reasona∣ble, and according to his covenant. But why shall he smite them thorow? 1. If we consider the history, we shall finde cause sufficient for this thorow destruction of the Moabites. They hired Balaam to curse Israel, Deut. 23.4. They followed the counsel of Balaam to commit trespass against the Lord, Numb. 25.1, 2, 3. and 31.16. Adde to these what ye read of their pride, security, vain confi∣dence, and contempt of God and his people; beside other sins, Jer. 48. 2. But if we look into the mystery, we shall finde yet more rea∣son for a thorow-smiting of Moab. Moab is a Bastard-generation, such as receives no correction from the hidden and inward law of God, figured by , Lot, which signifies hidden and covered; and such are interpreted Bastards, and not genuin sons, Hebr. 12.8. These revolt à patre, from their father, (so the Antients Ety∣mologize the word Moab,) and become born à patre diabolo, of their father the Devil; and his works they will do, John 8. The root of this rebellion and disobedience, is inward: And there∣fore Christs smiting of Moab must be thorow and inward also. It must needs be so: For whereas there is a treasury of wickedness in the beart of every sinful man, evil thoughts, murders, adulte∣ries,Matth. 15. v. 19. fornications, thefts, false witnessings, blasphemies, all in the plural; since Jesus Christ came to save us from our sins, how can he so do, unless his arrows pierce deep even to the heart? The Impostume lies there; and the man must perish unless it be ope∣ned; as they tell a story of him, who smiting and intending to kill his enemy, opened his Impostume with the stroke, and saved his life —Vulnus opem{que} tulit, he wounded him and healed him both at once; so unless Christ who seriously intends to cure our fe∣sterd ulcers of customary sins, pierce them and open them with the injaculations and arrowes of his sharp word and spirit, our impostu∣mated souls must perish. And therefore his living word,  piereth to the division of the soul and spirit,Hebr. 4. v. 12. (whence note by the way, that those two inward parts are different one from other;
since they can be divided) lets out the corruption, and heals the man. Such a cure was wrought on the Jewes, by S. Peters mini∣stry; by whom, God sent his word and healed them, Acts 2.36, 37. The sharp piercing words are, Let the whole house of Is∣rael know for certain, that God hath made this Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. Upon this word of truth Christ came riding and pierced them thorow with his sharp arrowes, the injaculations of his spirit; for its said, that having heard this word, they were pricked at the heart. For whereas Vulnus is Dissolutio continui, a wound is the dissol∣ving of that which was centinued and one before; whereas the sin∣ful man was one with his sin; as the envious man is one with his envie, and the prowd man one with his pride, and the like may be said of every sin, which is the very nature and being and one with the sinful man; the Son of God was therefore revealed, that he might wound and so make a dissolution and dis-union between the man and his sin; that they might be no more one; as the Aposle saith;1 John 3. v. 8. for this, the Son of God was manifested, , that he might dissolve and loose the works of the Devill, 1 Joh. 3.8. For this end, was the enmity of the Law put between the seed of the Woman and the seed of the Serpent,Prov. 22. v. 15. Gen. 3.15. as I have shewen. And whereas folly is bound up in the heart of a childe,  the Scepter or Rod of correction drives it far from him, Prov. 22.15. But as the Lord hath his piercing and smiting word, which pier∣ceth thorow the heart, and lets out the corruption, so hath he his healing word also.1 Tim. 1. v. 10. Such is his , 1 Tim. 1.10. (not only sound doctrine, as our Translators turn it, and thereby many understand Orthodox; which indeed often times is nothing so, but also) healing doctrine; such doctrine as heals our backslidings, Jer. 3.22. Such as makes of a Drunkard, a sober man, of a Letcher, a chaste man, of a Covetous man, a liberal and merciful man; yea, it heals all the spiritual maladies and diseases, Psal. 103.3. Such are those  healing words, 1 Tim. 6.3. 2 Tim. 1.13. and elsewhere.Esay 19.22. Thus the Lord smites and heales, he woundeth or smi∣teth-thorow (, the word in the text) and his hands make whole, Job. 5.18. 1. Note hence the transcendent power of the King Christ, in mastring and subduing the greatest power of sin, even the Ruling and Lording sins,Exod. 15. v. 4. the Princes of Moab. The Lords war is against the strongest of our sins; against Pharoah, and the Choyse of his Captaines, Exod. 15.4. Such he wisheth to fight withall: as the Poet describes a valiant man; Optat aprum aut fulvum descendere monte Leonem, he wisheth a wild bear or a Lyon to come down from the Moun∣tain; the strength of concupiscence the swinish sin of voluptuousness and sensuality; yea the roaring Lion, the Devill himself. The stronger the enemy is, the more fit for him to grapple withall.
Behold the Lord God, (or the Lord the Lord, ) shall come upon, or against the strong, Esay, 40, 10.Esay 40. v. 10. So it is in the Margent, and better (as most what) then in the text. Thus our Lord speakes of himself that stronger man, that he shall come up∣on the strong man armed, and overcome him and take away his armour from him, Luke 11.22. and destroy him, Hebr. 2.14. 2. Hence we may take notice, that the divine vertue refor∣ming the sinfullman, workes not superficially or slightly. The influence of this Star smites thorow the corners, the Princes of Moab. The powers of heaven operate, and are effectual even in the bowells of the earth. The scepter of Christ pierceth even to the heart. So the Psalmist describes him triumphant, Psal. 45.3.4.5.Psal. 45. ver. 5. Gird thee with thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou mighty one, with thy glory and thy Majestie; And prosper thou with thy majesty: Ride upon the word; So the Original sounds; , Ride upon the word of truth, and meekeness and righteousness, and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things; So the Tigurin Bible, the French, Italian and Spanish Bibles; also Piscator, and two of our old English translations have (Ride upon the word of truth &c.) Thus we finde him riding on a white Horse, , conquering and that he may conquer:Revel. 6. v. 2. Thus one victory armes him for another, untill he conquer all our enemies. He hath his bow, even the zeal of the spirit for the salvation of men, and his sharp arrowes. Thine arrowes are sharpe (the people fall under thee) in the heart of the Kings enemies. Even such are they who oppose him and his worke in their owne soules to their own salvation. It is good counsell which the prophet gives us, and let us all follow it, Hos. 6.1. Come and let us returne unto the Lord; for he hath torn us, and he will heal us, he hath smitten us, and he will bind us up. 4. He shall destroy all the children of Sheth. These words con∣tain the Messiahs subduing of all his enemies. Wherein we must inquire, who are these children of Sheth; and how we are to un∣derstand, that the Lord shall destroy them. As for the former of these. OUr Translators persist in rendring  Sons, by Chil∣dren; as, what is every where, the Sons of Israel, they render Chil∣dren of Israel. So here the Sons of Sheth, they turn the Children of Sheth. The truth is, the old English Translators, together with the French, High and Low Dutch, left them no better Copy to follow; onely Ainsworth and one more English, the Spanish and Italian, and the Greek and all the Latin Translations have Sons of Sheth. By the Sons of Sheth we must understand the Sons of Adam; that is, all the world, all mankind, so Vatablus, so the Glosse of the
French Bible. For all man-kinde descended from Noah after the floud; and consequently from Sheth; for all Caines posteritie perished in the floud. All the Sons of Sheth therefore are all men. So the Cald Parah. 2. What they render to destroy is , which is from  a Wall; and is here of contrarie signification, as to un-wall, so Airsworth turns it; Vastabit, he shall lay wast, so Hierom. Tyndal hath undermine. Coverdale, over-come. Others otherwise, but almost all come to this sense; That Christ shall destroy all the Children of Sheth, that is, all mankind. This sense hath been judged very inconvenient, first, in regard of all men; because Christ himself saith, That the Son of man is not come to destroymens lives, but to save, Luk. 9.56. Secondly, And more specially in repect of his Church, which shall never cease; accor∣ding to our Lords reasoning: Thus saith the Lord that giveth the Sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the Moon and of the Stars, for a light by night, &c. If these ordinances depart from before me, saith the Lord, then the seed of Israel shall also cease from being a nation before me for ever. Thus saith the Lord, If heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that they have done, saith the Lord. Upon such impossi∣bilities in nature, the Lord puts the destruction of his Church and people,Amos 9. v. 8. Jer. 31.35, 36, 37. And Amos 9.8. he shewes, who they are whom he will destroy, Behold, the eyes of the Lord are upon the sinful kingdom; or rather, on the kingdom of sin , in regnum peccati, upon the kingdom of sin, to destroy it from off the face of the earth: notwithstanding, I will not utter∣ly destroy the house of Jacob, saith the Lord. Yea, as for Sheth himself, and his holy seed? he was that great Patriarch and Father of the Church before the flood, a man so eminently holy, that he was called , a God among men, saith Theodoret; and his sons imitating their holy father, are called the sons of God, saith Chrysostom, Gen. 6.2. And will the Lord destroy these, or the genuin off-spring of these? Mark Abrahams reaso∣ning, which the Lord consents unto, Gen. 18.23.25. Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked? That be far from thee, from doing according to this thing, that thou shouldest slay the righ∣teous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be as the wicked:Gen. 18. v. 25. That be far from thee! Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do judgement. For the avoiding of this great inconvenience, some have ound out another meaning of these words, either understanding , Sheth, appellatively, or finding out another meaning of ; 1. By understanding  appellatively; and so it signifies those who are behinde, or the hinder parts. 1. Those who are behinde. And so Balaam, when he spake this prophesie, he turned his face to∣ward
the wilderness; that is, toward Israel, ver. 1, 2. And so the Moabites, the Ammonites, the Midianites, and all the people of the East, shall be understood by those behinde: So Jeremy calls such , the hindermost of the nations, Jer. 50.12. And so it was true of these, whom Israel, the people of the Messiah in their times, overcame. Or by , they understand such as besieged the people of Israel, according to Psal. 3. v. 6.Psal. 3. v. 19. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, who  have beset me round about. So that, what we have the sons of Sheth, should be Filii obsidionis, the sons of siege, or such as lay siege unto Gods peo∣ple. Or by , they understand the hinder parts; as Jehoshuah commands the people to pursue their enemies,Jos. 10. v. 19. and to cut off the hindmost of them, Josh. 10.19. Decandetis, i. e. caudam decidatis, to cut off their tayles; so Esay 9.14, 15. and 20.4. The King of Assyria shall lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians cap∣tives, yong and old Discoopertos  natibus, where we have the word  appellatively understood. 2. They have found out other meanings of the Verb ; as the LXX , that is, , or  saith Suidas, Praedabitur, pabulabitur, he shall forrage, plunder, and lay waste; but this, upon the matter, is all one with the former. The Chald. Paraphrast hath , Dominabitur, he shall rule; and the Samaritan version hath Exaltabit, he shall exalt. 1. Hence we may take notice, how the Spirit of God in Scrip∣ture, amuseth men, and intangleth and perplexeth all their un∣derstandings; insomuch as, although they have the written word of God before them, and the knowledge of Tongues and Arts, and search, and labour and toyl, and do , Dig deep, as in a Mine, for the sense and meaning of the word; yet at length, after all their digging and toyl, and labour, and search, with greatest industry and paines, they must confess, with sorrowful experience, that, nor knowledge of Languages, nor skill in Arts and Sciences (though they be good helps, while in∣struments only, serviceable instruments) nor studies, nor watchings, nor utmost humane endeavours can admit them into the inmost closet of divine truth; until, with humility, self-denyal & prayer, they yield their understandings captive to the obedience of that spirit, which hath dictated that word, and will lead them (being so docible and teachable) into the knowledge of it. And so we shall finde, that every one of these, hath a meaning suitable and according to the proportion of faith, as hath already appeared in part. The Lord layes waste and unwals all the sons of Sheth, even all men,2 Cor. 1. v. 5. when he overturns and demolishes their strong holds; what are they but  their reasonings? rather then their imaginati∣ons. When he plunders them of their false knowledge, and infa∣tuates
them, 1 Cor. 1.19, 20. When he robes them, and disrobes them of their false righteousness, John 16.10. Revel. 3.17. When he easily undermines their towring imaginations and Castles in the air of Assurance, which hath no foundation of faith and obe∣dience of faith: without which, all pretences of Assurance are only from a strong fansie and self-love. The Lord hath sworn; that the disobedient shall not enter into his rest; for to whom sware he, that they should not enter into his rest, but to those who believed not? So indeed our Translators turn the word , but that signifies disobedient ones.Hebr. 3. v. 18. 1 Sam. 2. v. 6. When he even kills and slayes us by the words of his mouth, Hos. 6.5. by that sword that goes out of his mouth, which is the Word of God, Ephes. 6.17. Rev. 1.16. yea, when he brings down to Hell, 1 Sam. 2.6. This is the common passage of all the sons of Sheth, even all the sons of God, unto the eternal life and salvation, even through Death and Hell. For so the Lord leads his people wonderfully; and so finally convinceth them, that even they themselves pass the sen∣tence of condemnation upon themselves, when they confess the sentence of God to be most just. Of this the Apostle speakes, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10.2 Cor. 1. v. 9, 10. We ( our selves) have had the sentence or answer of death in our selves, that we should not have trusted () in our selves, but in God raising the dead. He shall destroy all the sons of the tayl: and these sons are of two sorts, according to the two kindes of filthiness, 2 Cor. 7.1. 1. Of the flesh; and so all unclean, all lascivious persons, Whoremongers and Adulterers are sons of the tayl. 2. There is a filthiness of the spi∣rit, and so they who have seen vanity, and spoken a lying divination, Ezech. 13.7. All the false Prophets, they are sons of the Tayl, Esay 9.15. As for the reason of the former, They oppose and confound that orderly way of propagation which the God of order hath pre∣scribed unto mandinde; of which, above all his creatures, he condescends to undertake the preservation and government. And therefore, howsoever he is the Judge of all the Earth, yet all ex∣orbitances, all excesses of that kinde, come under his special cog∣nisance. Whence it is that Er and Onan are said to be punished by the hand of God. The Lord slew Er, and the Lord slew Onan also, Gen. 38.7.10. And 39.9. Adultery is said to be a sin against God. And Hebr. 13. Whoremongers and adulterers God shall judge. 2. As for the later, the reason why the Lord will destroy the false Prophets, may be because these sons of the Tayl oppose the God of order in his method and way of saving mens souls; and, under a pretence of doing the Lords work, in edifying their souls, , they subvert, or rather destroy mens souls, Acts 15.24.Acts 15. v. 24. Perverse and affected counterfeiting in all kindes, pro∣vokes great indignation in the person counterfeited. Since therfore
these , these sons of a Lye, would be taken to be  sons of a Star; (as the Jewes false Messiah in imitation of this Star, in my text, would be called,) since these sons of the Tayl pretend to be sons of Thunder, Mark 3.17. The most high God sets himself against them, Ezech. 13.8. as the Poets say of their Jupi∣ter, that he slew Salmoneus, Dum flammas Jovis, & tonitrûs imitatur Olympi, while he counterfeited thunder and lightning, Aenead. lib. 6. For so the Prophet saith expresly, Esay 9.14.15. That the Lord will cut off from Israel, Head and Tayl, branch and rush in one day. The ancient and honourable (, qui vultu su∣spicitur; so Munster; acceptus faciebus,Esay 9. v. 15. as Arias Montanus turns the words, Esay 9.15. we may render them in English, whose person, or face is respected: for there is a lawful respect of persons 1. Com∣manded, as Levit. 19.32. 2. Practised, and that by Elisha, 2 Kings 3.14.) he is the Head; and the Prophet teaching a lye, he is the Tayl; which the Lord threatens to cut off. 1. Hence may the loose, lascivious, and unclean persons, the sons of the Tayl, read their doom; The King Christ will destroy them. 2. Yea, hence the false Prophets who speak lyes in hypocrisie, may take notice that the divine sentence is gone forth against them also. For they are  the sons of the Tayl; it is the worst and basest part of the beast, whereunto the false Prophets are com∣pared: and the Lord threatens, that he will cut them off and de∣stroy them, Esay 9.14, 15. But we must not here forget that sense, which the Chald. Pa∣raphrast gives of these words; which is this; He shall rule over all men. And this is harmonical with the great voices in Heaven; when the seventh Angel sounded, the Kingdoms of this world are (or, according to many Copies,Rev. 11. v. 15. the Kingdom of the world is) be∣come our Lords, and his Christs; and he shall reign for ever and ever. For when the humanity is recovered, and seriously yielded up unto the divine Nature, the whole heaven and heavenly na∣ture congratulates unto God the kingdom of life, Rom. 5.17. now taken in; and celebrates and prayses the faithfulness of Gods promises. Let us now compare these two last Axioms together, and in reference one to another; and so we shall finde, that, as in like prophetical speeches, they have somewhat of consentaney nature and affection one towards the other; and somewhat dissentaney and different, yea, opposit one to other. 1. They have somewhat consentaney and agreeing one with the other. And so as the Lord shall smite and smite thorow the Princes of Moab; who are such as receive not correction, and so spi∣ritually are Bastards, Hebr. 12.8. So likewise he shall destroy the like incestuous generation, even all the sons of the Tayl. He is im∣partial
and without respect of persons; otherwise, how shall he judge the world? It is the Apostles reasoning, Rom. 3.6. I shall adde but one reading more, and that is of the ancient Samaritan version. And so these two last Axioms have some dissentuney affection, yea, opposite one to the other. He shall smite thorow the fools of Moab, but he shall exalt all the sons of Sheth. There is no doubt but they read , which signifies fools, for  the Corners or Princes, of Moab. But why fools of Moab? We read indeed of the pride of Moab, Esay 16.6. and Jer. 48.29. both in the same words; which the Prophets express very ele∣gantly; we have heard the pride of Moab; and then they turn aside, as it were, to let others know it, he is very proud. We read also of his security, carnal confidence, and contempt of God and his peo∣ple. We read not here of the folly of Moab. And no marvail; For can there be greater folly, then to be proud, secure, self-confident, and to despise God and his people? These characters demonstrate the Moabites to be Solomons fools, such are all wicked men: And therefore they may be well termed, Fools of Moab. But there is yet a reason more proper to our purpose. Moab and Ammon were of incestuous generation; and accordingly Moab hath his name, [à, Mo aqua, & Ab patris, velut è patris aqua geni∣tus. At inter venerea recensetur aqua; unde proverbia manarunt, ab∣stine ab aqua aliena. Bibe aquam è cisterna tua, & fluenta putei tui. Aqua furtiva est dulcior, &c. quae sunt ad illum modum.] And the God of the Moabites is called Chemosh; which according to S. Hie∣rom is from  and , quasi palpans, from dalliance and wanton∣ness. Whence is the name  [qui nocturnarum comessationum deunculus; quin & idem ipse lascivarum saltationum praeses. Memora∣tur etiam juvenum procacium festum quoddam apud lascivum comicum, quod  appellatur.] Thus much the Apostle intimates, Rom. 13. , not in surfeting and drunkenness; and then adds, not in Chambering and wantonness: Siquidem sine Cerere & Baccho friget Venus. Such wanton persons are called by a special name, Fools in Scripture; because that vice, in special, makes a man an arrant fool, unmans him, and takes his understanding from him. Thus the Harlot is called the foolish woman; and her Amaretto, a yong man void of understanding; who is taken by her fair speech, and goes after her strait-way, as an Ox goeth to the slaughter, and as a Fool to the correction of the Stocks, Prov. 7.22. And therefore the natural Philosophers observe, that every four footed beast and fowl, the more lustful it is, the more foolish it is: Of the fowls, one instance is the Sparrow; of the beasts, the Asse, Ezech. 23.20. And therefore Shechem, who ravished Dinah the daughter of Jacob, Gen. 34.2. is said to be the son of , Ha∣mor, that is, an Asse, v. 7. And he is said to have wrought folly in
Israel. So the woman that played the harlot, is said to have wrought folly in Israel, Deut. 22.21. Thus ye read the same phrase, upon like occasion, Judges 19.23. and 20.6.10. Hence it is, that Tha∣mar saith to her brother Amnon, now about to humble her,2 Sam. 13. v. 12. 2 Sam. 13.12. No such thing ought to be done in Israel; do not this same folly: there is an emphasis on every word. And v. 13. Thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel. These, and such as these, are the fools of Moab, which the Son of God smites, and smites thorow, as I shewed before. When they that are wise, or make others wise, ,Dan. 12. v. 3. shall shine as the Firmament; and they who turn many unto righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. For he exalts all the sons of Sheth, which are all the sons of God. Un∣to such glory and honour, the Son of God exalts the sons of Sheth, when he comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, and sits upon the throne of his glory; when all nations shall be ga∣thered before him, and he shall separate them, as a Shepherd di∣videth his Sheep from the Goats: And he shall set his Sheep on the right hand, the wise sons of Sheth; and the Goats on the left, the fools of Moab, whom he smites with the most dreadful sentence of final condemnation, and exalts the sons of God unto glory, and honour, and praise, and so invests them with himself, and gives them , That glory (which ours turn honour) that is from God alone, John 5.44.John 5. v. 44. 1 Pet. 2. v. 7. That honour which is Christ himself; unto you, who believe, he is pretious; so Our Translators, 1 Pet. 2.7. ; unto you who believe, he is that honour, that praise, which is not of men, but of God. Such praise, such honour, and such glory have all his Saints, Psalm 149.9. All the sons of Sheth. O ye sons of Sheth, Let us be subject, let us submit our selves unto the Scepter of Christ. Its a powerful Scepter; it smites and smites thorow the Princes of Moab. Its a Scepter of holiness; it destroyes all the sons of the Tayl. Its a righteous Scepter, a Scepter of equity, it pierceth thorow the fools of Moab, and exalts all the sons of Sheth. And this last honour of Christs Scepter, which David, Psalm 45. and S. Paul, Hebr. 1. ascribes unto it, is most notable. For neither the Psalmist, nor the Apostle setting forth the glory of Christs Scepter, commends it to us from the amplitude and largeness of his dominion, but from the rectitude and equity of it. Many unchri∣stian and antichristian Kings and Potentates have large domini∣ons, but crooked Scepters, Scepters of iniquity. Yea, the Devil chal∣lenged all the Kingdoms of the World, as his own, Matth. 4.8, 9. Yea, our Lord calls him, The Prince of this world, John 14.30. It is not greatness or largeness of a Kingdom, that is an honour to it. No, nor greatness of strength; For its a known speech, Magna regna, magna latrocinia; Great Kingdoms, are great robberies. And
Satan is stiled by our Lord, the strong man armed, Luke 11.21. It is not greatness of authority and dominion; it is not power or strength of a Kingdom, that commends it; but the rectitude and equity, the just and right use of the authority, power and strength; without which, a Prince or people may be said to be Stolidè ferox, as Taci∣tus speaks, foolishly, and, as we may adde, unjustly fierce or sa∣vage. For ; the goodness of a thing consists not in the largeness and greatness of it, but the greatness rather in the goodness of it. How equal, how just, how reasonable a duty is it, that we sub∣mit our selves unto this Scepter of Christ? yet who owns his domi∣nion? who slights not his authority? What else do we more or less all of us, when we neglect his known commands, the Edicts and Decrees of the greatest King? I say unto you, saith the only Po∣tentate, whosoever is angry with his brother, shall be in danger of the judgement; yet who regards the power of this Kings anger, so far as to curb and check his own? I say unto you, swear not at all; yet who, if himself swears not, hears not daily oathes, and curses, and blasphemies even against the King of Heaven and Earth, yet is silent? Judge not that ye be not judged, saith he; yet who judgeth not his brother? Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess. Look not upon a woman to lust after her. Yet maugre all these Edicts from the only Potentate, we dare do, or leave undone, what he ei∣ther commands us or forbids. How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand, to destroy the Lords Anointed? The Lawes of all Nations have made it treason, and punished with death, any plot or designe against the person of the Prince. Yet our thoughts, words, and deeds, our tongue and our doings have been against the great King: we have unregarded his commands, and so troden him under our feet; we have pretended his Soveraign∣ty, and put a Reed in his hand instead of a Scepter, Matth. 27. as if he were of such a flexible disposition, as to let us do what we list. Yea, we have crucified the Lord of glory; would we dare thus to transgress, did we stand in awe of this King, did we believe, were we indeed perswaded, that he hath a Scepter? O beloved! let us not weary the patience of our Lord Jesus Christ. The time is coming, yea now is, when he shewes him∣self to be a King, yea a King highly provoked, (as they say, , to be much incensed, is from  and , importing the wrath of a King;) and since we will not submit unto his golden Scepter, his Scepter of grace and clemency and patience, which he hath long extended, and held forth unto us, we shall feel the weight of his Iron Scepter, his Rod of Iron. wherewith he rules the Na∣tions, and will break in pieces false and pretending Christians, heathenish men, one upon another. The work which he hath
been long doing in this falsely called Christian world; and, according to his threatnings by fire and by his sword he is pleading with all flesh. Though, O foolish men! O daring generation! we fear it not, because we our selves yet feel it not. Must not that prophesy have its fullfilling as well in the letter as in the spirit? Revel. 6.15.16. That the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and rich men, and the chief Captaines, &c. shall hide themselves from the face of him that sitteth on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb. Laesa patientia fit furor; when the patience and long suffering of the Lamb is overcharged, its turned to fury. His Golden Scepter of grace, lenity, patience and long suffering, to our salvation, 2 Pet. 3.15. Being despised, he then takes to himself his Iron Rod of Se∣verity, Wrath and Fury; and makes use of it to the destruction of all disobedient men. O let us humble our selves under his mighty hand. Let us turn from those sins which provoke his indignation and wrath. Let us become his subjects indeed, and be like our King, righteous, holy, humble, meek patient and long suffering, &c. Such, even such is he: Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis; A Kings example hath a powerfull influence upon his people. Nor can his vertues and graces be otherwise discernd in the world, then by the graces and vertues relucent from him, in his people. For what is it for us to prayse the equity, righteousness and holyness of his scepter, unless our lives praise his holyness, righteousness and equity? What is it for us to commend his equity while we our selves are subject to iniquity? What is it for us to talk of his moderation, unless our moderation also be known to all men? Phil. 4.5. When we so walk as he walked, as it is the duty of us all, 1 Joh. 2.6. When we are like unto him, we shall then invite him to come and take up his residence and dominion in us. For truth (and he that is true) returns to him that practise it, Ecclus. 27.9. Thus David hoped to win him to himself, Psal. 101. I will sing of mer∣cy and judgment, O Lord I unto thee will I sing. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, O when wilt thou come unto me? I will walk in my house with a perfect heart, &c. And so Christ himself promiseth, Joh. 14.21. He that hath my commandements and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; And he that loveth me, shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and manifest my self unto him. Yea vers. 23. He saith of his father and himself, we will come and make our abode with him. Even so come, Lord Jesus! So let they kingdom come and thy will be done. For thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory for ever and ever. Amen!
He went after the man of Israel into the Tent;Numb. 25. v. 8. and thrust both of them thorow, the man of Israel and the woman thorow her belly.] Al∣though  may signifie Tabernaculum or Tentorium a Tent, as its here turnd; yet, if so, its for such an use, or abuse rather, as is here specified in the text. And therefore to avoid the doubtful signification of the general word [Tent] or Tabernacle, as Pagnin and Cajetan turn  Tabernaculum; and because that portable house wherein more chaste people dwelt, in the wilderness, yea, wherein the most holy God dwelt and walked with his people, 2 Sam. 7.6. is called by the same name, and by the same name mentioned, v, 6. it were to be wished, ? were Englished by a word more proper. Accordingly, although Tyndal and three other ancient English translations have the same word, yet Co∣verdale and another turn the word, Whorehouse; as also doth Lu∣ther, Piscator, and the Low Dutch, also Vatablus, Tremellius, Dio∣dati, and Castellio, following herein Hierom and the Chald. Paraph. Nec certè dissimulandum, idem vocabulum  nomen , sortitum esse: Mox eodem commate sequitur, (Phinees) ambos ipsos virum Israelis & mulierem, , in locis genita∣libus (ita Hieronymus) transfixit; adde quod habent Graeci quo{que} inter∣pretes , & Samaritana versio per ipsa pudenda trans∣adegit. Quam Tralatores nostri partem, honestè ventrem appellarunt. Uti mirum non sit, locum turpitudinis muliebris (quem R. David vocat) eidem lupanari nomen indidisse; in quo, lupanare confortium exercetur: Ita prostibulum nominat Ambrosius, quod consistorium publicarum libi∣dinum, Tertullianus. Nor is it unworthy a critical observation, that  a Stews or a Brothelhouse hath the name from  which signifies Cavare, (whence our English word Cave) Confodere, Exe∣crar, to make hollow, to dig, also to curse; because, as a very good Critick observes, and thence infers, Lupanar est cavea execrabilis; An Harlots house is an execrable Den. According to which Ter∣tullian very fitly, Benedictus status apud Deum, crescite & in multitu∣dinem proficite: Excessus verò maledictus, adulteria, stupra & lupana∣ria. Its a blessed state in Gods account, Increase and grow into a multitude: But the excess is accursed, adulteries, fornications, Bro∣thelhouses. The result of all which, is, that by , which our Translators turn a Tt, is to be understood what the prophet calls  an harlots house,Jer. 5. v. 7. Jer. 5.7. Which our Translators render in the plurall, they assembled themselves by troops in the harlots houses; whereby they wrong not onely the holy Text, but also the Jewes nation; and that even then when they were ripe for judgment; when yet the Prophet charges them but with one harlots house. How odious, yea how abominable are such places and practises
to every chast soul, yea, even of him who is Modestè nequam, not yet desperately wicked! As being that sin, which though it be∣gin with pollution but of one person, yet spreads it self to the defilement of the whole community; as the Lord implies, Levit. 19.29. Do not prostitute thy Daughter, (or rather, do not prophane thy Daughter , which should be holy to the Lord both in body and in spirit, 1 Cor. 7.34.)Levit. 19. v. 29. to cause hir to be a Whore, lest the land fall to Whordom, and the land be filled with wicked∣ness, Levit. 19.29. And a propotionable judgment followeth it. No portion of God from above. All the portion is from beneath, even a fire that devours to destruction and roots out all increase, Job. 31.1.—12. Yea, the Lord frustrates that end which these leud practises aim at, they shall die childless, Levit. 20.20.Prov. 7. v. 27. The harlots house is the way to hell going down to the secret or inner Chambers of death, Prov. 7.27. All this a man may hear, and know, and believe, and flatter himself as if he were a guiltless person, when yet he himself hath in himself that  that brothel-house and stewes which he hates and abominates without him. For from within, out of the heart of men,Mar. 7. v. 21, 22, 23. proceed evill reasonings () adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, coveteousnesses, wickednesses, () deceit, lasciviousnesses () an evill eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness. All these evill things come forth from within () and defile the man. So that all these are in the heart, according to the French proverb; What ever comes out of the Sack, was in the Sack. And therefore the heart is the Forge and work-house of wicked imaginations, plots, counsells, and devices. The heart is a slaughter-house, wherein the wicked one slayeth the innocent, Psal. 10.8. The heart is a Den of thieves. The heart is an arrant Brothel-house, wherein its possible that a man may be an adulterer and fornicator, yet not know a woman; and the like may be said of the woman in regard of the man. Our Master Christ teacheth us this Doctrin, Matth. 5.28. I say unto you, that every one looking upon a woman to lust after hir, hath committed adultery with hir already in his heart.Matth. 5. v. 28. Gen. 12. v. 17. Yea and sometime the Lord punisheth the lust, when it hath proceeded no farder then the heart, as Gen. 12.17. The Lord plagued Pharaoh with great plagues, and his house, for the matter or busynes of Sarai Abrams wife This is so consonant unto sound reason, that the very lascivious Poet himself could say, Ut jam servâris bene corpus, adultera mens est; Omnibus exclusis, intus adulter erit. Though well thou keep thy body, yet thy soul, When all are shut out, that within is foul. And Seneca; Incesta est sine stupro, quae cupit stprum. She is unchaste, without whoredom, who desires to be an Harlot.
Yea, although the soul be not stained with those obscene lusts; yet, because there is a covenant of spiritual mariage between Christ and the believing soul, Hos. 2.19.20. Zach. 8.8. And the Lord hath given himself to the obedient humanity, and is the  the Deity dwelling in us, Joh. 1.14. and 14.23. Yea, and hath made a contract of mariage with his Church, to which he speakes, as to one person;Exod. 20. v. 3. I am the Lord thy God: I am thine: Thou shalt have no after, or other gods,  Super faciem meam, upon my face; Thou art mine; The Lord having made this contract of mariage, Verbis formalibus & praesentibus, in these present formal words of a real contract, the breach of this contract of mariage is no other then spiritual whoredome:Jer. 3. v. 20. Surely as a wise hath treacherously depar∣ted from her companion or friend () so have yee been treache∣rous against me () O house of Israel, saith the Lord, Jer. 3.20. Hence it is that idolatry is spiritual adultery; both because it proceeds from carnal thoughts of God; and because adultery be∣trayes the heart to idolatry, as in the history before us; so 1 King. 11.1.—. And therefore idolatry is reckoned among the works of the flesh, Gal. 5.19.20. Yea, that in Gods account is idolatry, and spiritual adultery, when the heart disloyally turns away from God, to any thing which is not God, or leading unto God, Jer. 3.2. Where hast thou not been lyen with? Yee adulterers and adulteresses; know ye not that the friendship of this world; is enmity, (not with, as our Translators render it, but) of God? So the Greek ,James 4. v. 4. that the friendship of the world is the enmity of God? James 4.4. So our Lord calls the Jewes an adulterous generation, Matth. 12.39. and 16.4. This fornication and adultery is committed with the whorish wo∣man, the vain thoughts,2 Cor. 11. v. 3. which are compared to Eve, 2 Cor. 11.3. as the Serpent beguild Eve—so  your thoughts: which therefore are forbidden our bed, nor may we permit them to lodge in us. For therefore the Lord complains, Jer. 4.14. How long wilt thou cause thy vain thoughts to lodge in thee?  in thine inward part,Jer. 4. v. 14. or thine heart? as the LXX sometime turn . O thou Israel of God! Thou chaste Spouse of Christ! The false Prophets, the Balaams [who devour the people] have gi∣ven wicked counsel unto the Midianites [false judgements] against thee,2 Cor. 11. v. 3. Numb. 31.16. to corrupt thy chaste thoughts, , from that simplicity, that which is to∣ward Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3. Wherefore straiten or distress the Midi∣anites (.) Thou hast divine authority,Numb. 25. v. 17. even Gods command so to do, Numb. 25.17. From this whorish woman, even the vain thoughts, was the beginning of sin; and by her, we all die. Give not passage to the water, nor to the wicked woman ,
boldness of going abroad.Ecclus. 25. v. 26. If she go not  accord∣ing to thine hand (or power) cut her off , Plar. à carnibus,) from thy flesh, and give her a Bill of divorce, and let her go. More specially this concerns you, O ye Priests. It is not un∣known to you, how Phineas the son of Eleazer (that is, as the names import, Confidence of face in or from Gods help,) obtained the covenant of peace, and of the everlasting Priesthood, to wit, by slaying Cozbi, the tie or lying nature of sin, and Zimri, or, that disposition that rejoyceth therein, Numb. 25.6, 7. Psal. 106.30, 31; &c. It is the exhortation which Dr. Thomas Drayton , a man of blessed memory, and my reverend and worthy good friend, directed in a learned and pious Sermon of his at Wilts, on 2 Cor. 7.1. to the Ministers of that County, March 1. 1656. the Sermon is in print, and entituled, The Proviso or Condition of the promises. For which his good counsell therein contained, viz. to cleanse our selves from all filthyness of flesh and spirit, and to perfect holyness in the fear of God; he was long persecuted by igno∣rant Zelotes alleaging, that he, and another, a friend of his, had filled that County with the Doctrin of Perfection. Which is such another crime, as that which was laid against the Apostles, Act. 5.28. That they had filled Jerusalem with their Doctrin; and what was their doctrin but the doctrin of a perfect life? Such as Moses and the Prophets, Such as Christ their and our Master, and his Apostles taught them, and us, if we will learn it. May it not rather be laid as a true crime against his accusers, that they and such as they fill that County and the whole Nation with the Doctrin of imperfection and all wickedness; which will di∣rectly, and by good consequence follow from it? Besides, how unhandsom and unproper is it, for those, whose calling requires of them, that they stirre up men to endeavour after the perfect life, that they may stand  perfect and compleat in all the will of God, Col. 4.12.Col. 4. v. 12. How un∣seemely is it for them to plead for Baalim their Lording and ruling lusts, which they call their weaknesses, frailties and imperfections? If these must remain, why then is it written, that the Deliverer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn away  impieties or un∣godlynesses from Jacob, and that he shall take away their sinnes?Rom. 11. v. 26. Rom. 11.26. Yea, for what end did Christ give his gifts unto men, viz. His Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, pastors & teachers? was it not for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; until we all , meet or come into the unity of the faith, and the acknow∣ledgement of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,Ephes. 4. v. 12, 13. unto the mea∣sure of the stature or age () of the fulness of Christ? Ephes. 4.12,
13. Surely therefore these men cannot more evidently de∣clare that they are none of Gods gifts unto men, then when by their doctrine of unbelief, they take away all hope of the perfect life. For since hope is the foundation of all pious endeavours, if the hope of per∣fection be taken away, who will endeavour after it? and how can these men be Gods gifts for the perfecting of the Saints, when they take away the hope of being perfect? let such pretend themselves the gifts of God unto men; they are no doubt such as S. Paul calls false Apostles and deceitful workers, 2 Cor. 11.13. Yea, is it not crime enough to be , slow bellies, idle lazy drones, to do no good toward this great work of God, unless they be also  evil beasts, operative in mischief? like Wasps and Hornets vexing and stinging such as are industrious and abounding in the work of the Lord; such as warn every man, and teach every man, in all wisdom that they may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Unto which, this good man laboured, striving , according to his (Christs) operative power working in him,Col. 1. v. 29.  in power or vigour. And is it not a shame to be like the Gardiners Dog, according to the Italian, Proverb, which will eat no herbs himself, yet en∣vies those who would? Let such Pharisalcal hypocrites know, that the Lord denoun∣ceth a woe against them,Matth. 23. v. 13. who shut up the kingdom of heaven  against, or rather before men, and neither go in them∣selves, neither suffer them who are entring, to go in. But the zeal to my friend, (whom the good God hath rescued out of the hands of evil men, whose mercies are cruelty; God grant that his blood be not laid to their charge!) my love and zeal to him hath transported me into a large digression; yet such as is not unpertinent unto our present purpose. Much love, much zeal there is among the divided judgments; But the love and zeal of every severall opinion is wholly carried to∣ward its own respective party. And, what our Lord foretold of these last times, is found to be most true, that , because iniquity is mul∣tiplied, the love of many shall wax cold.Matth. 24. v. 12. The manifold iniquity hath now coold the love and zeal of every severall sect and party toward many; (so , may be understood objective objective∣ly;) so that there is no common love and zeal towards all men, but every one , sings to himself and pleaseth himself. Every Zimri, every divided party cut off from others (so Zimri signifies, as also to sing) loves and is zealous toward his Midianitish woman, the thoughts of the divided opinions and judgments; every Zimri's love and zeal is toward his Cozbi his lie; which every one deperit & perditè amat, loves and zealously affects, and commits adultery and fornication with all, every one in the darkness in the secret closets
of his own imagination, Ezech. 8.12. in his  the Brothelhouse, the Stewes of his own heart; whence proceed the issues of a wicked life and actions, Lenonum pueri quocun{que} in fornice nati. O Israel! The Lord requires all thy love, all thy zeal as his own, and, according to his command, to be bestowed upon thy neighbour. Let us, O let us be zealous for our God, every one against his Cozbi, the lying thoughts of the Midianitish woman, as Phineas was, according to Gods testimony of him.Numb. 25.11. Phineas hath caused my wrath to be turnd away from upon the sons of Israel in his being zealous with my zeal in the midst of them, v. 11. For so no doubt  should be rendred with my zeal, as S. Paul saith to his Corinthians, , I emulate or am zealous for you with the zeal of God, 2 Cor. 11.2. O let us with this zeal of our God, be zealous against all iniquity,2 Cor. 11. v. 2. all our vain thoughts which we have caused to lodge in us; and let us pierce them thorow, mortifie and kill them and cast them out of our Tabernacle. So shall the wrath of God be turned away from us; so will the Lord be zealous for his land, and spare us, Joel 2.18. and set his Tabernacle in the midst of us. O that he would vouchsafe so great grace unto us!
On the eighth day ye shall have a solemn Assembly:Numb. 29. v. 35. ye shall do no servile work therein.] The only wise and good God, who loves the man better then the man loves himself, according to that, Charior est superis homo quàm sibi, Man is more dear unto God, then he is to himself; out of that intire love unto man, he not only signifies in express words, what his will is, but intimates the same also more implicitly, in ceremonies, as Sacrifices, and Sacraments, and Sacramental signes, meats and drinks, as also certain times, as dayes, and weeks, and moneths, and years, Festival dayes, new Moons, and Sabbaths; which are a shadow, saith S. Paul, of things to come, but the body is of Christ, Col. 2.17. Hence it was, that the holy Apostles, when they preached the Gospel, they delivered the will of God shadowed in the law. The Lord Je∣sus taught them so to do, Luke 24.21. beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself. And v. 44.45. All things, saith he, must be fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses and in the Prophets, and in the Psalmes concerning me. Then opened he their understanding that they might understand the Scrip∣tures. Accordingly S. Paul, in his preaching the Gospel, said none other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say, should come, Acts 26.22. And can we follow any better, any other so good example as that of our Lord? The words are part of the prescript form and rule, touching the feast of Tabernacles and the eighth day of that Feast; where∣in is prescribed, 1. What was to be done; They must then have a solemn assembly. 2. What was to be left undone, Ye shall do no ser∣vile work. Accordingly I shall consider these two Rules. 1. On the eighth day Israel must have a solemn assembly. 2. They must do no servile work. 1. On the eight day Israel must have a solemn assembly. Where∣in we must inquire, 1. What this assembly was. 2. What was that eighth day. 1. What was that solemn assembly. It is true, that on the three principal solemn festivals of the Jewes, there were wont to be conventions and assemblies of the people; which might be truly called solemn assemblies, and this name might be given to all the three principal Feasts. But our Translators here call the last day of every such Feast, a solemn assembly, as here the eighth day of the feast of Tabernacles: whereas  signifies not the assembling or convening of the people together, but the retaining or restraining of them being so assembled; which is a great difference. Yea, Levit. 23.36. where we have mention of the same Feast, our Translators themselves
having rendred , as here, a solemn Assembly, they put in the margent, Hebr. Day of restraint; and the like, Deut. 16.8. a Chron. 7.9. Nehem. 8.18. And therefore what the Tigurin Bible hath Concio, an assembly or gathering of the people, Vaablus ex∣plains, Collectio sive retentio, i. e. Solennitas. Festum sic dicebatur, quod retinerentur qui venerant ad festum, &c. It was called a gathe∣ring or retaining, that is, a Solemnity. The Feast was so called, saith he, because they were retained or detained who came to the Feast. To like purpose Munster; who turns the word Retentio; and gives reason, because the seven dayes of the solemnity being past, the people was yet retained one day. So Luther explains it. Piscator in his High Dutch Translation turns the word, Verbots∣tag, which in his Latin he renders, Dies interdicti, a day of prohi∣bition; and his reason is, with reference to the following words; because on it, all servile work was forbidden. Tyndal and another after him, renders it a Collection; not because money was then gathered for the reparation of the Tabernacle, or to buy Sacrifices, as Lyra and some others have conceived; but because the people were then gathered and retained together. And so the Chald. Paraph. expresly renders the word  by , Collecti eritis, ye (not money) shall be gathered. Now because this Collection and retention was on the last day of the Feast, as S. John calls it, John 7. Therefore one of our old English Translators turns the word, The conclusion of the Feast. 2. This Collection, Retention, or Conclusion of the Feast, was on the eighth day. Which day was supernumerary and above the number of the Feast, which consisted of Seven dayes; as appears Levit. 23.34. On the fifteenth day of the seventh moneth, shall be the Feast of Tabernacles for seven dayes, unto the Lord. And af∣terward thrice, ver. 40, 41, 42. Ye shall keep it seven dayes. The reason of this supernumerary day is to be sought in the Mysterie of it. Meantime, as to the letter. The reason of this Collection and retention of the people on the eighth day, is to be referred unto the authority of divine instituti∣on; and the end of it, is well worthy his divine wisdom and goodness who ordained it. For the same Feast of Tabernacles was instituted in the seventh moneth, the moneth Tizri, which in part answers to our September; when they had now gathered in the increase of the year, Levit. 23.24. Then ye shall dwell in Booths, saith the Lord, seven dayes: every home-born in Israel shall dwell in Booths, that your generations may know, that I made the sons of Israel to dwell in Booths, when I brought them out from the land of Egypt. I am the Lord your God, ver. 42, 43. That the people might remember and consider, their slavery in Egypt, and their deliverance out of it. Their penury and poverty in the Wilderness when they were houseless, and harborless; and their
plenty and abundance in the land of Canaan, when they dwelt in houses that they had not built. And therefore the Law was com∣manded to be read every seventh year at that feast, Deut. 31.10. that they might hear, and learn, and fear the Lord their God (the author of all this good unto them) and observe to do all the words of his Law. And for that end, after the ordaining of that Feast, Levit. 23.43. is added, I am the Lord your God. Hence it is that the LXX render ; which some have conceived to be so turned, because that Song was so called, which the old Greek Stage-players sung at the end of their Co∣medies, when they went off the Stage; as Suidas, and Pollux, and others affirm. Accordingly some conceive, that the Greek In∣terpreters alluded to this custom of the Stage-players, because, when they ended the Feast of Tabernacles, they returned to their houses with great joy. But truly I am not easily perswaded, that the Greek Interpre∣ters would so much honour the Comedians, and their profane Stage-customes, as to transfer them unto the holy Scripture. There is no doubt but the LXX gave this name to the Feast, ac∣cording to the divine institution of it, as hath been shewen, in memory of Israels coming forth of Egypt. And for the same reason, they gave the name , Exodus, unto the second book of Moses; wherein that great work of God is recorded; and rendred the word  for a memo∣rial of the peoples going out of Egypt, Levit, 23.16. Numb. 29.35. Deut. 16.8. 2 Chron. 7.9. Nehem. 8.18. as well knowing the will of the Lord, that his people should remember the day when they came forth out of the land of Egypt, all the dayes of their life, Deut. 16.3. Hence we learn one main end of humane society, the cele∣brating of solemn Assemblies, for the worship and service of God, in the great Congregation. Such are all the solemn Feasts in Scrip∣ture. As also for the management of civil affairs, in order to a peaceable life, , 1 Tim. 2.2. That which the Psalmist expresseth in like words, Psal. 110.3.  in the comlinesses of holiness;Psal. 100. v. 3. 1 Tim. 2. v. 2. which our Translators express, in all godliness and honesty. Where  turnd by honesty, a word in our language, of very large signification, might more properly be rendred by comely gravity. The Wiseman Prov. 8.6. brings in Wisdom, saying, I will speak of  excellent things; the LXX turn the word  grave things; that is, as the Phi∣losopher explaines , a decent deport∣ment, becoming all ranks and orders of men. So that those Con∣ventions of the people were either Ecclesiastical or civil. And both had their times of restraint and their times of dimissi∣on. For whereas all things in the Church ought to be done in de∣cency
and  according to order, 1 Cor. 14.40.1 Cor. 14. v. 40. We read that our Lord the Head of his Church, is desired by the Disciples to let the multitude depart, Mat. 14.15. as afterward he doth, v. 22, 23. and 15.29. And we read this practised by the Town Clerk, or rather, Sacred Scribe, , as Dr. Hammond well proves, that he dismissed the Assembly, Acts 19.35.Acts 19. v. 35. And this dis∣mission proves a restraint, in all lawful Assemblies. Such were those of the Christians in the Apostles times, Hebr. 10.25. James 2.2. and afterwards. So Ignatius to Polycarpus, , let the Assemblies be more frequent. In which dismission was practised; and therefore a restraint supposed. In the Greek Church, after the Sermon, the Deacon said, , a dismission to the people: that is, the people may depart. And the like custom was in the Latin Church. Hence is that known form of speech used by the Deacon, after the Sermon to the Catechumeni, (those who were not yet initiated or entred into the divine mysteries, but were yet in their rudiments) to them it was said, Ite, missa est. The Congregation is dismissed, ye may go home. These antient, and now antiquated customes of the Church, easily discover unto us, what Dissolutae scopae, what loose and confused companies our Church-congregations most-what are; as being neither duely gathered and assembled together; nor detained by any gentle and moderate restraint upon them; nor decently dismissed. All which might well become the people of the God of order, and the comely body of Christ the head. But at this day, most men ac∣count it a great part of their Christian liberty, to be disorderly, and to do what they list. So that our Church-Assemblies are like peo∣ple, some going, others coming from the Market: or like Bees, alwayes some going in, others out of the Hive. But if we begin to speak of these disorders, we shall never come to an end. Come we rather to the spiritual meaning of these words. For alas! what honour is it unto God, or what benefit is it unto the people, that so many bodies of men are gathered together in one place, or that they are retained and restrained there? The Church of God is a communion of souls and spirits. And this communion of souls and spirits must be with the God and Father of spirits, who made us out souls: Otherwise, Nihil boni est in unitate, nisi unitas sit in bono; There is no good in unity, unless unity be in goodness. We must know therefore, that there is a twofold Restraint. 1. From sin and iniquity. 2. A restraint unto God and his divine na∣ture. 1. The restraint from sin and iniquity, is the restraint of the seventh day, Deut. 16.8. Six dayes thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and the seventh day shall be  a solemn Assembly, or rather a restraint. The feast of the Passover requires a purging out the leaven of malice and wickedness, a keeping our selves from our own iniquity. This must be done with unleavened bread, even
with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. Ye perceive, sincerity accompanies the first and lowest duty, even the first passage out of Egypt. So far are they out, who call perfection, which is the highest duty, by the name of sincerity, which is or accompa∣nies the lowest and meanest. 2. There is also a restraint, a recollecting, and calling home all our wandring thoughts, our loose affections, our unadvised words, our rash actions; a bringing them to due examinations; a judge∣ing and condemning what is blameworthy of them; a sifting and winnowing our hearts, as the Prophet exhorts, Zephaniah 2.1.  Inquirite in vos ipsos, scrutamini, let every one of you search Inter scruta among the trash and trumpery of his sinful con∣versation. Under thy pride, thine envie, thy wrath, thy cove∣tousness, thy gluttony, thy drunkenness, thy lasciviousness, lies the chast, sober, temperate, bountiful, patient, meek, loving, humble Christ of God, troden under foot in the street. He it is who is made flesh, and desires  to take up his Tent, to keep his Feast of Tabernacles with us,John 1. v. 14. John 1.14. Canst thou, darest thou own, believe on, hope in, love, cleave unto such a Christ? canst thou honour him, joyn thy self unto him? Unto him is the , our restraint, our retention; unto him we are to be adjoyned, and to become of one spirit with him. Unto him we are to be conformed in his humiliation and abasement, that we may be made like unto him in his glory and exaltation. The reason of this collection and retention of the Church of God in union, may be referred to the Author of it; whose wisdom and goodness as it appears in the history, so much more in the mystery of it. The story minded Israel according to the flesh, of their bodily thraldom in, and deliverance out of Egypt; their great poverty and want of all things, and their plenty and abundance. The Mystery imports the precious redemption of their souls out of their spiritual slavery under the spiritual Pharaoh. How mise∣rable, poor, and naked they were; but now abounded with all spiritual riches; houses full of all good things, that is, the holy Spirit of God, Matth. 7.11. with Luke 11.13. For by this eighth day was signified the holy Spirit of God. Our Lord himself declares thus much, John 7. Where ver. 2. ye read, that it was the feast of Tabernacles. When our Lord went up to Jerusalem, ver. 10. On the last day, the great day of that Feast, , Jesus stood, and cryed, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. He that believeth on me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. But this spake he of the Spirit which the believers () on him,John 7. v. 39.  should afterward receive, John 7.37, 38, 39.
In order to the receiving of this Spirit, the Lord Jesus com∣mands their restraint in expectation of it, Luke 24.49. Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you; but tarry ye in the City Jerusalem,Judg. 6. v. 34. till ye be indued or clothed with power from on high: For so we read, Judges 6.34. that the Spirit of the Lord clothed Gideon. The word they render [tarry] is , sit ye, which notes that quiet posture of their minde, Anima quiet a ani∣ma prudens; wherein they were to receive the Spirit of God. And accordingly we finde them in such a posture and disposition of minde, Acts 2.1. ,Acts 2. v. 1.3. They were all unanimous at, or in one; , and it sat upon every one of them, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost. S. John puts both together, the Spirit and the day of the Spirit. I was (or I was made , so Arias Montanus, or, I became) in the Spirit, in the Lords day; where he explaines one by the other, by apposition: for so we understand that Lords day, which is so often mentioned in the Prophets, and called the day of the Lord. In that day he was, wherein there was no night, nor need of a Candle, neither light of the Sun;Rev. 22. v. 5. for the Lord God , shall enlighten them, Revel. 22.5. Hence we perceive good reason why the Lord laid a restraint upon them to tarry at Jerusalem. It was the day of the Spirit, the eighth day there was  a restraint. Hence we learn that, as in the letter and outwardly, so in∣wardly and in the Spirit there is a difference of dayes. It is the Wisemans question; Why doth a day excel a day, and all the light of the day of the year, is of the Sun? So the words are read in the Greek, Ecclus. 33.7. He answers his question,Ecclus. 33. v. 7.—13 By the knowledge of the Lord, they were distinguished, and he altered seasons and feasts. Some of them he hath made high dayes; and some of them he hath made high and sanctified; and some of them he hath put for the number of dayes. And the Wiseman shews, there is like reason for the difference among men. All men, saith he, are from the ground, and Adam was created from the earth. In multitude of knowledge the Lord hath divided them, and made their wayes diverse; some of them he hath blessed, and exal∣ted, and some of them he hath sanctified, and set them near him∣self. But some of them, hath he cursed, and brought low, and turnd them out of their standings. As the Potters clay is in his hand, , all his wayes are (which words are left out in our Translation) according to his pleasure; so man is in the hand of him who made him to render unto them according to his judgement. Let them take notice of this who confound all differences of dayes, and differences of men, how point blank they oppose the ex∣press
testimony of the Wiseman here. I know, there is a time, when some strong men may esteem every day alike, Rom. 14.5. But I am well assured, that many of those who plead for a parity of dayes and persons, are not yet grown up to that spiritual age. But let them take notice, that there is no time in all the Scripture set, wherein its said, that all persons shall be equal. Which is the main thing they contend for, upon no ground. Yea, that which they suppose their principal ground, is a main argument against their parity.Mat. 23. v. 8.10. Our Lord saith to his Disciples, Matth. 23. Be not ye cal∣led Rabbi, for one is your Master, the Christ; and all ye are bre∣thren. And ver. 10. Be not ye called Masters, for one is your Ma∣ster, , the Christ. But the greater or greatest of you shall be your Minister () Its evident from the context, that our Lord endeavours to render his Disciples like unto himself. As therefore he did not exercise Mastership over his Disciples, as the Jews Rabbins did over the people: so neither would he, that his Disciples should, one over another; because they were brethren; which brotherhood yet inferred not a parity among them, no more then our being the brethren of Christ, Hebr. 2.11. renders us equal to him, who is the first-born of many brethren, Rom. 8.29. But as he who is greater then all, and indeed our true Master, yet was mi∣nister of all; so should he who is the greatest among his brethren, be as their minister. Whence we may reason convictively; that if our Lord supposed some of his Apostles and Disciples greater or greatest of their brethren, then surely he supposeth, they are not equal. 2. Hence also appears the spiritual excellency of the eighth day, which is the true Lords day, when the Lord God omnipo∣tent reigneth; and his Kingdom is come unto us, in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: For so we shall finde, that in this number, these are comprehended. The number eight is a full num∣ber, and called by the Pythagoreans, the number of justice and righte∣ousness; because, as it is compounded, so it is also resolved into num∣bers Paritèr pares, equal parts, and particles of those parts. Whence Georgius Venetus observes, That they who were saved from the flood, were Eight; which, according to the number of Justice, im∣plyes, that all who shall be saved, must be just men, righteous men. Yea, that Noah, for this reason, is said to be a just man in his gene∣ration, Gen. 6.9. Yea, he himself is said to be the eighth Preacher of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. which is true, without that absurd suppliment of person; as I have heretofore shewen. 2. In this mystical number also of eight, the peace is represented, when, by Circumcision performed on the eighth day, Gen. 17. the body of sin in the flesh, which lusted against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. is put off, Col. 2.11. and we now worship God in the spirit, Phil. 3.3. when all jarring dis-harmony, all differences between our God
and us are silenced and taken away, by Christs mediation as the binding cord, and we hear nothing but the most harmonical diapa∣son. Wherein two things are considerable: 1. A Return to the same Tone, from whence we departed. 2. Though it be not al∣together of the same Key, yet great agreement, great peace there is, an union, identity, and sameness. The only difference between them, is; The one is lower, the other is higher. These are discernable, even to every ear, though the learned Musitian can best judge of these things. But what is this to us? When man thus imitates his God, thus returns unto him, then as the first day of the Feast of Tabernacles is holy, so is the eighth and last also, Levit. 23.35, 36. When, as it was in the beginning, so it is now. When the one extreme is God, the other Man most like unto God; and both make a most harmo∣nical and peaceable Diapason. There's but one minde in both, 1 Cor. 2.16. One heart in both; David according to Gods heart; In both, one will, Gods will done in earth as it is done in heaven. O most perfect peace! 3. From this righteousness and peace cannot but Echo and re∣sound answerable joy, joy in the holy Ghost. How can it be other∣wise? For when the Lord hath circumcised the heart, Deut. 30.6. with the circumcision of the spirit on the eighth day, the day of the spirit of love, and , hath cleansed and purged it round about, according to the LXX, and taken away the foolishness of it, so the Chald. Paraph. expresseth it, so that the man now loves the Lord his God with all his heart, and with all his soul; when now the mans love is fixed upon what is most lovely, even the Christ of God in his Tabernacle, the desire of all nations, Hag. 2.7. When the man delights in what is most lovely, most desireable, and most delightful; then the desire coming is a tree of life, Prov. 13.12. Such joy must then be in great measure proportionable to him in whom we rejoyce; and so, in a sort, unmeasurable and infinite; such is the joy in the spiritual feast of Tabernacles, when the Lord takes up his Tabernacle with us, and dwels with us, and we with him, Revel. 21.3. Such as when Nehemiah (even the consolation of the Lord, the , the great Comforter, as his name imports) keeps the feast of Tabernacles, it must needs be joy, great joy, exceeding great joy, Nehem. 8.17. As we may reason from what S. Peter writes to the believers in Christ, Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing , ye re∣joyce,1 Pet. 1. v. 8. (or leap and dance) with joy unspeakable, , Glorificata, glorified joy. Such is that which ariseth, not from the knowledge of Christ according to the flesh; for though we have known Christ according to the flesh, yet now we know him so no more; for we walk by faith, and not by sight; by faith in the might and power of God; according to which, our Lord saith, Blessed are
they who having not seen yet are believing,Joh. 20. v. 29. John 20.29. Who can duely esteem this faith and love, but he who can experimentally say, My Beloved is mine, and I am his? Cant. 2.16. The excellency of the holy assembly and restraint on the eighth day, may justly reprove both the assemblies and restraints of known wicked men, and of seeming holy ones; for there are of both sorts. The Prophet tells us of an assembly of treacherous men, Jer. 9.2. The word is , such as restrained themselves from what was good,Jer. 9. v. 2.—8. and were in the bond of iniquity. He describes them verse 3. They cause their tongue, their bow, to shoot a lie; and have not strengthened themselves for truth in the earth. For they proceed from evil to evil, and have not known me, saith the Lord. And the Prophet gives warning of such. Take ye heed every one of his friend, and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will (not be Israel prevailing with God, but) , will ut∣terly supplant, will imitate Jacob in deceiving his brother; and every companion will walk deceitfully. They will use deceit every one a∣gainst his neighbour, they will not speak the truth: they have taught their tongue to speak a lie. They have laboured or wearied themselves to commit iniquity. Whereupon the Lord tells Je∣remy; Thine habitation is in the midst of deceit: wherefore I am melting them, and I will try them, saith the Lord. For what shall I do for the Daughter of my people? As if the Lord should say, they are indeed thus wicked, an assembly of treacherous men; but some good men there are among them; as some gold among much dross; wherefore I will melt them and try them. Their tongue is an arrow shot out; it speaketh deceit. One speaketh peace with his neighbour with his mouth, but in the midst of him, or in his heart, he laieth his wait. These sins the Prophet found and reproved at Jerusalem; and so did David before him, Psal. 5.5. He had found a like assembly of treacherous men, like those before the confusion of tongues, Gen. 11. of whom the Lord said, the people are one, and they have all one language. Whereupon he confounds their tongue; and David prayes for the like confusion; they are now bound up in the bond of ini∣quity. Wherefore v. 9. Divide their tongues: for I have seen vio∣lence and strife in the City. Their lying, deceit, and fraud are sins more proper to a City. Whence they say, that Astus craft, subtilty, deceit, and fraud, is from , that is, a City: wickedness is in the midst of it; deceit and guile go not out of their streets. These are City-sins, our City-sins, sins rank and abounding in our City. And therefore the Lord proceeds in his threatnings against that people; and it may be feared, for like reason, against us also, Jer. 9.9. Shall I not visit them for these things? saith the Lord; shall not my soul be avenged of such a nation as this? not only that na∣tion, but , such as this also. These are , a combination of wicked men committing open and known wickedness.
Others there were also among the Jews, an assembly of seeming holy men, Esay 1. who brought a multitude of sacrifices unto God, so that he was full with the burnt offerings of Rams, and the fat of fed beasts, and the blood of Bullocks, Lambs and Goats. These were , ver. 13. a solemn meeting, as it is there rendred, or rather a people in restraint or retention, wholly taken up in offering sacrifices, observing new Moons and Sabbaths. But what saith the Lord, of these? who hath required this at your hands to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain oblations: Incense is an abomination unto me: The new Moons and Sab∣baths, the calling of assemblies; I cannot away with iniquity and the solemn meeting or restraint. So, no doubt, the words are to be read.Esay 1. v. 13, 14. And so Pagnin, Tremellius, Munster, Piscator, the Tigurin Bible, and two of our old English Translations render them. Not as our last doth, with the supplement [it is] but jointly without a supplement. And the reason is, because iniquity opposeth the righteousness of God; and the more of God is opposed, the more God hates it: and therefore it followes, your new Moons, and your appointed feasts my soul hateth, they are a trouble upon me; I am weary to bear them. This was, no doubt, a gross mistake of the Jewes, that they could not distinguish between that life, which God required out of the ceremonies, even his everlasting will and commandement, John 12.50. and the ceremonies themselves which God adjoyned unto it, until the life it self should appear, Col. 3.9. Yet I doubt not, but we may parallel them with a people a∣mong us, an assembly, a combination of seeming holy ones, who make their assembling, and the keeping of an outward Sabbath, hearing the Word and receiving the Sacrament, and the observation of a few other outward duties, the very , the whole business of their religion, wherewithal they cover their envie, their pride, their co∣vetousness, their wrath, their surfeting, their drunkenness, their cham∣bering, their wantonness, all their abominations: As for what is required out of these outward services, as from the Sabbath, the ceasing from our sins, from hearing of the Word, obedience to be per∣formed thereunto; from receiving of the Lords Supper, the shewing forth the Lords death, in the daily mortification of sin: As for the love of God and our neighbour, the walking in good works, the very end, for which our God created us, Ephes. 2.10. Of these, Ne  quidem; few words of these; or, if words, yet but words. These are, after we believe, and are assured, that is, have strongly fansied, that we are justified, these are then accounted but , things, at the best, indifferent, and in a manner, at our discretion, as be∣ing not absolutely necessary to salvation, which they are sure of already, but, upon the matter, as to salvation, impertinent
and needless. But if they be urged home, and their necessity be demonstrated, and that to salvation, then they are reputed Pha∣risism, Arminianism, Socinianism, Familism, Monchery, Popery. So that all the Christian duties, and all the excellent priviledges of the eight day of the feast of Tabernacles, are resolved into a few outward services of the seventh day. But let them expect what event the Jews had of all their ceremonial services, without the life of righte∣ousness; Who required these things at your hands? I cannot away with iniquity and the solemn meeting or restraint. As for us, let us keep the feast of Tabernacles to the Lord: let us keep a solemn assembly, a retention, a restraint on the eighth day. 1. Let us restrain our souls from all iniquity. Let us vow this vow unto the Lord and keep it.Numb. 30. v. 3. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, and swear an oath to binde his soul with a bond, he shall not break his word. Or rather, according to the Hebrew,  by binding a bond upon his soul; so David saith, Thy vows are upon me, O God! If we make vows unto God, our word is no more ours, but Gods; and therefore we are obnoxious unto him. So that to violate our words is not simply to break it, as our Translators turn it, but to prophane it, as it is in the Hebrew, , he shall not profane his word; because it was sacred, as made to the Lord; and therefore being not performed, it is profaned; as they acknowledge in the margent. 2. Let us avow and consecrate our selves to the Lord. A pro∣missory oath differs little, and only formally, from a vow. Ac∣cordingly David gives us example of the other restraint, even to binde our selves to the Lord and his righteousness; I have sworn, and I will perform it,Psal. 119. v. 106. that I will keep thy righteous judgements; or rather, the judgements of thy righteousness. 1. It is no mean Society and assembly we are invited unto; read how the Apostle describes it, Hebr. 12.22, 23, 24. 2. Nor is the benefit small; no less then even the subduing the power of our greatest spiritual enemy.Mark 1. v. 23. Mark 1.23. we read of a man in the Synagogue , a man with, or in an unclean spirit; who cryed out, saying, Let us alone, What have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to de∣stroy us? I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God. Satan knew well, that Jesus and he had nothing common; therefore he saith, , what is common to us and thee? And therefore he well knew that there would be no society between Christ and him, but that he the stronger man, would cast him out of his Tabernacle which he had usurped. Whence saith David, thine enemies roar,Psal. 74. v. 4. , (like the Whelps of the Lion the De∣vil) in the inmost of thine assemblies. For if, saith Ignatius, ye often come together, to the thanksgiving and glory of God, , the powers of Satan are destroyed, his fiery
darts of temptations, which he casts, to inflame us unto sin, are rendred ineffectual. Your unnanimity and agreement in the faith, is his destruction, and the torment of his Angels. So he. Nor is the danger of neglecting this fault, contemptible. They who come not up to keep the feast of Tabernacles, shall have no rain, Zach. 14.16, 17. Men have long looked at Christ without them, and many hundred years since: Now the Prophet speaking of the times of the Gospel, and dispensation of the spirit, the eighth day, invites all nations to come to the spiritual Jerusalem, to keep the feast of Tabernacles; that now at length they may own him the true  the indwelling Deity who doth , take up his Ta∣bernacle in us; that they may come, that is, believe, John 6.35. and that Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith, Ephes. 3. Yea, Christ himself cries out, on the eighth day of that feast; he that is a thirst, let him come to me and drink. If men come not so to him, nor believe in him, so that he may dwell in their hearts by faith, they shall have no rain, no showers of blessings; nor shall the ri∣vers of living water, flow out of their belly; which he spake of the spirit, which the believers on him should afterward receive, John 7.37, 38, 39. All these laid together make the feast of Tabernacles appear the most excellent of all the rest, as being the last; and the eighth day of that feast more excellent then all the other. Indeed, as I shew∣ed before, it's no part of the feast, but a supernumerary day; a day which imports an excellency as  and  signifying, to be redundant and abounding, which also import excellency. This octonarius the number of eight is called  and is in∣terpreted numerus pinguedinis, numerus compositus ex primo numero binario intra denarium impingantus, a number of fatness; because it hath the name from  pinguem esse, to be fat, abounding with mysteries; as also because it answers to  oyl, a princi∣pal figure of Gods good spirit, which signifies the fatness of Gods house, Psal. 36.8. fatness wherewithal the soul is satisfied, Psal. 63.5. That oyle which swims aloft above all legal ceremonies; a∣bove the septenary of the legal Sabbath; above all compulsions of the Law; nor comes it at all by the works of the law, but by the hear∣ing of faith, Gal. 3.2. Do we keep this feast unto the Lord, as we ought? All his feasts are holy convocations, and to be proclaimed such, Levit. 23.2.37. And the Church is assembled together in Gods and Christs name, which is holy, 1 Cor. 5.4. And we must be holy as he is holy. The proselyte to be adjoyned unto the Church, is called  from , to draw out, and gather up: such is the Church of God and Christ, such as are drawn out of hell, and as∣sembled and gathered unto God. Such is  a congrega∣tion and assembly of holy ones, called out of the world, which lies
,1 John 5.19. in the evil one; which is more truly so rendred, than by our Translators, who turn it wickedness, 1 John 5.19. Therefore every one of those who were baptized, professed an abrenuntiation of the evil one, saying,  I renounce Satan, before he adjoyned himself to Christ, saying, , I list myself in the roll of Christs souldiers. And hence it was, that the sons of Israel kept the feast of the Pas∣over, before they kept the feast of Tabernacles, The restraint of the 7th. day, the restraint from the sin, before the restraint of the eight day, the addicting, binding and consecrating themselves to God and his righteousness. Yea, the sin is supposed to be consumed, before we keep the feast of Tabernacles, according to what Moses wrote; Numb. 33.2. Moses wrote their goings out, according to their journeys,Numb. 33. v. 2. by the commandement of the Lord,] The words are . It were authority enough for those journeys, if written only by the commandement of the Lord; but it adds much to the authority of that journal containing 42. journeys of Israel, that Moses wrote them at, from, or according to the mouth of the Lord, as the words properly signifie; so that the Lord dictated unto Moses, who was the Lords Amanuensis, and wrote accord∣ing to, from, or at, the mouth of the Lord. Now the first journey was from Ramasses to Succoth, Numb. 33.5. How does that con∣cern our present business? Much; if we consider, when they took their journey from Ramasses, viz. on the morrow after the Passover, ver. 3. when now we become conformable unto the death of Christ, the lamb slain, the true Passeover offered for us, and begin to purge out the old leaven of malice (though that word malice in English, signifies hatred; but so doth not ; to which it answers in the Greek: I wish it were rather turned naughtiness or leudness, when we have begun to purge out the lea∣ven of leudness) on the morrow after the passeover, they went from Ramasses, that is, the melting and dissolving of the iniquity, which moulders away and consumes, by conformity to the death of the lamb; and therefore the Psalmist saith, that the ungodly shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord (those of our own household) shall consume as the fat or what of the lambs, is pretious; they shall fail or fade away, as the smoak, Psal. 37.20. David compares sin to the fat of lambs offered for the burnt sacrifices: which is easily dissolved and melted upon the altar; such is the melting of the iniqui∣ty signified by Ramasses: from whence they journeyed to Succoth, that is, Booths, Tents, or Tabernacles. That was their first journey. They encamped at Succoth; which was the occasion, that the Lord took, for instituting the feast of Tabernacles, according to Levit. 23.42, 43. All they who keep this feast, are the home-born of Israel who
are pure in heart. Psal. 73.1. Israelites indeed, in whom there is no guile, John 1.47. who walk according to the rules of the feast, Gal. 6.16. whereof we have heard the first. The eighth day Israel must have a solemn assembly, or rather, a restraint and retention. The second rule of the feast, is. 2. Ye shall do no servile work therein; word for word, ye shall do no work of servitude. [Therein] is a supplement, how need∣ful, I shall shew anone. Herein we must inquire, 1. what this servile work or work of servitude is. And it is hard to say, since disputes of the Canonists and Summists about it, have made it intricate. They conclude and agree most-what, that by a servile work is to be understood some corporal, mechanical or artificial work; how be it they hence except works of necessity to be done, and such as whereby men may serve one another in love. Also by a servile work, they under∣stand journeying, dancing, singing, fidling, hunting, fishing, fowling, painting, marketing, going to law, doing any work for a reward; whence in the Arabic version a servile work, is cal∣led a work of gain or for gain. Light of nature taught the heathen, that on their holy days and feast days, they must do no work. So Tully in his 2d. book de le∣gibus. And Macrobius in his first book saith, the Priests affirm, that their Festivals are polluted, if any work be done in them. Only they say, Feriis agi licere, quod praetermissum noceret, that such work may be done on their Holy dayes, which might do hurt if left undone; as to draw an Ox out of a pit. Whereby it appears, that the Gentiles knew not only the law of nature, but somewhat of the Gospel also. For this sentence of Scaevola the high Priest hath good conformity with what the only true high Priest delivers up∣on like occasion, touching the Sabbath, Luke 13.15, 16. According to this account, we may finde somewhat like Chri∣stianity even among the idolatrous Heathen; yea, the Heathen, if we consider, and compare them according to their light, with many who believe themselves to be the only Christians, they may shame them and all other, who place the breach of the Sab∣bath in sitting at their doors, or walking a turn in the field. Which haply may be as necessary for some man, as plucking a Sheep out of a pit on the Sabbath day: And how much is a man better then a Sheep? saith our Lord, Matth. 12.12. And thence he there con∣cludes, That it is lawful to do well on the Sabbath dayes. We must therefore inquire yet further what a servile work is. Others have conceived, that by a servile work, is to be under∣stood such work as a Servant or Handmaid is wont to do; and thus the LXX call it ; which because it may signifie a work tending to divine worship, which is most-what called , therefore they would rather turn it , manual labour,
or work with own hands. But surely the Lord would not destroy his own Primitive institution, or make that unlawful to be done, which he himself commanded our first parents to do, and that in the state of innocency. For so we read, that the Lord commanded them to subdue the earth, Gen. 1.28. and 2.15. Its said that the Lord God took the man, and put him in the Garden of Eden, , to till it; which is the word before us, here rendred ser∣vile, or of servitude: doubtless if such a work were at any time unlawful to be done, the Lord would not have commanded them, while they were in their integrity, to do it. We are therefore yet to seek what is that servile work, which is here forbidden to be done on the eighth day. There is no question but Israel, accord∣ing to the flesh, understood by a work or works of servitude, such as they wrought in Egypt; when the Egyptians made them serve with rigour,Exod. 1. v. 14. and made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in Morter, and in Bricks, and in all service in the field, with all their work, wherein they wrought with rigour. But whereas old things are past away,2 Cor. 5. v. 17. and behold in Christ all things () are made new; and according to the promise, the Lord now brings his people again out of the land of Egypt, Zach. 10.10. we must understand now other servile works answerable unto the spiritual Egypt, the land of Ham the servant. And there∣fore Origen interprets the doing of Israels works in Egypt, Opera carnis, terrena opera, opera seculi, actûs terrae & lutea explere ministe∣ria, to do the works of the flesh, earthly works, worldly works, deeds of the earth, and to fulfil durty offices or services. It rests therefore, that, since, according to our Lords decision, it is lawful to do well on the Sabbathday, well-doing is not forbidden on the eighth day; so that the sirvile work is the sinful work; & who∣soever commits sin, is the servant of sin, John 8.34. Hence it is, that the sinful man yields his members servants to iniquity unto iniquity, (that is, from one degree of iniquity unto another,) and so he becomes the servant of sin, Rom. 6.19.20. A servant of corrup∣tion, 2 Pet. 2.19. A vassal unto divers lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3.3. So that every sin is a servile work, such as rvery ones ruling lust commands him to do. The reason why no such servile work is to be done on the eighth day, may appear from 1. Divine authority forbidding it; the Lord saith, ye shall do no servile work. 2. In regard of the work it self, which is  and , sin and iniquity, unlaw∣ful in its own nature; and therefore it brings a prohibition with it; its that which ought not to be done. 3. In regard of the quality of the work forbidden, servile work, a work of servitude; and there∣fore mis-beseeming, yea, unlawful for those whom Christ made free. 4. In respect of the eighth day; which is the day of the Spirit, as hath been shewen; and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there
is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. Yea, 5. The seventh day imports a cessa∣tion and rest from all servile work. No Manna was then to be ga∣thered, Exod. 16.6. No labour for the meat that perisheth, John 6.27. No distracting care, what we shall eat, or what we shall drink, if we have tasted, that the Lord is gratious, 1 Pet. 2.3. No journeying on the Sabbath, Exod. 16.29. but every one must tarry in his place. Now God himself is  the place, and its one of the Names of God. And if all our works be wrought in God, John 3.21. we shall then keep the Sabbath well unto the Lord. Cain went from his presence, and then whither went he? he dwelt in Nod, Instability. Nimrod went from him, and wrought a servile work; he built his Babel, his work of confusion. No fire was to be kindled on the Sabbath day, Exod. 35.3. Ye read of iniquity burn∣ing like a fire, Esay 9.18. A fire of envie, which is not kindled on the true Sabbath, Esay 11.13. A fire of legal zeal (which, I know, will burn against this exposition of the Sabbath) in some yong Dis∣ciples, like those, Luke 9.54. which is there quenched. No buy∣ing or selling must be on the Sabbath, Nehem. 13.15. For the time is short, that they, who buy, shall be as though they possessed not, 1 Cor. 7.30. Accordingly the Prophet speaking of the great Sabbath, saith, there shall be no Canaanite, that is, no Merchant, no buyer or seller in the house of the Lord, Zach. 14.21. There must be no bearing of burdens on the Sabbath, Jer. 17.22.Hebr. 12. v. 1. We must lay aside every weight that presseth down and , the sin that so easily besets us in every circum∣stance. And therefore the Lord comforts his people against Assur, that is the besieging sin, Esay 10.24. And he gives a reason, ver. 27. In that day his burden shall be removed from off thy shoulder,Esay 10. v. 27. and his yoke from off thy neck; and his yoke shall be dissolved or bro∣ken (,) because of () the unction or the anointing of the Spirit of God, which gives the true liberty. Yea, the Lord mindes his people, Levit. 26.13. of his redemption and freeing them from the Egyptian slavery; I am, saith he, the Lord your God,Lev. 26. v. 13. which brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, from being bondmen to them, and I have broken the bands of your yoke, and made you go , In erectione, erect or upright; which is the posture of liberty and freedom. And therefore the Chald. Paraphrast turns it  In libertate, in freedom: as the contrary posture of being bowed down, is a signe of bondage and servitude, Rom. 11.10. Ever bow thou down their back. 1. Observe we hence, what that is which enslaves and abaseth those who otherwise are most noble and free-born; what else but servile work, or work of servitude? Even Adam who was the son of God, by his fall, became the servant of sin. And, of all A∣dams posterity, Ham the son of just Noah, so noble, that he was by divine estimation, better then all men of his age, and taken in
exchange for the world, Ecclus. 44.17. His son Ham, by his ini∣quity, became a servant of servants; so that the Egyptians, his off∣spring, have been, and yet are, until this day, the Drudges of all Nations, as I have formerly shewen, on Gen. 9.25. And he hath stained all his issue with a black spot spread over all their bodies; a mark of a black sinful soul. Yea, the Israelites of the noble stock of Abraham, free-born, were yet abased and sold under sin, and became the servants of Cushan Rishathaim (even the blackness of both iniquities, inward and outward) and him they served eight years, the full time of the spirit of bondage) until they cried unto the Lord; and he raised up a Saviour in the fulness of time, until Gods time,Judges 3. v. 8, 9. that is, Othniel, came, even the Saviour, and delivered them, Judges 3.8, 9. An express figure of Christ our Saviour, whom God the Fa∣ther raised up, and sent him to bless us by turning every one of us from our iniquities, Acts 3.26. And accordingly Christ, in Gods time, even in the fulness of time, he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from the blackness of all iniquity, outward and in∣ward; and that he might purifie unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. How free was Ahab, even the King of Israel? yet he sold himself to commit iniquity, & became a very servant. How much more free was King David? yet hear how he groans under the burden of his sins; Mine iniquities, saith he, have come over mine head, as an heavie burden; they are too heavie for me; and, as a man bowed under his burden, ver. 6. I am wreathed or wryed and pressed down exceedingly,Psal. 38. v. 6. Psal. 38.6. So was the noble daughter of Abraham whom Satan had made crooked and bowed down, a figure of the noble heaven-born soul, which is by sin averse from heaven and heavenly things, and bowed down to the earth, and minding earthly things, yea, abased even unto Hell. 2. The eighth day is a day of liberty. It is the day of the spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. Howbeit its a Paradox; a day of restraint, yet a day of liberty. It is a restraint from sin and restraint and binding unto God; which is to be free indeed. Gods service is perfect freedom. No man is ever made or permitted to be so free, indeed so licentious, as to be left to the bent and inclination of his own will; but as he is freed from the bondage of sin and servile works, he comes under the yoke and service of Christ and his righteousness. And this is the end of our redemp∣tion, that being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, we should serve him, (our Redeemer,) without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the dayes of our life, Luke 1.74, 75. So the Apostle,Rom. 6. v. 22. Rom. 6.22. being made free from sin and  made servants of righteousness. For this end, our conscience is purged by the blood and Spirit of Christ, that we may serve the
living God, Hebr. 9.14. And for this end, the people pray for de∣liverance from their enemies, that they might serve the Lord. And we may well confess and pray with them, 1 Sam. 12.10. we have served Baalim and Ashteroth, our Lording lusts, our riches, our flocks (they are our Baalim and Ashteroth) now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee. O ye sons and daughters of God, ye who are hasting the coming or presence () of the day of God,2 Pet. 3. v. 12. and tending toward the eighth day, desiring to become born of the Spirit, let not us abase our selves to the servile works of sin. We are of the light and of the day, and ought to walk as the children of light and of the day. This is Christs day which Abraham saw, and rejoyced,John 8. ver. 56. John 8.56. : Abraham your father rejoyced that he might see that my day. Not only that he foresaw the time of Christ in the flesh, though that also may be a truth; as Abraham desired to see by vision, or experience, or some other way of revelation, when, or what manner of time, the time of Christ should be; when in spirit he desired a signe to assure him that he should possess the land of rest; whereby the spiritual promises of God were signified: For so he saith, Lord! how shall I know, that I shall possess it? Then God shewed him a vision, Gen. 15.8. So that in that sense it may be a truth, that Abraham then had seen that day of Christ. But doubtless Abraham had seen Christs day in his soul and spirit, and had obtained the rest of his soul, even the day of Christ. And this appears evidently by the following words. Thou art not yet fifty years old, say they, and hast thou seen Abra∣ham? Our Lord answers; Before Abraham was born, I am. Be∣fore Abraham was born; so it is in the Greek;  A ; and the Latin, Antequam Abraham fieret, before Abraham was made or born, I am; not, I was. The former before Abraham was, it notes a temporary being. I am, signifies the eternal being proper to God alone, signified by  Gods proper name; a be∣ing without beginning or end, and best signified by the present, I am. And so the Jews understood him. Thus oftentimes Christ makes known his eternal being, by I am, though our Translators obscure it, by turning the words otherwise. This eternal being, this light, this day of the Lord, Abraham saw, and rejoyced: This is that , that Lords day wherein S. John the Divine was, Revel. 1.10. This is the day which the Lord hath made, Psal. 118.24. we will rejoyce and be glad in it; he hath made and honoured this day above all other, as he is understood to have made Moses and Aaron, 1 Sam. 12.6. Thus he made twelve, Mark 3.14. he ad∣vanced them, and preferred them before all others. And thus the Lord made the eighth day. The eighth day supposeth all the other seven preceding. And since Non pervenitur ab extremo ad extremum nisi per medium,
nor can we come to the eighth but by the intermediate seven dayes: Let us therefore enquire into the seven dayes preceding, which may be some wayes helpful towards our attainment unto the eighth day. Whereas therefore our unregenerate estate is compared to darkness, wherein we walk, not knowing whither we go; of which the Apostle, Rom. 1.21. They became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkned; and Ephes. 4.17, 18. Acts 28.26, 27. Hearing ye shall hear and not understand; that the true light, the day of the Lord may shine unto us. Let us consider these dayes 1. With reference to Gods crea∣tion, and according to their mysterie; and 2. More plainly, and in relation to our duty. The number of six is the first perfect number; because it results and ariseth from the combinations of the parts, one, two, and three. Whence the Pythagoreans call it Gamon, the number of Mariage; because the parties joyned one to other, beget the whole number. The parts also multiplyed one by other, pro∣duce the same. As six times one, thrice two, twice three. A number fit for the fabrick of the world; which consists of the first proportion, as of four to two; which, with the principles from which it ariseth, and to which it tends, makes the Diapason, of all harmonies and agreements of sounds, the most harmonical and consonant. And therefore Pythagoras applyed it to Wedlock, and more emi∣nently to that mariage and conjunction of the creatures among themselves. And this number being the first perfect number a∣grees to the perfect Architect and Workman, as also to his work, to whom & to which, nothing is wanting, nothing is superfluous. And therefore when the Creator had finished his work of creati∣on, and produced and parted it into this number of six, Moses adds his Epiphonema; Perfecti sunt igitur coeli & terra & omnis ex∣ercitus eorum, Gen. 2.1. Thus the Heavens and the Earth were fini∣shed, and all the host of them. And therefore Orpheus who had read these works of God in Genesis, (as Socrates, Plato, and many others of the learned Gen∣tiles had done) he put a Period and a full close to his Hymns and Songs, in the sixth generation; because the argument of his Hymns were, in this sixth generation, wholly concluded and perfe∣cted; because in that number of dayes, the great workman, God himself had finished his work in six dayes. Now if more curiously we consider the egress and progress of the Workmaster, the number of six, wherein this Fabrick was made, is fitly represented by a Triangle, whose base is three, the top one, and the middle two. For the whole Fabrick or work of the World, is raised, & proceeds from the three subsistences which
are called persons, whose works Ad extra are undevided; and they tend unto one end, the glory of the one and onely God. The Transitus or passage is by a Binarius, a Duality, by two, which is the matter; and is consummate and perfected by union, which is the form. Thus the divine Philosopher in his Timaeus, Where God, saith he, the Maker of the World, hath produced the number of Heaven and Earth, he presently made the light, whereby the Creators might be distinguished and distinctly known; the Chaos was the matter, the light the form; the first dayes work. On the se∣cond day, he set the Firmament between the waters above and be∣neath, even the Divine Wisdom and the Humane, lest there should be a greater influence then this inferiour World could receive. This is the second dayes work; which the antient Divines account unhappy; and the Jews of old read mournfully with the Accent ; as grieving for that Obstacle, that bar which hindred the influence of the Divine Wisdom and goodness upon us. The Fountain of Divine Grace and Goodness, it is most plentu∣ous, most exuberant, and abundant; but the Divine Justice weighs out unto every one its measure whereof it is capable. For unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift Christ, Ephes. 4.7. divided to every one according as he will,Ephes. 4. v. 7.1 Cor. 12.11. On the third day, according to the formal number which is three, the formes of things are explained, and thereby they are severed one from other. That the distinction of these might appear more evidently, the the two great Lights and all the other Stars are made and set in Heaven; and that is the fourth dayes work. On the fifth day signified by  which is the character of life, the living souls were made, which fill the air and water. On the sixth signified by , which also is a character of life, the living creatures were made, which replenish the earth. Last of all when the house is builded and finished, the Man, the Lord of it, is made in the most perfect form, even the similitude and image of his God. Now because the Lord in six dayes made Heaven and Earth, and rested the seventh day, therefore man is commanded to la∣bour six dayes, and to rest the seventh day. The reason of this consequence, is; man was made in the image and similitude of his God. From this, when man fell, he was again invited thereunto, to imitate his God in doing and lea∣ving undone and renewing his work in labour and in rest. As by the six dayes, our God had his egress and rested in the seventh, so man, fallen man hath his regress and return to his God by his six dayes of abour; and rests in the seventh. As before God made the World, there was darkness, &c. The
like we read, Jer. 4.23. As therefore God said, Let there be light, and he who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, shines in the heart, 2 Cor. 4.6. The light that enlightens every one coming into this world; that light of faith, which precedes in our regress and return unto our God. Deus lumen perfecit operibus suis. 2. There follows Discrimen honestorum & turpium, that , the Firmament dividing between those waters above, and those wa∣ters beneath, even that spirit of faith discerning, whereby we know how to refuse the evil and choose the good, to sever the spiritual and heavenly love, from the carnal and earthly: other wise the former, as experience often proves, would easily degenerate into the later,Col. 2. v. 5. unless there were , Col. 2.5. A Fir∣mament of faith and divine and spiritual wisdom, to put difference between them. 3. Thirdly, there is a separation of the waters from the earth, when the natural and sensual passions are gathered together and made subject to divine reason. Then the minde free from sensual delights and other perturbations, as the earth dryed from the waters, must bring forth the Plants of Gods planting. 4. Because the light must not be hid and put under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick, that may give light to all, and shine before men, two great lights; the Sun to rule the day, even the great light, by which we see God the light; In lumine tuo videbimus lucem: and the less light to rule the night, even humane wisdom to guide us in the affairs of this life, which is but as the night, in regard of the day light of Heaven. The Stars are examples of the holy ones, they who turn many to righteousness who shine as the Stars, Dan. 12. to whom the children of Abraham are compared, Gen. 1 5. 5. Moving creatures, the motions and inspirations of Gods Spi∣rit: The gifts and graces of the holy Spirit , Charismata. So one of the most ancient and pious Fathers understood that word. By these, we take the wings of a Dove, and we flye  upon the face of the firmament by contemplation and eleva∣tion of the minde, above all earthly things. By these our soul escapes as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowler. 6. Then the earth brings forth the living souls, even such as live unto God and are conformed unto him; with whom God is so delighted, that he approves it is good, and cooperates with us, saying, Let us make Man, after our image; even male and fe∣male; the female, the thoughts, 2 Cor. 11. which receive the seed of God; A facie tua concepimus Domine & peperimus spiritum salu∣tis; the male, when he works according to grace received. Thus the man being perfected, is fruitful, and multiplies and brings forth fruit and fills the earth, even the earthly man with the gifts of Gods grace; so that the heart and the flesh rejoyce in the living
God. Thus he brings under the earth and subdues it, and all the beasts. Thus the man, after his six dayes egress returns and comes to the seventh; and so both meet in the Sabbath, the true rest, Esay 64.5. Thou meetest him that rejoyceth and worketh righte∣ousness, that remembers thee in thy wayes. Behold the glorious patern propounded to our imitation, even God himself. God goes out of himself by six dayes or degrees, and rests in the seventh; and man goes out of himself by six dayes, and he also rests in the seventh. But whereas there are two things in rest considerable, rest from something, and rest in something, this is the first rest; even rest with Christ according to the flesh, being armed with the same minde and dying to him. The second rest is in Christ according to the Spirit, even in the eighth day; when we return again into God, as our Lord saith, John 16.28. I come forth from the Fa∣ther, and am come into the world; again, I leave the world, and go to my Father. For we are also come forth from the same Fa∣ther (Luke 3. ult. Acts 17.) into this troublesome world, that we may return by the like, six dayes; and then finde our rest in God. Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord; even so saith the Spi∣rit, that they rest from their labours in Christ; to whom they live, who are dead unto the world; and then arise with Christ unto a better life, even the resurrection and the life of the eighth day: I am come that they might have life, and have it in more abun∣dance. 2. Hitherto we have considered these seven dayes preceding the eighth, with reference to Gods creation, and according to their mysterie; let us now consider them more plainly, and in refe∣rence to our duty: And so we read of six legal dayes or lights of the Law, which must fit and prepare us and lead us unto the seventh and eighth day. I read them in a very pious Author who is called Hiel, and stiled by Arias Montanus (who himself was a great light of his age) Christianae veritatis viventis testis, cui nomen ipsa Christi virtus & veritas Hiel indidit; a witness of the Christian living truth, to whom the power and truth of Christ gave the name Hiel. The first six lights he names in this order. 1. The Light. 2. The Hearing. 3. The Understanding. 4. Confession. 5. Obediencè. 6. De∣light and Pleasure in the law of God. Which we may illustrate thus. We have the two former, Prov. 20.12. The seeming eye and the hearing ear, the Lord hath made them both. Leah is labour which brings forth Reuben the son of light, and Simeon the hearing in the humanity. Out of the mouth of the Lord comes under∣standing, Prov. 2.6. or wisdom, which is to fear the Lord and to depart from evil, Job 28.28. Then follows confession of sin, which we now forsake and finde mercy: whence we take courage to
be obedient unto righteousness, Rom. 6.16. So that by frequency of obedient actions we attain to delight in the law of God, ac∣cording to the inward man, Rom. 7.22. This is that they call a good will, which is , the Vigil, Eve, or preparation for the Sabbath day, or rest from sin, which is the dawning of the eighth day, when the day-Star ariseth in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. O ye free-born Israelites! Who desire the appearing of the last day, the great day of the feast of Tabernacles, let us finish our six dayes works, and keep the seventh a holy Sabbath, a restraint, a rest from all our sins;2 Pet. 3. v. 11.12.18. and hasten the coming or presence of the eighth day, the day of God, in all holy conversations and godlinesses. So shall the Day-Star arise in our hearts, and the Son of God will  take up his Tabernacle with us. To him be glory both now and to the day of eternity, 2 Pet. 3.18.
Deuteronomy. These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel, on this side Jor∣dan,Deut. 1. ver. 1, 2. in the Wilderness, in the Plain, over against the Red Sea, between Paran and Toph l, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Dizahab. (There are eleven dayes journey from Horeb, by the way of Mount Seir, unto Kadeshbarnea.] In these words before us, is the Title of the fifth book of Moses, and the Argument of that Book. The Title of the Book, is either that in the Hebrew, which is the same with the first words of the Book, , These are the words; (and there is the like reason of all the other four Books of the Pentateuch. Whose Titles are the first words of their respective Books;) Or, that of the Greek Interpreters, , Deuteronomie; which Title other languages, by a common consent, have followed, and ours among the rest. And they meet happily in it. For the Title is or ought to be Communi fax, as a common light to the whole Work, whose Title it is. And indeed such is this of , to this Book; as we shall shew anon. Meantime the LXX and their followers have good warrant for this Title out of Deut. 17.18. Where Moses faith concerning this Book, the King shall write  which they render, , Deuteronomie. So Hierom and Pagnin, which yet Arias Montanus would rather express by Duplum legis, a Duplicate of the Law. Ours rather, a Copy of the Law: Others, Secundam le∣gem,Deut. 17. v. 18. Josh. 8. v. 32. the Second Law. Ours rather, a Copy of the Law. So likewise Josh. 8.32. I believe, they might very well here, as in the Title, have retained the word Deuteronomie. For this Title bodes something more excellent in this Book, according to some Proverbs and Proverbial speeches, , Secundis melioribus, Second things, or thoughts better; Secundae res are prosperaeres, prosperity; and—melior fortuna seque∣tur; better fortune will follow, &c. The excellency of this Book therefore appears, in that it is Secunda Lex, a Second Law; or, as some have rendred, Deuteronomium, Secundilegium. For a new Law well beseeemed a new people, such as this was;Numb. 26. v. 64, 65. according to Numb. 26.64, 65. Among these (mustered by Moses and Eliazar)
there was not a man of those mustered by Moses and Aaron the Priest who mustered the sons of Israel in the Wilderness of Sinai. For the Lord had said of them, Dying they shall die in the Wil∣derness: And there was not left a man of them, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Jehoshuah the son of Nun. And as the Law and the people were new, so was the Governour new also, even Jehoshuah. Not that this Book containeth a new Law, but indeed the iteration and repetition of the old. As S. John writes of the old and new Commandement of love. Beside, this Book hath great affinity with the Gospel, which is often by the Antients called Nova Lex, the New Law, and known by the name of the New Testament. So it is called by S. Hierom, Evangelica le∣gis praefiguratio, a prefiguration of the Evangelical Law. For this Book of Deuteronomie hath in it much of the Gospel, as will easi∣ly appear unto the humble and docible readers of it. Moses ex∣presly saith so much,Deut. 29. v. 1. Deut. 29.1. These are the words of the Co∣venant which the Lord commanded Moses to strike with the sons of Israel in the land of Moab, Beside the Covenant (mark that) which he stroke with them in Horeb. And what other covenant is that but the second and new Covenant, the second or new Law, which is Deuteronomie. Which is the same whereof the Prophet speaks, Jer. 31.31. Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that I will strike a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Israel,Jer. 31. v. 32, 33. and with the house of Judah. Not according to the Co∣venant which I stroke with their Fathers in the day, that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt (which my Covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord: which later words our Translators turn otherwise in the margent: but neither text nor margent will yield so good a sense as if instead of  [I was an husband] we read,  [I rejected or abhorred them;] and so the word is used, Levit. 26.43. 2 Sam. 1.21. and the sense is plain, and will agree with the paral∣lel Scripture, Hebr. 8.9. , and I regarded them not, or, I cared not for them, or rejected them. And with Hie∣rom, Ego neglexi eos, I neglected them.) But this shall be the Cove∣nant that I will strike with the house of Israel, after those dayes, saith the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward part, and write it upon their heart, and will be their God, and they shall be my people, &c. That Evangelical Covenant is intimated by S. Paul, 2 Cor. 3.3. Hitherto we have considered the Title of this fifth Book of Moses, stiled, These words, according to the Hebrew; and accord∣ing to the LXX called Deuteronomie, the Second Law written in the heart: which the Lord be pleased to make good unto us! Come we now to consider somewhat of the Argument of this Book, in the following words.
On this side Jordan, in the Wilderness, in the Plain,Deut. 1. v. 1. over against the Red-Sea.] These and all other places here named are held most-what to be circumstantial to the speech of Moses. Howbeit what they render, on this side Jordan, , is no more on this side, then on that, but in transitu, in the passage, that is, when they were now ready to pass over Jordan. As for the Red Sea, concerning it, I have formerly spoken; but here is no , no Sea expressed, but only  which they turn Red, which is indeed the Reed-Sea rather. But I have shewen reason elsewhere why the LXX and others render it the Red Sea, as here , neer the Red Sea; and the Vulg. Latin, Prope rubrum mare. But if here the Red Sea were to be understood, how could the same place be neer Jordan, as it is said to be, both in the Greek and Latin? And therefore Cajetan and others affirm, that  is here taken for Cannetum, a place where Cannae, Reeds grow; or, as  also signifies, Finis or Ter∣minus, the term or bound of the promised land; as neer to Mare mortuum or Lacus Asphaltites, the Dead-Sea, the bound of the Holy Land. But indeed why should Moses be so extreme curious in descri∣bing the place where he spake these words to all Israel? It is true, the Argument he treats of, is of great moment; but so likewise are many other, which are not so circumstantiated with names of places; as the first giving the Law, Exod. 20. The Apostasie of Is∣rael, Numb. 13.14. In both Scriptures the actions are named and specified each by one place, and no more. And there are many like. Nor were some of these places named, so nigh the passage over Jordan, where these words were spoken, as to specifie it; as ap∣pears by most of them, if we compare them with the Chorogra∣phical Tables. Yea, some words understood of places, will hard∣ly prove so, as will be manifest unto those who shall well exa∣mine them. The Chaldee Paraphrast opens the whole business, declaring summarily in these few words, the Argument of the whole Book of Deuteronomie, and the practise of Moses herein conformable un∣to other Governours of Gods Church. For thus he understood and explained this verse, as minding and reproving Israel for their sins committed in the places mentioned. Thus by, [These words] he understands hard and reprehensory words: Moses repro∣ved them, saith he, because they sinned in the Wilderness, and be∣cause they tempted God in the Plains over against the Red Sea, and in Pharan. Where they murmured against Manna. And in Hazeroth, where they provoked God for flesh. And in that they made themselves a golden Calf. So he interprets Dizahab; which is from  and  sufficientia auri, whence the LXX turn the
word , and the Vulg. Latin, Ubi auri est plurimum, where there is much gold. And many suppose Dizahab the pro∣per name of a place, which is no where else named; nor doth Hierom mention it, where purposely he treats De locis Hebraicis. The Appellative signifies the abuse of their plenty of gold to the making of an Idol. Which opinion of the Chald. Par. is so probable, that Rabbi Salomon, and Munster, and others follow it. Yea, Rupertus was so far perswaded of this, that hereby he explains the Lords words, Numb. 14.22. [They have tempted me these ten times,] to be proper∣ly understood, and not taken for many, as elsewhere, Levit. 26.26. Job. 19.3. But whether exactly that number of provocations may be found in these words, as Ainsworth on Numb. 14.22. hath recko∣ned up just so many, I leave to their inquiry, who have more leisure. Lastly, according to this interpretation, the Chald. Paraph. brings in Moses now toward his death, reproving the sons of Israel; as Moses had brought in Israel himself doing the like, immediate∣ly before his end, Gen. 49.1, 2, 3.—33. In like manner Samuel in his old age sharply rebuked the people, 1 Sam. 12. And that great example of all Governours, the Lord Jesus Christ, whom the Lord raised up like unto Moses, He, before his asscension into heaven, left a severe reproof with his commission to the Apostles, Mark 16.14. But let us proceed unto the following words. (There were eleven dayes journey from Horeb by the way of Mount Seir,Deut. 1. v. 2. unto Kadeshbarnea.) The word journey is not in the Text; howbeit the literal sense will bear it well enough. The words might well be let loose from the Parenthesis, both because they are consentany with the former verse, as also because they agree with ver. 6, 7, Where the Lord commands the people to take their journey from Horeb, as they did ver. 19. and came to Kadeshbarnea. They agree very well with ver. 1. and make good proof of that sense which the Chaldee Paraphrast gives of it, viz. A Reprehension of the people for their sin: There was eleven dayes journey from Horeb the way of Mount Seir unto Kadeshbarnea. They had now gone thorow that great and terrible Wilderness, and were come to the con∣fines of the promised land, v. 19. and that in eleven dayes. Whence we may consider that inestimable loss of the unbe∣lieving Israelites, who in so short a time had finished so much of their journey, and refused, through unbelief and disobedience to make further progress toward the holy land. Insomuch, as what remained of their journey, was not finished in less then thirty and eight years; which, had they been willing and obedient, according to the proportion of their journey past, might have been accompli∣shed in less then so many dayes, Deut. 2.14.
Let the Israel of God take notice of this; That there intercede eleven dayes or legal lights, between Mount Horeb [the Sword, and terrour, and killing letter of the Law] and Kadeshbarnea [the move∣able, or mutable holiness of the child] and that in compasing Mount  or Seir, [that formidable doctrine which causeth horripila∣tion, and makes the hair stand on end through fear.] Besides, the number Undenarius, eleven is of ill omen, as being that which is called in the Interlineary Gloss, Numerus transgres∣sionis, the number of transgression, since the mysteries of it, for the most part, bode somewhat that's evil. It is S. Augustins observation, lib. 15. de Civit. Dei, cap. 20. That the tenth generation of those who built up the City of God, ended in Noah: But Cain, who was the builder of the Devils City, he had eleven in his posterity before the flood. Quoniam lex denario numero praedicatur, unde est memorabilis ille decalogus; profectò numerus undenarius, quoniam transgreditur denarium, transgressionem legis, ac per hoc, peccatum significat. Because the Law is delivered in the number of ten, whence that Decalogue is memorable; surely the number Eleven, because it transgresseth (or goes beyond the denary or number of Ten,) it signifies a transgression of the Law, and thereby Sin. The same Father gives further instance of eleven Curtains, Ʋndecim vela Cilicina. In Cilicio recordatio est peccati, propter haedos ad sinistram futuros; quòd confitentes in Cilicio proster∣nimur. Progenies ergo Adam per Cain scelerationem, undenario numero finitur, quo peccatum significatur. Eleven Curtains of Goats hair, (or Sackcloth;) In Goats-hair is the remembrance of Sin, by reason of the Goats which are to be at the left hand. Because when we confess in Sackcloth, we are humbled or cast down. Therefore the Progenie of Adam, by the wickedness of Cain is finished in the number of eleven, whereby Sin is signified. And this number falling short of twelve, is that notable number of the twelve Patriarchs and Apostles; as there were eleven children of Ham before the flood, sons of Canaan, Gen. 10.15.—18. In un∣denario fuerunt Apostoli, tempore passionis, quando defecerunt à fide. The Apostles were in the number Eleven in the time of the Passi∣on, when they fell from the faith, saith S. Bernard. And as the num∣ber eleven is ominous in regard of the sin, so likewise is it unlucky in respect of the punishment. For the like number of dreadful Epi∣thites, we meet withal, noting the day of the Lord, most terrible unto sinful men, Zephan. 1.15, 16. Where we have a description of the day of the Lord, by Eleven adjuncts and circumstances of it, which render that day most formidable and terrible. For its cal∣led a day of wrath, and that day brings forth Twins; and every one of them speaks terrour and affrightment; and imports an abhorrency unto our nature. How much more the whole num∣ber of them, and that number, the number of Eleven? which in
it self alwayes bodes some evil or other; That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distre a day of wastness and deso∣lation; a day of darkness and gloominess; a day of clouds and thick darkness; a day of the Trumpet and alarm against the fen∣ced Cities, and against the high Towers. 1. Wherefore let no man hastily presume of his attainments, as if he were already come into the heavenly Canaan, the land of Rest. There are eleven dayes from Horeb, by the way of Mount Seir, to Kadeshbarnea. Moses describes that way, ver. 19. of this Chapter; when we departed from Horeb, we went through all that great, that terrible wilderness: (the words are ful of Emphases) which ye saw by the way of the Mountain of the Amorites, as the Lord our God commanded us; and we came unto Kadeshbarnea. After we receive the Law, in Horeb, that is 1. in heat of concupi∣scence accidentally stirred up by the Law, Rom. 7.8. 2. In drought, without any rain or dew of grace to extinguish or allay it. 3. In terrour of the sword, that killing letter. All which S. Hierom under∣stands by Horeb. We then come into the Wilderness, the Wil∣derness of Paran; where Hagar and Israel dwelt, Gen. 21.20, 21. which are allegorically understood of the first covenant, saith S. Paul, Gal. 4.21.—25. A solitary, a lonely condition, which is described,Deut. 8. v. 15. Deut. 8.15. That great Wilderness, a state of long solitude, and desertion; and that terrible, by reason of the fiery Serpent, (the word is singular) the Devil, which usually frequents such Deserts, and annoys us with his venemous temptations, as with fiery darts of the evil one,Ephes. 6. v. 16. , Ephes. 6.16. He allures us with blandish∣ments and inticements, until we embrace his suggestions; and then, as the Scorpion, he smites with the tail of despairing re∣morse, accusation, and condemnation. Such Briars and Thorns are with us in Sinai, and we dwell among such Scorpions, Ezech. 2.6. A place of thirst () [thirst after comfort and life] but in which there are no waters, [of spiritual consolation.] All that great, that terrible Wilderness we pass thorow, before we come to Kadeshbarnea [the unstable holiness of the childehood] and then we are not yet come unto the rest. 2. Let no son of Israel despair. There are but eleven dayes from Mount Horeb unto Kadeshbarnea. Passuri graviora! dabit Deus his quo{que} finem. We must endure greater and more grievous evils then these, by how much we draw nearer to the heavenly rest: And our God will put an end to those also. It is at the Lords command that we take this journey, Deut. 1.19. And he is leading us thorow that great, that terrible Wilderness. He is bringing forth water out of the Rock of Flint: He is feeding thee with Manna in the Wilderness: giving thee to eat the same spiritual meat,Deut. 8. v. 15, 16. and causing thee to drink the same spiritual drink, 1 Cor. 10. Deut. 8.15, 16. The words are in the Participle, and
imply the continued acts, the perpetual guidance of our God, his causing us to drink into one spirit, and feeding us continually with the bread of life. Wherefore be weak, that is, acknowledge thy weakness; and thou shalt be strong. So the Arabic Proverb. And the Apostle, Hebr. 11.34. Out of weakness they were made strong. Remember what befel the fearful and unbelieving Israe∣lites in Kadeshbarnea, in the wilderness of Paran; they were a∣fraid of the sons of Anac, and believed not in the mighty power of God; and so entred not into Gods rest; which is the Apostles main argument of Hebr. 3. and 4th Chapters, with allegorical allu∣sion to Num. 13. and 14 Chapters. Degeneres animos timor arguit—Fear proves base spirits, female and effeminate—, timerous Ismaelites, not valiant and couragious Israelites. Consider what he saith, who sits upon the throne, he who is  and , the first and the last, Revel. 21.1.—8. S. John having seen the new Heaven and the new Earth, and the holy City, the new Jerusalem; he heard the great voice, saying, the Tabernacle of God it with men, and he will take up his Tabernacle () with them, &c. then ver. 7. ,Rev. 21. v. 7, 8. he who is overcoming, shall inherit these things, or (according to another copie) , all things, and I will be to him a God, and he shall be a son unto me: But to the fearful, and unbelievers, and sin∣ners, and abominated ones, and murderers, and fornicators, and Sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, their portion is in the Lake burning with fire and brimstone; which is  that second death. Wherefore rest not in Kadeshbarnea; be not alwayes children, Ephes. 4.14. lest ye perish in the childehood, (as they did, Num. 14.) but v. 15. , attaining to the truth of these types and figures, by love, grow up unto Christ , in all things (or who is , all things, and in all things, Col. 3.11.) , be men, be valiant and couragious, through that faith which overcomes the world, 1 John 5.4. Fol∣lowing the Lords cloud of witnesses, Hebr. 12.1. who through faith , longsuffering, inherited the promises, Hebr. 6.12.Heb. 6. v. 12. With such victorious faith & such longsuffering endure ye travail and labour, your six dayes; so shall ye attain unto the seventh, the true Sabbath, the Rest-day of your souls, even Jesus Christ, even through Jesus Christ our Lord. The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many more as ye are, and blesse you, as he hath promised you.Deut. 1. v. 11.] These words contain Moses his Blessing of Israel. And as they are here ren∣dred, they make a good sense. But they reach not unto the full blessing, such as Moses intended, and the Lord had promised.
For whereas Moses acknowledgeth Gods blessing promised to Abraham, to be fulfilled in part unto Israel, he prayes for the ac∣complishment and fulness of it, in bringing in the true Israel of God, whereof the Israel according to the flesh, was a type and figure. The promise made to Abraham, was of a twofold seed; where∣of the one was, that it should be as the dust, Gen. 13.16. and as the sand on the sea shore, Gen. 22.17. The other, that it should be, as the Stars of heaven, Gen. 15.5. and 22.17. The former is fulfil∣led in Israel according to the flesh; the later in Israel according to the promise; according to which, Abrahams seed was to be cal∣led, Gen. 17.19.21. The former promise was made good unto the fathers of these Is∣raelites, to whom Moses here speaks; who were numerous and multiplyed, but of an hard and impenitent heart, Rom. 2.5. like the sand on the Sea-shore, and as the Dust, Gen. 13.16. minding earthly things, Phil. 3.19. The later part of Gods promise unto Abraham was fulfilled in the people to whom Moses here speaks, as he affirms, v. 10. The Lord your God hath multiplyed you; and behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude. Howbeit this accomplishment was only figurative; and it self was to be yet fulfilled in the true Israel. And therefore Moses prayes thus. The Lord God of your fathers adde beside, or over and above you,  as it were you, or, like unto you, or such as you, a thousand such as you are, that is, true Israelites, such as you represent in type. And thus many both antient and later Translators understand the words, and commend them to us in this sense. The LXX thus, The Lord God of your fathers , Addat vobis (not as the Latin Translators there turn it, Ut sitis, that ye may be, but) ut estis, as ye are. The Samaritan version, The Lord God of your fathers adde over and above you, as ye are. So the Ara∣bic, such as ye are. To the same purpose, the Tigurin Bible, and Vatablus, Addat super vos, sicut estis, that is, Hebr. Ʋt tales, quales estis, that such they may be as ye are. So the Spanish Bible, so Pisca∣tor and Pagnin. Howbeit Arias Montanus, though often very ju∣diciously he render by the Participle, what Pagnin turns by the Verb, yet both of them agree to render  Addat, the Lord adde, which is better here turnd by the Participle, and not harsh in En∣glish, The Lord God of your fathers be adding unto you, such as ye are! So that hereby is imported Gods continued act of adding unto his Church and people, such as they are. Which is very reasonable. For, 1. Such is the vertuous inclination of holy love in every pious soul, that it moveth and disposeth every one to his like; so that good men soon finde out one another. 2. The Divine Wisdom goeth about seeking such as are worthy of her, and sheweth her self
favourable unto them in the wayes, and metth them in every thought, Wisd. 6.16. according to what our Lord saith of the Fa∣ther,John 4. v. 23. Acts 2. v. 40.47. that , that he seeketh such worshipping him; and such he brings unto the Son, and is daily adding such unto his Church; according to what S. Luke saith, Acts 2.47. that God added unto the Church  those who being obedient unto the exhortation, v. 40. (, save your selves, or, be ye saved) saved themselves from the crooked or untoward generation; such , such saved ones, God added unto the Church daily. 3. Here∣in consists much of Gods blessing upon his people, that, addition of such, as they themselves are, is made unto them. Which the Psalmist proves, Psal. 115.13, 14. He will blesse them that fear the Lord, the small with the great: Wherein that followes;Psal. 115. v. 13, 14. the Lord will be adding  above you, above you, and above your children. 4. From such addition, or from addition of such, results the glory of God. So the Prophet Esay 26.15.Esay 26. v. 15. Thou hast added to the nation, (then followes) thou art glorified, viz. in regard of his faithfulness, in that he makes good his promised blessing. So that, under the figure of Israel here mentioned, and the increase of them, and addition unto them, Moses prayes for the Is∣rael of God; such as are pure in heart: unto whom, in special man∣ner, God is gratious; as Asaph saith, God is good unto Israel; and then he explains what Israel that is, and adds; to the pure in heart, Psal. 73.1. The like distinction our Lord intimates, John 1.47.John 1. v. 47. speaking of Nathanael, Behold, faith he, , an Israelite indeed (or truly,) in whom there is no guile. For so , veritas, the truth is oppo∣sed to types and figures very often in Scripture, Dan. 7.16.19. and 11.2. John 6.32. and 15.1. Hebr. 8.2. and 19.24. This is Israel indeed and truly. And such is the Israel which God respects and saves, and according to which, he is said to be the God of Israel. And therefore when the Apostle had spoken the wisdom of God among the perfect, and had declared the secrets of the divine dispensation, and shewen in what manner and order God declares his wrath on the vessels of wrath, and the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, and had now taught, that every one who is a vessel of wrath, he becomes such, because, through his hard∣ness and impenitent heart, he treasures up wrath against the day of wrath: but the vessels of mercy, are such, as have cleansed themselves from these, and have prepared themselves unto every good work, Rom. 9.27. He confirmes this doctrine, by the authority of the Prophet Esay 10.22. If the number, , of the sons of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, a remnant shall be saved. They who are not to be saved, are as the sand of the Sea; they who shall be saved, are as the Stars of heaven. For the speech contains both parts of the promise made to Abraham, Gen. 15. saith one of the pious Antients.
Howbeit I cannot but note a mistake of the Translators in the place named,Esay 10. v. 22. Rom. 9. v. 27. Esay 10.22. where they render  though; and in Rom. 9.27. they so render : both which, in both places of Scripture are conditionals, not discretives, and are to be turnd by Si, if, not, though. And as God could adde no other then such unto his Israel; so nei∣ther could Moses pray for any other than such to be added unto Gods Israel. For if the sons of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, an hard hearted, fruitless, and unprofitable people, if an earthly minded people, how ever numerous, yea innumerable, nor can God bless such, nor adde them to the Church of Christ; nor can Moses or any other true servant of God, pray for the addition of such. It is the advice of the Wise man; Desire not a multitude of unprofitable children, nei∣ther delight in ungodly sons; Though they multiply, rejoyce not in them, except the fear of God be with them. Trust not thou in their life, neither respect their multitude: For one that is just, is better then a thousand, &c. Which he proves by many examples of Gods judgements on the increase of sinful men, whom God pitied not, nor spared the six hundred thousand footmen who were gathered together in the hardness of their hearts, Ecclus. 16.1.—10. Consider this, O thou Israel of God! and endeavour to assimi∣late and make others like unto thy self, that they may be added unto thee, Esay 54: 1, 2, 3. and 60. and 61. and 62. And let all others know, that God seeks for such; and that, upon such is his blessing; and from such ariseth his glory; and such an Israel of God it is, for which Moses here prayes. And such are they, for whom he prayes who is like unto Moses, Acts 3.22. even the Christ of God, John 17.6.—20, 21. they are the pure in heart, such as are without guile, they are saved from their sins,Gal. 6. v. 16. and are conformable unto the will of God. On such an Israel, the Apostle also prayes for a blessing, as Christ himself did, as Moses here doth: As many as walk, or, whosoever shall walk orderly, according to this rule, (the words are ) peace be upon them, and mercy, and up∣on the Israel of God! Gal. 6.16. Judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him.Deut. 1. v. 16, 17. Ye shall not respect persons in judge∣ment.] Moses in these words gives two precepts to the Judges: 1. Affirmative: 2. Negative. The Affirmative, judge righteous∣ness between a man and his brother, and his stranger. For the word they turn righteously, is  justice, or righteousness, not  in righteousness; which might be rendred righteously. There is a broad difference between these two. For to judge righteously qualifies the Judge; but to judge righteousness, notes the object or matter judged; which is here commanded, and elsewhere we
read the like; as Deut. 16.20. Zach. 8.16. Psal. 58.1.Psal. 58. v. 1. (Where yet our Translators have turnd  uprightly for uprightness.) So the Chald. Paraphrast here hath  judge truth, inte∣grity, or uprightness. And the Vulg. Latin, Quod justum est, judicate, judge ye what is just. And thus Moses here gives precepts concern∣ing the object which ought to be just. And the like precept con∣cerning the object, we have, Zach. 8.16.Zach. 8. v. 16. Execute the judgement of truth and peace in your gates. Where the Hebrew is acknow∣ledged in the margent to be, judge truth and the judgement of peace. Elsewhere the person judging or otherwise acting, is qualified,Psal. 112. v. 5. as Psal. 112.5. The good man guides his affairs  in judgement. Moses puts both together, Levit. 19.15. Ye shall do no un∣righteousness in judgement, thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty: (there's both real and personal object, and lawes concerning both: then followes the law qualifying the Judge,) , in justitia, LXX, , in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour. Nor was this distinction unknown to the Philosopher, who puts difference between doing what is just, and doing the same justly; to which is required, that he who so doth, be , that he know what he doth, that he do it out of election or choice, and that he be habitually and immutably radicated and confirmed in so doing. What the Translators turn the stranger that is with him, is no more then , his stranger. For howsoever Psal. 41.9. that which we read, he that eateth my bread, is in the parallel Scripture, John 13.18. He that eateth bread with me; so that my bread, and with me, and his stranger, the stranger with him, should be all one, as Ainsworth observeth, yet here seems not to be the same reason. For in the Scripture before us, a brother and his Proselyte or stranger, are as Actor and Reus; whereof one, by the law of Re∣lation, is, and may be said to be the others. And thus Solomon couples them, Prov. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause, seemeth just: but his neighbour cometh, and searcheth him; where the neighbour is , his adversary: and both are the Actor and Reus, the Plaintiff and Defendant; and the one of them, is said to be the others. 2. As for the negative precept, Ye shall not respect persons in judgement, the Hebrew words are  non agnoscetis facies in judicio, ye shall not acknowledge faces in judg∣ment; which accordingly the LXX turn, . This is a prohibition of very large extent; and whether the Hebrew phrase speak not more home to the business, and make
it more plain, then that whereby we express it, viz. to respect persons, I leave it to the consideration of the judicious Reader. For therefore the wise Heathen intending the same thing, have represented their Judges pictured without eyes, as the Thebans, with∣out eyes and ears, as the Lacedemonians; and the Athenien Judges being about to pronounce sentence, withdrew themselves and re∣tyred into some dark room. All which imported that exact care in the Judges, that they might exactly and precisely consider the cause it self without no∣tice or knowledge of Actor or Reus, Plaintiff or Defendant; and so might exclude all things what ever were , not appertaining to the business in question. The Psalmist found and blamed this kinde of unjustice in the publick judicatories,Psal. 82. v. 2. Psal. 82.2. How long will ye judge iniquity, and accept the faces of the wicked? And S. James found the like fault in the Christian Assemblies, James 2.1. My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ of glory , with respects of persons or face: For if there come into your As∣sembly a man having a gold Ring in gay apparel;James 2. v. 1.—4. and there come in also a poor man in vile rayment, , and ye look upon him, that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto him, sit thou here, , well or conveniently; and say to the poor man, stand thou here, or sit here under my footstool. And are ye not partial in your selves? and are ye not become judges of evil thoughts, or rather, evil reasonings? . And is not the same partiality and acknowledgement of faces, pro∣pagated from age to age, even down to our times, and practised at this day in our Assemblies? when men, without regard had unto the faith in our Lord Jesus Christ of glory, look up and down their Congregations, for men with gold Rings, and Plush Jackets, and set them in convenient places; because such as these may prove good customers, and buy off their commodities. As for others in vile rayment, how ever faithful and obedient, let them sit or stand, it matters not where; there's no gain to be hoped for from them. Are not men at this day, thus partial? are they not judges of these evil reasonings? Do not men thus endeavour to serve God and Mammon? This is an acknowledgement of faces, and that unexcusable. But whether, out of this consideration, all incivility and neg∣lect of persons, Magistrates, men of place and authority, aged and gray-headed, &c. whom the Word of God commands us to ho∣nour; whether an unmannerly disrespect of these, ought to be in∣troduced and brought in among Christians; whether honour of all men enjoyned, 1 Pet. 2.17. ought from this pretence, to be waived; whether the outward signes of honour, (since honour it self is a signe, and in the person honouring,) ought, for this reason, to be for∣born;
let them well consider, who go about to bring in an uni∣versal parity, with a rude and unwinning behaviour, among the people of God; which the Scripture every where holds forth, as the most civil, most courteous, best behaved, of the most winning conversation of all societies in the world. Let them well ponder this in their mindes, who think to excuse all outward honour, with pre∣tence of inward. If it be inward, what inconvenience will follow, if it be brought forth and become outward? How else can it be known to the person honoured? Our Lord Jesus, the Head of his Church, judged not accord∣ing to the sight of his eyes, nor reproved according to the hearing of his ears, &c. Esay 11.3. and he forbids us to judge according to sight, , and commands us to judge righteous judgement,John 7. v. 24. John 7.24. Yet he teacheth us to salute not onely our brethren, but others also. Yea, the scope of his exhortation is, that herein we should out-do all other men. If ye salute your brethren onely, what do ye more. (Our Lords will is, that we should herein do more then others do.) , what do ye more? do not the Publicans so? His Disciples must exceed them in their salutations, and salu∣tations of others, beside their brethren, Matth. 5.47. Certainly they who forbear such outward salutations, as they pretend, lest they should foment and nourish pride in those whom they salute; its much to be feared, lest that forbearance of salutation, proceed from pride: As when the Cynic slovenly trampled upon Plato's handsom Bed, with his durty feet, saying, That he trod down Plato's pride, he was well answered, At superbiâ majori, but with greater pride then his. How needful therefore is it, my brethren, in our judging, to begin with our selves, when the Lord is come, 1 Cor. 4, 5. and to judge righteousness for righteousness, and approve of it, because it is such? and condemn for sin, even because it is such, Rom. 8.3. Not for any other respect, as profit, pleasure, credit, or what ever else is impertinent, and belongs not to the object or matter to be judged; when we our selves are stablished and confirmed in righteousness, we shall be able to judge righteousness without ac∣knowledging of faces: For Righteousness is neither Actor nor Reus, neither one brother nor another, neither brother nor his stranger; but a third thing more sacred then them both. For justitia est aliena virtus, justice is anothers vertue, saith Aquinas,Deut. 1. v. 17. Psal. 7. v. 6. and the judgment that is Gods, Deut. 1.17. 2 Chron. 19.8. Even so raise up thy self un∣to us, O Lord, for the judgement that thou hast commanded, Psal. 7.6. Your little ones which ye said, should be a prey, and your children which in that day had no knowledge between good and evil,Deut. 1. v. 39. they shall go in thither, and unto them will I give it, and they shall possess it.]
These words contain part of Gods sentence against this apo∣state people; which is the frustration of their fear, but in favour of their obedient children. They said Numb. 14.3. That their wives and children should be a prey; but v. 31. the Lord secures them of that fear: and here again; these, the Lord saith, shall go in to the land, &c. Accordingly there are in these words two Axioms. 1. They had said despairingly, that their little ones and their children who had no knowledge between good and evil, should be a prey. 2. The Lord saith with confidence, that those their little ones, and their children who had no knowledge between good and evil, should go into the land, and unto them he would give the land, and they should possesse it. In the former, two things are to be explained; 1. What is here to be understood by the little ones. 2. What it is to have knowledge between good and evil. 1. The word turnd little ones, is in the singular number, , but to be understood plurally; and so the LXX render it, , your little children; which two are explained in the fol∣lowing words, to be such as had no understanding between good and evil. Howbeit, the words are not so to be rendred, but thus word for word. Your sons which knew not, or had not knowen, in that day, good or evil. So the Chald. Paraphrast. So likewise the LXX, which yet they turn distinctively, , good or evil. Vulg. Lat. Boni & mali ignorant distantiam, they know not the distance of good and evil. Its literally the description of that age which wants discretion or discerning good and evil. By good and evil we are to understand what is honestum & tur∣pe, honest and dishonest, just and unjust, righteousness and unrighte∣ousness. The knowledge of good and evil, is either laudable, divine and godly, or blame-worthy, humane, that is, belonging to the fallen man, and ungodly. There is a laudable, a divine and god∣like knowledge of good and evil, such as is in God himself, Gen. 3.5. whereby he knowes all the good and evil that is done in the world; how else could God judge the Earth? Gen. 18.25. For know∣ledge is necessarily required unto judgement, according to that of the Philosopher, , every man judgeth well of what he knowes, and of these he is a good judge. And like knowledge in his measure, man had before his fall. So we may understand, Gen. 3.22. Behold, , the man was, or hath been, as one of us knowing good and evil. Of which, I have spoken in its place. The humane, the fallen mans ungodly knowledge of good and evil, is practical, and consists in the disobedient life, in not doing
what good, he knowes, ought to be done; and doing and not eschewing the evil which he knowes, ought to be avoyded. And thus the little ones, the sons of the apostates had not known good and evil; whom their unbelieving fathers predestinate to be exposed as a prey to their enemies; and themselves to be devou∣red by the sword, Numb. 14.3. And the reason of this surmise, is intimated by the Lord him∣self, ver. 11. of the Chapter; They believed not in his mighty power for the subduing of their enemies, and for their own preservati∣tion; nor thought they the innocency of their little ones a defence unto them, nor that it won upon the favour of their strong helper; nor durst they trust him with the tuition of their supposed Orphans. 1. Whence we may note, how dear, children are to their pa∣rents. They are a part of them; and therefore they fear all evil that may befal them, as incident unto themselves. 2. Of children, the males commonly take up most of their pa∣rents affections. Your sons; because these carry their fathers name, and propagate it unto posterity. These build up their fa∣thers house, and family, whence they have their name, , from , to build. 3. Of children, and males, the little ones, and of little ones, the least takes up most of their parents cares; the word is here in the singular, , parvulus, your little one: which is here rendred little ones. So careful was Jacob for Joseph, the yongest, and afterward for little Benjamin. 4. See from hence, what is our Primitive estate, the state of in∣nocency, the not knowing of good and evil otherwise then God knowes it; the good as to love it, and do it; the evil as to hate it and avoid it. Thus not only , Adam, but , man is made. So Solo∣mon saith, that God made  the man upright; and its evi∣dent it must be understood of man in general; for it followes, But they have found out many inventions, Eccles. 7.29. Yea, how can man be said to be fallen man, unless we first have stood? 5. Take notice hence, what is the fallen mans estate, The know∣ledge of good and evil. The knowledge of the good, and holding it captive under the evil; the disobedient knowledge of what is ho∣ly, just, and good. The knowledge of the evil, the obeying un∣righteousness, Rom. 2.8. 6. Observe what good education of children there was among the people of God, and that under evil parents. All under twenty years are here called little ones; and they retained their innocency, so that they had not known good and evil. Such a little one was Saul, in the beginning of his reign, innocent, as a childe of one year old, 1 Sam. 13.1. as the Paraphrast improves the Hebraism; and the Lord tels Samuel, and he saith to Saul, when thou wert little in thine own eyes, &c. 1 Sam. 15.17.
If evil fathers love their children, care for them, procure good for them, how much more shall your heavenly Father give good things, Matth. 7.11. Yea, his holy Spirit, Luke 11.13. unto his children who ask it of him. 2. The Lord saith, your little ones, which ye said, should be a prey, and your sons which in that day had not known good and evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them will I give it, and they shall possess it. These words contain the Lords frustration and disappoint∣ment of the unbelieving and rebellious fathers fears and cares touching their little ones; for whom their heavenly Father pro∣vides better. The sins of evil parents shall not prejudice or hurt their chil∣dren, as to their entrance into the heavenly countrey. Note hence the qualification of those who shall enter into the holy land, even the little ones, even they who have not known the good and the evil. Such little ones not knowing good and evil, we have been; inno∣cent, simple, without malice, humble and obedient, 1 Cor. 14.20. But when we grow up from this childehood, we lose our inno∣cency, become subtil, crafty, malicious, prowd, disobedient; and so we are excluded out of the holy land: for none such inherit it, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. The holy Spirit could as well have expressed it self in the plu∣ral, and it had been more proper to this place, had it intended only a literal meaning of these words. Our Lord saith, that our little one, and our sons shall go in, &c. There is one in us, and he a little one whom we know not, Joh. 1.  who is , humble and lowly and little in his own eyes, and the Teacher of littleness, Matth. 11. whom we have esteemed stricken, smitten of God and afflicted, Esay 53. even exposed as a prey to the roaring Lion, and such as are the sons born of the everlasting Father. For what one man is he, who shall chase a thousand? Josh. 23.10. Who, when he ariseth, scatters all his enemies? Psal. 68.1. He is the guide and Captain of all his little ones who know not good and evil: This is that one who obtaines the prize, and all his little ones through him, 1 Cor. 9.24. Let us strive to enter into the promised land. Its the same exhor∣tation in the type and figure which our Lord Jesus gives to his Disciples under another metaphore, when he exhorts us to strive to enter in at the strait gate. We are estrang'd from the womb, and turnd backward; full and swollen big with the knowledge of good and evil, 1 Cor. 8.1, 2. And so we proceed, and flatter our selves in our knowing know∣ledge, and thereby justifie our selves; when all this while we are more and more , alien'd from the life of God,
while we think our selves neer unto it; yea, partakers of it. Thus the Cynic wittily reproved the Stoicks, whom they laughed at, because he walked backward in their School. Ye jeer me, saith he, but think your selves wise, who go backward in your life. A tart retorsion, and a true one. And therefore there is a necessi∣ty of rav'ling all our partial work. Our Lord assures us of this,Matth. 18 v. 3. Matth. 18.3. Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted (or turn'd about) and become as little children, ye shall by no means enter into the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore let us pray to the Lord, that he will set that little one in the midst of us, that we may be renewed in the spirit of our minde; that we may put on the new man who is renewed in knowledge, according to the image of him that created him; that so we may become fools in this world that we may be wise, that we may become little ones like that little one, that we may know the good and the evil as God knowes it. That we may so run, so strive, that we may obtain. That we may enter into the holy land, and receive the kingdom of heaven, as little ones, through the little one the heir of the king∣dom Jesus Christ our Lord.
NOHMATOMAXI'A, OR, The Conflict with Evil Thoughts. SERMON XII. Deuteronomie 2. ver. 24. Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass over the river Arnon: Be∣hold, I have given into thy hand Sihon the Amorite King of Heshbon and his land. Begin to possess it, and contend with him in battle.] THese words are part of a Military Oration, whereby the Lord of hosts exhorts and stirs up Israel to engage them∣selves in war against Sihon King of Heshbon; and thereto he encourageth them by a free gift of him and his land into their power. Wherein we have 1. A forcible cohortation, adhortation, or manifold exhortation. 2. A powerful inducement and motive perswading thereunto. The exhortation is 1. Preparatory to the war, Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass over the River Arnon. 2. Executory, Begin, possess, and contend with him in battle. The inducement and motive perswading hereunto, is, by di∣vine artifice, situate between these two kinds of exhortation, as a powerful perswasive unto both; Behold, I have given you, &c. The Exhortations may be considered either in themselves, and a part, or joyntly, as one is in order to other. Thus; Arise ye, take your journey. Arise ye, that ye may take your journey, and pass over the river Arnon; Arise ye, take your journey, and pass over the river Arnon, &c. But I shall not speak so particu∣larly
of all the divine truths which this Text may afford,SER. XII. but I shall take the exhortations in their order, and speak of them as they are serviceable to our edification. And first of the first. 1. Rise ye up. The word here turn'd to Rise up, is , which properly is a change or motion of the body upward, which had sitten, lyen, or fallen down before. Generally it imports a change in order to some other state, and so it signifies. 1. Surgere, to Rise; which in regard of the term à quo, is from sleep, from sin and uncleanness, from a low estate, from great abasement, from bondage; we have all these together, Esay 52.1, 2. Awake, awake, put on strength, O Zion, put on thy beautiful garments, &c. There shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean. Shake thy self from the dust; Arise and sit down, O Jerusalem, loose thy self from the bands of thy neck, O Capive daughter of Zion. Yea, rising is from sleep, and that sleep in death. Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, saith the Apostle. 2. But  signifies also Insurgere, to rise against, to rise up, Hostili more; as also to make insurrection against the predominant and oppressing sin. This seems to be more proper here, as the Lord exhorts to a warlike engagement against Sihon, and to a spiritual warfare against sin and iniquity. And so, this command is Secundum motum Anti∣typiae; Christ our Head is risen; and it is most reasonable, that his body arise with him. He hath risen from a dead sleep, his low estate, abasement, and humiliation; and it is the duty of those who are Christs, to arise from a like, a worse sleep in death. Christ hath conquered and abolished death, and brought life and immortali∣ty to light, 2 Tim. 1.10. And, according to the exceeding great∣ness of Gods power to us-ward who believe, we rise up as mighty men, and tread down our enemies in the mire of the streets, in the battle; and we fight, because the Lord is with us, Zach. 10.5. We call upon the Lord, and awaken him in us; Awake, why sleepest thou, O Lord; arise, Psal. 44.23. And again, v. 26. Arise an help for us, so  signifies. And the Lord calls upon us,Psal. 44. v. 26. Ephes. 5. v. 14. Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ  illuminabit te, Christ shall enlighten thee. Whence we may take notice; 1. That men are commonly asleep, or lazy, or at ease in the flesh, or drown'd in speculation, or dejected and in a drooping despondency; and not soon or easily rouz'd or raised up to diffi∣cult and hard duty. 2. The Lord supposeth in us believers, a power to arise, when we are awakened by his outward call, as that of the Minister, as that of Moses here; and by his inward call annexed to the out∣ward, the voice of Christ speaking from heaven, Hebr. 12.25.
3. And this is the great mercy of our God to his Israel, that he hath raised up his Son Jesus, and sent him to raise us up, and to bless us by turning every one of us from our iniquities, Acts 3.26. or as it is in the Vulg. Lat. Ut convertat se unusquis{que} à nequitia sua,Acts 3. v. 26. that every one of us turn himself from his iniquity: which the most antient English Translations follow, and the Greek will bear it. This goodness and mercy of God, will be frustrate, and so great grace, we shall receive in vain, if as Christ is risen, we arise not with him. Wherefore, 2. The second Exhortation is, Take your journey. Whence it followes, 1.Psal. 119. v. 1. The Law of the Lord is a way; O the blessednesses of those who are perfect in the way! What is that way? It follows, who walk in the law of the Lord. The Gospel also is a way, Acts 19.9. They spake evil , of that way; and v. 23. There arose no small stir , about that way. In both places the Vulg. Latin hath De via Domini, concerning the way of the Lord; which is the way of life. Yea, it is called the life it self, Acts 5.20. Go stand, and speak in the Temple to the people, all the words , of this life. 2. There are diverse stages, diverse steps in the way of life, diverse degrees of lalitude, extension and intention in the divine vertues and graces. There is an increase of faith, Rom. 1.17. An abounding in hope, Rom. 15.13. A walking and progress in love, Ephes. 5.2. A growth in grace, 2 Cor. 9.8. 2 Pet. 3.18. According to which, we may out-go one another, and exceed our selves. 3. We are all of us, by profession, not at home, but Travailers, and such as seek a countrey, a better countrey, that is, an heavenly, Hebr. 11.16. 4. The way to the heavenly Canaan, consists not in indivisibili. It is not finished all at once. Justification is not in an instant: but as in nature, place and space, motion and time, they are all Continua, continued;Revel. 22. v. 11. and therefore they have Partem extra partem, one part beyond another. So in our spiritual journey, he that is righte∣ous, let him be righteous still. The Greek text is otherwise in some Copies, , let him that is righteous, work righteousness still, Revel. 22.11. For since the way to the state of bliss here prefigured by the Lords land,Rom. 2. v. 7. Hebr. 10. v. 38, 39. is signified by a journey, it imports progress and going on, a patient continuance in well doing, , of good worke, Rom. 2.7. And as Justification it self is progressive, so likewise is the justify∣ing faith, from faith to faith, Rom. 1.17. And the just shall live by faith, or out of his faith, (.) But if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. The Greek words are, ,
which found thus; And if he (the just) draw back, my soul hath no pleasure in him; there's no [any man] in the text, but the just man necessarily understood: So Hierom, Justus autem mens ex fide vivet: Quòd si subtraxerit se, non placebit animae meae. But my righteous man (he read ) shall live by, or out of faith: but if he shall draw himself back, he shall not please my soul. But the Translators could not endure this to be spo∣ken, or suspected, of the righteous man. It could not consist with their opinion of a man perpetually righteous; although meantime he be unrighteous, In sensu composito; unrighteous even while he is righte∣ous, as some have said, (O absurdissimum turpiloquium!) that David was as lust in the act of adultery with the wife of Uriah, as when he danced before the Ark. And therefore Beza taught the Tran∣slators to corrupt the text, by adding [quis] to it, Si quis subduxe∣rit se, if any man draw back. But we are not ; Hierom read , we are not, Non sumus subtractionis filii, we are not sons of drawing back to perdition, but of faith, , to the purchasing or gaining of the soul, which otherwise is lost by drawing back, but saved and gotten by going on, Hebr. 10.38, 39. This faith is all one with obedience of faith, Rom. 1.5. and 16.26. That is, such obedience in doing and suffering according to the will of God, as proceeds from faith. And such a peculiar people Christ purchaseth, as are zealous of good works, Titus 2.14. and abounding in them, 2 Cor. 9.8. as the end of our creation, Ephes. 10. and the way and means whereby we are justified and saved; not as they proceed from the Law, or any power or strength in man, but as they come from faith in Christ: So the Apostle; Knowing,Gal. 2.16. that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ. The words are not so truly rendred by the Adversative, as they might have been by the Exceptive; and so the Vulg. Lat. hath Nisi, unless. So the Tigurin Bible, and Pagnin, as also the Spanish translation. The words are, : which words sound thus; Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, unless by the faith of Jesus Christ; that is, unless those works proceed from faith in Jesus Christ, who is the power of God, whereby they are wrought, 1 Cor. 1.24. Thus S. Paul, who saith, that a man is justified by faith; and S. James, who saith, that a man is justified by works, and not by faith only, James 2.24. they are both solidly reconciled one to the other. It is true, there are examples brought to prove, that  answers to , and may be rendred by Sed, but: Nor do I deny it. But since S. Paul understands faith in the power of God for producing good works prescribed in the Law; and S. James understands the same good works proceeding from the same
principle of faith; what need was there to fly to an Hebraism, when the Greek text it self is so clear and evident? As for that distinction, that Bona opera sunt via ad regnum, non causa regnandi, that good works are the way to the kingdom, not the cause of reigning; who ever was the Author of it, its satisfactory only to those who want Logic, and cannot distinguish between a cause nakedly and properly expressed; and a cause clothed with a me∣taphorical term; nor between a cause in general, and a meriting cause. Calvin himself acknowledgeth, that good works are Causae quaedam salutis inferiores, certain inferiour causes of salvation. And so S. Paul; We are, saith he, his workmanship created in Christ Jesus,Eph. 2. v. 10. , In bonis operibus, in good works, which God hath prepared, that we should walk in them. The way is conti∣nued, and the motion and travail in the way, is progressive, it con∣sists not in indivisibili: It is not finished at once. Wherefore, Let us arise from our empty contemplations, from our ease in the flesh; from our sins, and thraldom under them, unto faith; unto righ∣teousness of faith; unto perseverance in the faith and righteous∣ness; to the labour of love; to action, to travail. The helps conducing to our journey are many; two especially: 1. The Word of God which is the Travailers Viaticum, as the Manna to the Israelites in their travailes, (and therefore its cal∣led the Word of the Lord,Exod. 16. v. 16. Psal. 37. v. 3. Exod. 16.16.) And 2. Prayer, according to the Northern English Proverb; Meat and Matins minish no way. Thus let us feed on the Word, and on Faith in the Word, so Psal. 37.3. As the Israel of God did all eat that same spiritual meat, and did all drink that same spiritual drink; for they drank of the spiri∣tual Rock accompanying or following them () but that Rock was Christ;1 Cor. 10. v. 4. no other but he could accompany them or fol∣low them. Timothy was a Travailer in the same way, and was nouri∣shed up in the words of faith and good doctrine, 1 Tim. 4.5. So was Gaius, S. Pauls Host, Rom. 16.23. for whose good journey in the way of the Lord,3 John. v. 2. S. John prayes, 3 John v. 2. ; above all things I pray, that thou mayest have a prosperous journey, and be in health, as thy soul prospereth in its journey. So the Lord will be with us, as he was with those Travailers, Luke 24.13. who went to Emaüs, Timoris consilium, the counsel of fear, (as that word is interpreted) for timor is consiliativus, fear in∣clines us to take counsel, saith Aquinas. And that name imports the first state of the new converts under fear; which is said to be upon every soul, Acts 2.43. which is figured, when the Disciples are said to be unanimous altogether in Solomons Porch, a type of Gods fear in the spiritual Tabernacle. When two or three are unanimously gathered together in the Lords Name, he is with them; according to that proverbial speech, When two or three
meet and speak of the words of the Law, the  the di∣vine presence is with them, Mal. 3.16. Matth. 18.20. 3. Wherefore (fellow-travailers) let us arise, and take our journey, and proceed to the next Stage of it, the third exhortation; let us pass over the river Arnon. Arnon is the name of a Rock, a City, and a River, according to Adrichomius and others. Rivers of old were the bounds of Countreys. Such a border was Jordan between the two Tribes and an half, and the other Tribes of Is∣rael, Josh. 22.25. And such was Arnon to the sons of Moab, Numb. 21.13. For Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the Amorites. The Lord sets bounds and limits unto the dwellings of the seve∣ral nations, Acts 17.26. He hath determined the bounds of their habitation. These bounds, whatever Potentates, Princes, or peo∣ple, out of their boundless ambition, or insatiable covetousness, shall transgress, let them know, they remove the Lords Land-marks; and therefore the Lord casts upon them the fierceness of his wrath,  anger exceeding and passing over all bounds. And hence it is, that he gives command here and exhorts Israel, , Pass ye over the river Arnon. For Sihon had fought against the for∣mer King of Moab, and taken all his land out of his hand, even unto Arnon, Numb. 21.26. Israel must not meddle with the Moa∣bites, Deut. 2.9. but with the Amorites, who had transgressed their bounds, and removed the Lords land-mark, they must meddle. The Lord avenges upon Sihon his injury done to Moab, and gives his land unto Israel by conquest. This right Jephtah defends against the Ammonites, who claim this land in the right of Moab their bro∣ther. But since the Lord commanded Israel to make war upon Si∣hon, and gave Israel his land, (as appears by the next words) Jephtah proves jus Gladii to be jus Dei, the right of the Sword drawn at Gods command, to be Gods right, Judg. 11.12.—27. Let them who invade others, look well to it, whether they have such au∣thority as Israel here had, when the Lord commanded them to pass over the river Arnon. Howbeit, if we consider these words in their mysterie, we shall finde the same command and exhortation to be directed unto us also: and that the Lord saith to us, Pass over the River Arnon. Mysticè. Arnon signifies Lux filii, the light of a childe, son, or nephew; according to which the woman of Tekoa calls her son, her Coal, 2 Sam. 14.7. And the Lord promiseth to David, that he will give him a Lamp or light, Psal. 132.17. I have ordained a Lamp for mine Anointed. And the Christ of God, the Anointed-one the Son of David after the flesh, is the Candle of the new Jerusalem. Re∣vel. 21.23.
There are diverse degrees of divine light imparted unto men.Esay 8. v. 20. 1. The Morning light, Esay 8.20. which is the law of God, To the Law, to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word it is because they have no morning light ( Aurora) in them. So Salomon. The Law is a Lamp, and the Commandement is a light, Prov. 6.23. 2. There is a progressive light or increase of light, which exceeds the former; but falls short of the perfect light, whereunto it shi∣neth, Prov. 4.18. And this light is the doctrine of repentance, and re∣mission of sin, and faith , on one coming after him, Acts 19.4. This is the doctrine of John Baptist, John 1.7, 8. who is said to be a burning and a shining light. This is that grace of God which hath a power to save all men, . This light is in order to the great light.Tit. 2. v. 11. For so the Apostle goes on, looking for the blessed hope of the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.13. And there∣fore the Evangelist saith of John Baptist, He was not , that light, but he was sent to bear witness of that light. That was the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into this world. The light here meant is the first degree of light, the Morning light, or light of the Law; which is the light of the childe, that is, Arnon.Gal. 4. v. 1. The Heir so long time as he is a childe, differeth nothing from a servant, , being Lord of all, Gal. 4.1. This light of the childehood, is either in regard of the minde and under∣standing, or in respect of their little strength; and unsetledness and weakness of them both. 1. In regard of minde and under∣standing; the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, That they be no more children,Ephes. 4. v. 14. fluctuating or tost to and fro () and carried about with every winde of doctrine, , by the cheating of men, by their craftiness, , according to the method or way-laying of deceit. 2. In regard of strength to act and to do what we un∣derstand; and herein the child is also unsetled. I could not speak to you as to spiritual, that is, strong; but as to carnal, that is weak. 1 Cor. 3.1. This state was figured by Kadesh-barnea, the unsetled holiness of the childe. To pass over Arnon therefore spiritually, it imports the pro∣ceeding and increase of divine light: not to be alwayes children, but , attaining to the truth, or being true through love we should grow up unto him () accord∣ing to all things, who is the Head, even Christ. Hence its evident that, 1. There is an inconsistent and unsta∣ble spiritual nonage, a childhood in Christianity. This must as ne∣cessarily precede in the Christian life, as childhood in the natural life. 2. The Lord requires and expects a growth and increase from our minority to riper spiritual age, Ephes. 4.14, 15.
1. Justly are they hence reproved, who pass over Arnon, be∣fore they come at it. They think themselves past children, before they come to Kadeshbarnea the unsetled holiness of the childe, like him who, Ʋt cito transiret, corripuit fluvium. Yea, before they come into the Wilderness, the forlorn and desolate estate. Yea, they fansie themselves in Canaan while yet they are willingly de∣tain'd in Egypt, the straits of sin. They presume themselves sons of God, although they be the servants of sin and Satan. Yea, they perswade themselves, that they are Comprehensores, that they enjoy the heavenly countrey, even before they are viatores, before they have travailed one step toward it. O beloved! were this the condition of some one or few, it were much to be lamented; how much more when it is the estate of thousands? May I not appeal to thousands, whether they have any ground for that high opinion of themselves, beside their own self-love and strong fansie, whereby they have flattered themselves into an imagined estate of bliss, and climb'd up another way into the sheepfold, then by the strait dore of humility, self-denyal, and mortification, John 10. 2. Others are blame-worthy who continue in their spiritual childehood; as if they thought it would pass away like the natu∣ral infancy and nonage, without any care or endeavour on their part; as if they hoped to go over Arnon dry-shod. Rusticus expectat ut defluat anmis; at ille Labitur & labetur in omne volubilis aevum; The Clown looks that the River ebb away; But that glides on, and will glide on for ay. Men justly expect that they who are now grown up to some years of discretion, they should put off the Boy. It is expro∣brable unto such; What? alwayes a childe? And is it not al∣so reproachful unto thee, who ever thou art, that thou art al∣wayes a childe, alwayes pretending childish infirmity and weak∣ness; that thou art alwayes in thine inconsistent estate? So weak, that Nec lingua nec pes suum satis officium facit; so weak, that thou canst neither go nor stand. Yet this is one great infirmity and weakness of many who believe themselves Saints, and grown men in Christianity. This justly reproves those, who when they have passed over Arnon, think that they are come to their rest, to the end of their journey; not considering that there are diverse stages in our journey toward the heavenly Canaan. Wherefore let us proceed, Behold, I have given into thy hand, Sihon the Amorite King of Heshbon, and his land. The words contain the Lords free donation of Sihon and his land, into the power of Israel. The gift is either personal or real. 1. Personal, and so we have the name of the person, Sihon, illu∣strated
by his nation, an Amorite, his royal authority, King, and his royal City, Heshbon. 2. The real gift is his land. Of these, the Lord gives Israel a demonstration: Behold, or see, I have given into thy hand, Sihon, &c. In which words these Axioms are contained. 1. Sihon the Amorite King of Heshbon had his land. 2. God gave into the hand of Israel, Sihon the Amorite King of Heshbon, and his land. 3. The Lord saith, Behold I have given in thy hand, Sihon the Amorite King, &c. 1. Sihon the Amorite King of Heshbon had his land. The land of Sihon is that which is otherwise called the land of Gilead, as appears, Numb. 32. v. 29. compar'd with v. 33. Howbeit this land of Gilead was now cal∣led the land of the Amorites; for Sihon King of the Amorites, had fought against the former King of Moab, and taken all his land out of his hand, even unto Arnon, Numb. 21.26. And this was Sihons land. What was his City? His City was called Heshbon; that was the royal City of Sihon King of the Amorites, Numb. 21.25. Deut. 1.4. Whence observe, that 1. Sihon the Amorite, a wicked man, had his land; the Lord calls it his: So the Edomites, the Moabites, and the Ammonites, all sinful nations yet had their Ci∣ties and Territories by the best right, Jure divino, by divine right, as appears by Deut. 2.5.9.19. Whence it is evident, That Domi∣num rerum temporalium non fundatur in gratia. The dominion of tem∣poral things is not founded in grace. As for the mystical meaning of these words. Sihon has his name from  which is of the same signification and extent with , which is to sweep away dust, durt or filth; also to destroy, extirpate, and root up. So that Sihon is a Sweeper, a Destroyer, one who extirpates and roots up. These are no meet qualifications for a King: yet this Sihon is said to be King of Heshbon. That's Sihons royal City; and what is Heshbou? What else but the thought and imagination? So  signifies. So that Sihon the Amorite is that talking, bitter, froward, rebellious, domineering spirit in men; which sweeps away, destroyes, extirpates, and roots out all good cogitations and thoughts out of us, and implants all evil thoughts in their room. And in these evil thoughts Sihon dwels.—Ill â se jactat in aula. Sihon keeps his Court in Heshbon among the thoughts. That we may the better understand what Sihons royal City and Court is, we must know, what Heshbon the thought and thoughts are. They are certain inward acts of the reasonable soul; which may be considered either abstractly in themselves, as they are without commerce or influence upon the affections, & receive no taint from them; and so they may be said to be indifferent. Such are they, which befal men waking like Dreams. These, although we cannot call them evil; because they receive no corruption
from the evil will and affections; yet without doubt they are great impediments and rubs in our spiritual journey; and hinder our proficiency and growth in grace; yea, and too evident a signe they are of an empty heart, that is not filled with the love of God. For if the heart be filled with these, intus existens prohibet extraneum, they keep off God from his Sanctuary, Eezch. 8.6. The thoughts may be considered concretely, as they excite and stir up affections, 1. Either to good, as concerning our God, and the eternal state of our souls; and so consequently the thoughts are good; as where the Psalmist saith, I said or thought, I will look to my wayes, Psal. 39.1. Or 2. As they move us to evil; in which regard, they may be called evil thoughts, Ezech. 38.10. So that the good or evil thoughts receive their tincture and name from their objects whereabout they are conversant and busied. But because as Scire malum non est malum, to know evil, is not evil; so Scire bonum non est bonum, to know what is good, is not that good we know, we must understand that thoughts are either speculative or practical; 1. The speculative thoughts busied about evil, it is not necessary, that the thoughts themselves should be evil. For God himself is said to know the vain and sinful thoughts of men, Psal. 94.11. when yet his thoughts are no more infected by the evil, then the Sun is by shining on a Dunghil. And thus some excel∣lent men have known evil, and how to act it, yet have not done it; as its said of Titus the Emperour, that he knew how to counter∣feit the hands of all the great men of Rome, but he never did it unto any mans hurt. How much more is this true of our Lord and his Apostles? who, in their reproofs and dehortations, are necessarily supposed to have known the evils, which they reproved, and from which, they deborted; yet were they not so much as in a thought guilty of them, or corrupted by them. Howbeit in men under an inferior dispensation, even speculative thoughts of evil,Job 31. v. 1. may administer oecasion of evil. So Job reasons, I have stricken a covenant with mine eyes, and why should I think upon a Maid? As for the practical thoughts about evil, which proceed to de∣light and consent in the evil, there is no doubt but they are evil. And in these, Sihon, having rooted out the old inhabitants out of the heart, the good thoughts proceeding from God, Psal. 139.17. 2 Cor. 3.5. he brings in a Colonie of his evil thoughts; and these are his royal City, his Mansion house where he resides and dwels. Hence we may observe, that if Sihon be King of Heshbon, if the destructive and extirpating spirit bear rule in our thoughts, the man is no doubt fallen from his God. For since the heart is fons omninum actionum ad extra,—since all actions proceed from the heart, and most mens thoughts and actions are most unlike unto God, unto whose image the man was made, it cannot be but the heart, the Fountain of our thoughts and actions, hath been corrup∣ted.
Neque enim oculos ad concupiscentias sumpsimus, neque linguam ad maleloquium; neither received we our eyes for concupiscence, nor our tongue for evil speaking; nor our ears to hear evil words; nor our belly for the sins of the belly; nor our hands for violence; nor our feet for a vagrant life; nor was the Spirit implanted in us, ut insi∣diarum & fraudum & iniquitatum cogitatorium fieret, that it should be made a study of treacheries and of frauds and of iniquities. So Tertullian de spectaculis, cap. 2. Sihon is called here an Amorite, and elsewhere also King of the Amorites. An Amorite is Locutuleius a great Prater, a bitter talker: So that when Sihon is said to be an Amorite and King of the Amorites, we understand that evil spirit which sweeps away, ex∣tirpates, and roots out of us all good and wholesom words, (Hence Amo∣rite has the name) and sets in their places, all devouring words, all words that may do hurt, Psal 52.4. Hence we may learn part of that hard lesson which—Coelo descendit,  came down from heaven, Know thy self. If heavenly thoughts, if the precious thoughts of God lodge in us, Psal. 139.17. without doubt, Gods Spirit acts and rules us. And that Spirit will prompt us to speak good and wholesom words which convey grace to the hearer. For then the  the  which is the Indwelling Deity, the Essential word of God takes up his residence and dwelling in us. But if vain, sinful and wicked thoughts dwell in men, they de∣clare plainly what Spirit rules and acts in them, that Sihon the Amorite and King of Heshbon, and King of the Amorites reigns in them. And he suggests foolish, vain, sinful, bitter words, and sets the tongue on fire from Hell, James 3. I well know how men are wont to excuse themselves, that their hearts are good, though their words be evil; so saith that wanton Epigram∣matist, Lasciva est nobis pagina, vita proba est. Our book's lascivious, but our life is good. Its impossible. Words are a great part of our life; according to which we shall be all justified or condemned, Matth. 12.37.James 3. v. 11. That argument of S. James, is unanswerable, Jam. 3.11. Doth a Fountain send forth, at the same hole, ; that which is sweet and that which is bitter? If there∣fore, as a Fountain casts forth her waters, so foul-mouth'd men cast out their wickedness, Jer. 6.7. there is no question to be made, but Sihon the Amorite reignes in those souls; the word of Belial dwels in them; the , the living Word of God harbours not there. There is no concord between Christ and Belial; that is, the De∣vil, as the Syriac there turns it, Satan, 2 Cor. 6.15. 2. Sihon also hath his land; which is the land of Gilead; but since Sihon was King of the Amorites, and that land in his posses∣sion, it was called the land of the Amorites.
Gilead  is Acervus testimonii, an heap of testimony or witnes∣sing; which figured the multitude of the divine witnesses the Pro∣phets of the Lord, and all believers who give testimony unto the truth and power of God, the cloud of witnesses, Hebr. 12.1. Hence was Elijah the Tisbite, 1 Kings 17.1. Elijah the Tisbite that was of Gilead. When Sihon is King of the Amorites, all the heap of wit∣nesses, all the Prophets testimonies are made matter of talk. All that men read, all they hear, all they meditate, all they learn, by read∣ing, hearing, meditation, it is to talk it out again. And freely and openly to speak my fears, I am perswaded, that Gilead is yet in the Amorites hands. I much fear that what the Lord tells his Prophet, is verified and fulfilled of our times, may I not say also of this place? Ezech. 33.30. 2. The Lord gives Sihon the Amorite King of Heshbon and his land into the hand of Israel. But quo jure? By what right does the Lord give these into the hand and power of Israel? by a manifold right. For although the Lord, by reason of special covenant with Abraham and his seed, vouchsafed to be styled the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the God of Israel; yet the Lord had made a covenant also more general with Noah and his seed after the flood; and con∣sequently with all nations descending from them, Gen. 9.10, 11. So that, not only by right of creation and preservation, (which is cre∣ation continued) and by right of redemption from the flood, whereby he redeemed them from death, but also by right of covenant, yea, jure forisfactionis by right also of forfeiture, by breach of covenant, all became obnoxious and liable unto the just judgement of God; so that by a manifold right, he might dispose of them and theirs, their persons and estates; as here of Sihon and his land. Mysticè. 1. Observe, O thou Israel of God, how potent and subtil, how malitious enemies thou hast, even after thou hast past over the river Arnon. The spiritual childe meets with some opposition; the flesh lusts against the spirit; this was figured by Esek, Contention, which Isaac first met withal: But when that's overcome, greater enmity ariseth; that's Sitnah, the strength of Satanical hatred. Both must be subdued before Isaac comes to Rehoboth, the latitude of freedom, Gen. 26.20, 21, 22. The Ephesians had conquered the former, and were now in conflict with the later; to whom S. Paul saith, we wrestle not with flesh and blood, (such as the Galatians as yet little children, Gal. 4.19. had to fight withal, Gal. 5.17.) but a∣gainst Principalities, against Powers, against , the worldly rulers of the darkness of this world, , which I render a∣gainst the spiritualities of wickedness in heavenly things, Ephes. 6.12.Ephes. 6. v. 12. That is, saith Aquinas, the very power and strength of wickedness.
Such enemies as David complaines of, Psal. 56.2. They who envie me have swallowed me up all the day:Psal. 56. v. 12. For many fight against me from on high; so the LXX, and Tremellius: Prowdly or arro∣gantly, so Piscator and Coverdale; although David may be under∣stood to direct his complaint unto God by this word , as here, so Psal. 92.8. Mich. 6.6. 2. Note hence, O Israel, how great a strength is imparted unto thee by thy God, even , the hyperbolical or exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe, Ephes. 1.19. 3. Hence its evident, that one spirit does not act in all men; for if Sihon King of Heshbon extirpate and root out the good thoughts out of the heart, and implant evil thoughts in their room; and the Is∣rael of God hath a spirit of power from the God of life, to destroy Sihon and root out all the evil thoughts out of the heart, and implant good thoughts there, surely these divided, opposite, contrary acts can∣not proceed from one and the same spirit. Its our Lords argument, That Satan cannot cast out Satan; but the finger and Spirit of God it is, which is contrary to Satans spirit, which casts out Devils, Matth. 12. An Argument, which nor Satan, who brought this Ranting principle from the bottom of Hell, nor all his Ranters are, or ever will be able to answer. 3. Behold, I give into thy hand, &c. The word here turnd Be∣hold, is, , See; whereby the potency and strength of the ene∣my, and the prepotency and greater ability to overpower him and the Lords free donation is propounded to our eye of faith; See, I have given into thy hand, &c. Thus Faith is Speratorum subjectio, rerum demonstratio quae non cernuntur; as Castellio well turns Hebr. 11.1. faith is the propounding (or setting before our eyes) things hoped for, the demonstration of things which are not seen. So potent, subtil, and malitious an enemy, and power over him to subdue him, being given into thy hand, O Israel, well deserves an Ecce, Behold, see I have given, &c. But I see no such matter, saith weak Jacob. Not with thy bodily eyes; this object is propoun∣ded unto thine eye of faith. Nor can these things be made known unto us but by the Spirit of God. We have received, not the spirit of this world, but the Spirit that is of God, that we may know the things that are freely given to us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. And therfore when the Prophet Elisha's servant feared the army of the Syrians which compassed the City of Dothan round about; Fear not, saith Elisha, for there are more with us then they who are with them; and withal he prayes, Lord open his eyes. The Prophet Elisha and his servant were besieged with an ar∣my of Syrians, Pride and deceit and the curse due to these; these are Aramites or Syrians; and these compass Elisha, that is, God the Sa∣viour, and his servants; yea, Sin is  besieging us in
every circumstance, Hebr. 12.1. If we be in Dothan [in the Law,] if Elisha be with us, there are more with us then are against as. They who keep the Law, , they cast a trench a∣bout themselves, as the LXX turn, Prov. 28.4. 2. Begiu, possess, contend with him in battel. Hitherto we have heard the three prepuratory Exhortations; and their perswasives and motives inducing to the war. Come we now to those Exhortations which we may call execu∣tory. And they also are three. Begin, possess, contend with him in battel. 1. Begin. This word sometimes imports no more then the act it self which one is said to begin; as its said of our Lord, He began to say, Luke 12.1. that is, He said, Matth. 16.6. He began to cast out, Mark 11.15. that is, He did cast out, Matth. 21.12. Sometime it signifies the entrance and first part of the work; as, he that hath begun a good work, will finish it, Phil. 1.6. And thus it may be a general exhortation enlarging it self to all the rest, as the entrance and first part of them; Begin to arise, begin to take your journey; be∣gin to pass over Arnon, to possess, to contend with him in battel. 1. Hence it appears, that, after all the precedent exhortati∣ons, to arise from sin to righteousness, from death to life, men are prone to lie still in sin and iniquity. After exhortation to take their journey toward the spiritual land, men are rather inclined to stay at home in the flesh. After exhortation to pass over the River Arnon, they had rather be still children in Kadeshbarnea. After the Lords free donation of Sihon the Amorite King of Heshbon and his land, in∣to our power, and his evidencing this to our faith, men hardly believe any such thing possible. And therefore the Lord yet stirs us up, Begin, arise, begin, take your journey, begin, pass over the river Arnon. 2. Hence its also evident, that the work of salvation, is not sud∣denly finished, or in a short time, since so many exhortations are needful thereunto, and the work as yet not done. 3. According to the measure of grace vouchsafed unto us, there ought to be a suitable complying and endeavour to walk worthy of that grace. The Lord saith, he hath given Sihon and his land unto Israel: and v. 31. See, I have begun to give Sihon and his land before thy face: therefore arise, take your journey; therefore begin thou to possess it. Behold, here a figure of the mutable and inconsistent estate; wch is represented unto us in the spiritual childehood. The people lin∣gred and continued in their unsetled condition, without any pro∣gress, or going on. Whence it is, that Moses tells us, that these things befel the people in Kadeshbarnea, Deut. 1. That is, Sanctitas filii instabilis, the unstable holiness of the son or childe; or rather, the sanctity and holiness of moveable, changeable, and unsetled purity, such as is that of the childe, Ephes. 4. as I have formerly shewen.
And if we look upon the present state of Christianity, we shall finde most-what such a kinde of instability and unsetledness, among men. The second book of Esdras is a Prophetical history of times then to come. Among other predictions we finde this, 2 Esder. 15.14, 15, 16.2 Esdr. 15 v. 16. Wo to the world and them that dwell therein: For the Sword and their destruction draweth nigh: And one people shall stand up to fight against another, and swords in their hands. And there shall be sedition among men, and invading one another. They shall not regard their Kings, nor Princes; and the course of their actions shall stand in their power. What our Translators turn, Sedition, is Inconstabilitio, which is rather to be rendred unsettlement, or instability. How true that prophesie is, may appear to any who shall impartially take a survey of the Christian Church now for many years, especially in this our nation. 1. Hence they are justly reproved who lie still in their fall; set not forth, nor begin their journey; but abide on the other side Arnon. Yet (O wicked imagination! how hast thou covered the whole face of the earth?) even these men think, they are come to their journeys end. Sihon the Amorite King of Heshbon, who roots out the good thoughts, and implants evil in their room, he bewitches them, and perswades them, that they have built goodly castles of assurance in the air, when they have not yet laid the foundation, they have not yet begun the work; that they have climbed up to the top of Jacobs Ladder, when indeed they have not yet set their foot on the first round. They are fully assured and certain of their salvation, before they have denyed themselves, taken up their cross, and followed their Saviour. These indeed have begun their journey, but they have begun at the wrong end. 2. Justly also are they hence blamed, who, although they be∣gin well with good thoughts, good wills, good purposes, yet proceed not, continue not in their course well begun: Ye did run well, saith S. Paul to the Galatians, Gal. 5.7. These he calls his little chil∣dren, cap. 4.19. And whereas many, in that state, pretend in∣firmities, and complain, that they have no grace, no strength to go on in their spiritual journey; the Apostle supposeth, that they had strength;Gal. 5. v. 7. and therefore he reproves them for not using it; Ye did run well, saith he, who hindred you, that ye should not obey the truth?  does not signifie to hinder, but caedo, percutio, pulso, to cut, to strike, to beat or drive back; and so, by consequence, im∣pedire to hinder; as Pagnin turnd it; but Arias Montanus corrects it, and renders it intercidit. We may render it, who hath stricken you or driven you back? which is proper to the case of the Gala∣tians, who were driven back from the Spirit to the flesh; from the grace of the Gospel, to the works of the Law; from their son-ship in Christ, to a voluntary bondage under the elements of the world. So
So that they who pretend, they want grace and strength, and say, they would go on, if God would give them grace, they lay the whole blame of their negligence and improficiency upon God himself, whereas indeed they themselves alone are in the fault. 3. But more sharply are they to be reproved who begin well, but end ill. The Apostle reproved this Apostasie in the Galati∣ans, Gal. 3.3. Are ye so foolish, that having begun in the Spirit,Gal. 3. v. 3. are ye now made perfect in the flesh? or rather, according to the ori∣ginal Greek ; are ye so void of spiritual under∣standing? (so  signifies, which our Translators turn, foo∣lish, as I shall hereafter shew, if the Lord will) that having begun in the Spirit, ye are now made perfect in the flesh? By the flesh is to be understood the carnal commandement, as that of circumcisi∣on, which engageth to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. Hebr. 7.16. and 9.10. But we may enlarge this Reproof, and extend it unto those, who have begun in that spirit, whereby we mortifie the deeds of the body, Rom. 8.13. and go about to be perfect in the corrupt sinful flesh. Such are they, who having entred, and made good progress in the narrow way of mortification, become weary of it, and return to their vomit, of made holiness, which they had cast up with the Dog; and reject the true holy things: and with the Swine, they tread under their feet the precious Pearl, Matthew 13.46. and return to their wallowing in the mire of sensuality, 2 Pet. 2.22. So the precise, ignorant, and bloody zeal, and the brutish, sensual, and voluptuous life are accurately distinguished in the vulgar Latin, Matth. 7.6. Be we exhorted to begin our journey. Tis high time with all of us. Via longa, vita brevis. The way is long; and we have but a short life allowed us wherein to finish it. But, Dimidium facti qui bene caepit, habet. Who well begins, he has done half his work. Its true, the beginnings of every good work, are difficult and hard, Haec dum incipias gravia sunt, dum{que} ignores: ubi cognôris fa∣cilia, saith the Poet, of a less weighty business. Wherefore let us break thorow all difficulties, and possess the land before us. That's the next exhortation. 2. Possess. The word  does not signifie all manner of pos∣session, but more properly to possess heir-like, that is, to inherit; which is the proper act of an heir. 1. But how can the people of Israel possess heir-like, the land of the Amorites? The Land is the Lords, Levit. 25. He hath spied it out for Israel, Ezech. 20.6. who is the Lords first-born, Exod. 4.22. Israel is my son, my first-born, and so the Lords Heir. But,
2. How can Israel be commanded to possess heir-like that land, whereof he hath as yet no possession at all? Israel was not yet pas∣sed over the river of Arnon which was the border of the Amorites. By possessing, Israel comes to possess. Israel by inheriting, comes to inherit. The Lords command is so to be understood, as he himself speaks,Deut. 2. v. 31. v. 31. of this Chapter. , where again our Translators obscure the Text, and render it, begin to possess, that thou mayest inherit his land. The words sound thus; Begin, inherit, that thou mayest inherit his land. As we begin, so we pos∣sess; we stay not upon the finishing of the whole work before we possess. So far forth as we die unto sin, so far forth we live unto God. As much as we put off of the old man, so much of the new man we put on. This is a great encouragement unto all yong travailers in Gods way: so far as they have gone, 'tis all their own. So the Lord tels Jeho∣shuah, every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I given unto you, Jos. 1.3. So Israel takes possession. For A∣braham heir of the world was called to Gods foot, Esay 41.2. and so God gave him possession: And no otherwise can the children of Abraham hope to inherit the land, then by walking in the steps of A. brahams faith and obedience, Rom. 4.12, 13. And they must fight for all they shall possess. So it followes. 3. Contend with him in battle. The word  here turnd, Contend, properly signifies, Mis∣cemini, be ye mingled; so Arias Montanus turns it; and Ainsworth, Medle with him. Yea, and our Translators so render the same word, v. 5. of this Chapter, , medle not with them, how ever their mindes changed in turning the same word here. To mingle is to make a medley. The word also signifies to ruminate or chew the cud. The word  which is rendred here Battle, were better turnd War: For how ever the word signifie both, yet war and battle differ, as Bellum and Praelium; bellum war, imports hostility, and hostile disaffection of enemies one against another, although there may be truces and cessations, à praelio, from actual battle and fighting: but the war lasts, while the hostility and enmity lasts, and till a peace be made, or one of the parties destroyed. And such was the hostility between the Greeks and Trojans, the Romans and Carthaginians: and such was the war between Israel and the Ama∣lekites, Exod. 17.16. and between Israel and Sihon and the Amorites here. The reason of this war. 1. Its Gods cause. He puts the enmity, be∣tween the Woman and the Serpent, and their respective seeds, Gen. 3. 2. Our right. God hath given Sihon the Amorite King of Hesh∣bon and his land into our hand and power. 3. There is necessity of such a meanes for the recovery of our right.
1. The word  war here used is from  to cat, or  bread, or what is eaten. Which imports to us, that war is an eater, a waster, a consumer, and that on both sides. The sword devours or eats one as well as another, 1 Sam. 11.25. even to the utter wasting of nations, and desolation of kingdoms. So that howsoever the war began, and whatever the cause and quarrel was at first, yet the quarrel in the end will be, for necessary support of nature, for bread; Thou hast bread, and I have none, thou hast meat, and I have none; thou hast clothes, and I have none. And therefore the Wiseman gives good counsel; the beginning of strife is as when one letteth out waters. Or rather, according to the order of the words,Prov. 17. v. 14. He who letteth out waters  is as the begin∣ning of strife: therefore leave off contention before it be medled withal, Prov. 17.14. The vast level in the North and North East of this Nation, which lay long time under water, might at first have been prevented with half a dayes labour, which hath cost much treasure, and the labour of many years; and it may be yet questioned, whether in vain or not. Such advice as this was given in this place many years ago, while it was Res integra, when as yet no blood was drawen; but in vain. Yea, even , that counsel was imputed as a great crime to the Author of it; when yet the effect hath proved, that it was good counsel, how ever it was taken. War is an eater, a wa∣ster, a consumer. 2. Although war in diverse cases may be lawful, yet Gods peo∣ple ought to wait upon Gods summons; Gods Trumpet must sound Alarum when they go forth to battle, Numb. 10. 3. Hence it appears, that, although ambitious Tyrants and Invaders usurp a power over others, as Sihon did over the Moa∣bites, and are permitted so to do, by the patient and long-suffe∣ring God; yet Altissimus est patiens redditor, Ecclus. 5.4. the most High hath his Jubile, Levit. 25. when he will restore every one to his right. 4. Although the Lord give to Israel, Sihon and the Amorite King of Heshbon, and his land, into their power, yet must Israel fight for it. The promises of God, do not disoblige us from that duty which is required of us for the obtaining of the promises. No, not the Oath of God, Deut. 8.1. Hebr. 6.13, 14, 15. Yea, the promi∣ses of God are a stronger obligation to binde us to obedience, 2 Cor. 7.1. Mysticè. 1. Heshbon is no free City, but under the tyranny of Sihon. Thoughts are not free, as many think, who make little ac∣count of them. Its true indeed, that the judgement of the heart and thoughts belongs not to mans day, nor can man judge of them. It is also true, that the thoughts or dinarily, without our choice, glide into our mindes as light into a room; but whether these be
good or evil, they are not free from Gods knowledge or cognisance. For he judges the thought of the righteous to be judgement,Prov. 12. v. 5. Prov. 12.5. and the thought of foolishness to be sin, Pro. 24.9. and 15.26. And if the Lord take cognisance of the evil thought and judge it to be sinful, surely the sinful man is liable to punishment for the sinful thought. And therefore S. Peter directs Simon to pray, that the thought of his heart may be forgiven him, Acts 8.22. 2. The exhortation is, medle or mingle with him, with Sihon the Amorite King of Heshbon, in war or battle. What shall we mingle with him? Deal with him at his own weapon. So our Lord coped with the Devil, Scripture against Scripture. Object. But Sihon suggests evil thoughts. Suggest thou good thoughts against them. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts. Tis true; but good thoughts also proceed from thence: For Prov. 4.23. Out of the heart, are the issues of life. What though Sihon and Heshbon be strong? the good thoughts are from God and they are stronger. Igneus est illis vigor & coelestis origo. Good thoughts have fervent force, and heavenly birth. Does Sihon the Amorite King of Heshbon fight against thee with wrathful thoughts? answer him with milde and gentle. Does the Amorite set upon thee with hard speeches? Give him a milde answer. It was the Jews stratagem, when the Romans fought against Jerusalem, and forced their Engine, their Iron Ram against the City walls to batter them, they cast out Wooll-packs; which met the Ram, and saved their wals. A soft answer turneth away wrath, Prov. 15.1. Does the Amorite proceed to cursing and bitterness? Though they curse, yet bless thou, Psal. 109.28. Bless them that curse you, Matth. 5.44. Its the precept of the true Jehoshuah. Not rendring evil for evil, 1 Pet. 3.9. nor rayling for rayling: but contrary wise blessing, as knowing, that ye are called, that ye should inherit a blessing, 1 Pet. 3.9. It was the practice of the true Jehoshuah, when he was reviled, he reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2.23. Why therefore should the opposition of Sihon, with his Hesh∣bonites, his Amorites, his Army of evil thoughts discourage the Is∣rael of God? For why should any true Israelite complain? Alas! my vain thoughts lodge in me. Heshbon prevailes over me, Jer. 4.14. Mistake not thine own state, poor soul! The thoughts are quick and nimble mortons, which, its possible, may be indifferent, or naturally good; or, if evil, haply not evil to thee. There is an open passage from all sensible things to the senses; as they say, Quodlibet visibile radiat, every visible thing sends forth a species or image of its self; the like we may say of other objects in regard of their respective senses. And the way lies as open from the senses unto
the common sense, and fansie and thoughts. If now the thought be evil, as injected and cast into the soul by the Evil one, its evil to thee only if thou entertain it well. If you feed a Dog, hee'l be sure to resort to you, and faun on you, as one who loves him. But if you beat him away, and be constant and earnest in so doing, hee'l be gon, and look at you as his enemy. Even such are our thoughts to us, as we are to them. They faun upon us, as if they loved us, and presented somewhat convenient for us: if we give them good entertainment, feed them with consent and delight in them, they will abide with us, and lodge with us, Jer. 4. But if we beat them away with the Staff of the Law (as the Chald. Par. calls it, Psal. 23.4.) they will forsake us. The Lord knowes the thoughts of man, that they are vain, Ps. 94.11, 12. but then follows, Blessed is the man whom thou correctest, O Lord, and teachest him out of thy Law. Tis true, a Dog is impudent; his Epithet is , shameless; and our thoughts they are bold and thrust themselves upon us. They were so bold, so unseasonable, and saucy they were, that they intruded into the company of the Disciples even at a time most unseasonable, , Luke 9.46.Luke 9. v. 46. There entred in a reasoning among them, this, which of them should be the greatest. Our Lord complains of them, They came about me like Bees, Psal. 118.27. Beelzebub was the God of Ekron, 2 Kings 1.2. (whence the Poets had their Acheron) who has hi name from  a Fly, as Macrobius cals him , a god that drives away Flies. He injects and casts his evil thoughts into the souls of men; which are impudent as Flyes are; and though you beat them away, they will return. The only way is to kill them; as they say, it was Domi∣tians the Emperours business, to kill Flyes: An exercise too unsuit∣able for an Emperour, unless he intended thereby to be like his fellow-gods, as he called them, and especially him who was cal∣led  and , Jupiter, who drove away flyes. How∣ever, it is a laudable, yea, a divine exercise, and fit for those who would be like unto the true God, to be , to drive away, mortifie, and kill the vain and sinful thoughts. Mysticè. The word  signifies also to ruminate; ruminate upon him; meditate upon him. The verb  so signifies. But being in the reflex form  it signifies a more then ordinary rumination and meditation. Let us ruminate and meditate on Sihon, on Heshbon. Sihon is a sweeper; he endeavours to sweep out our good thoughts; let us en∣deavour also to sweep out all his evil thoughts. Sihon is Eradicator, that evil spirit that endeavours to root up all the plants of righteous∣ness. And let us root up all the plants of wickedness. Every plant which our heavenly Father hath not planted shall be rooted out, Matth. 15.13. Let us extirpate every plant of wickedness. Let us
sweep out the dust of the false knowledge. This was Davids practise, Psal. 77.6. in Vulg. Lat. Scopebam spiritum meum, I swept my spi∣rit, or rather, my spirit made diligent search. So let us search, so let us sweep out every Sluts corner in our house. There is no doubt, but, if we will take pains with our selves, we shall finde work enough within doores; even in the inner chambers of our hearts. There is great need to sweep it. There is a treasure lost there. The woman swept that house to finde her Groat, Luke 15.8. The old Latin text had, Evertit domum, she overturnd the house; as ma∣ny endeavour by controversies and vain janglings to overthrow the Church of Christ. The Mistriss bids her Maids sweep the house: the one asked the other for a Broom; the other said, it was a Besom; no, saith she, it is a Broom: while they thus contended, the house lay unswept. The wisdom of God cals upou us to sweep and cleanse our hearts, James 4.8. And men quarel and contend a∣bout that word whereby they should be cleansed, John 15.3. and leave the work undone. O how often come men to hear the cleansing word, how it should be applyed for the purifying of their hearts, and by that very Opus operatum, as they call it, they think them∣selves cleansed,Prov. 30. v. 12. they are pure in their own eyes, when yet they are not washed  from their own dung. But let us return unto the former signification of the word: Let us contend, let us medle with Sihon and his Heshbonites in battle. The enemy must be discovered before we can fight him. The Roman Historian saith of a certain people in Italy, with whom they had war, Difficilius ipsos invenire quàm vincere, It was more difficult to finde them out, then to overcome them. The people of Heshbon are such a subtile people, they lurk within us. How long wilt thou cause thy vain thought to lodge in thee? Jer. 4.14. The man of sin,Jer. 4. v. 14. Sihon, the Leader of evil thoughts, cannot be revealed, unless there be first a departure, 2 Thes. 2.3. While our thoughts lodge in us, and are of our house, while we are one with them, and they with us, we cannot possibly perceive them or discern them as enemies unto us. If the object be too near us, we cannot discover it; Sensibile supra sensorium non facit sensatio∣nem. When what is visible, is upon the sight, it cannot be seen. The god of this world blindes the eyes of men with their own thoughts, whereby they are not discerned. But if we look on our thoughts at a distance, if we depart from the man of sin, he will be then revea∣led; we shall then discover him, and see how fouly we have been abused by him. When the enemy is discovered, he is not to be conquered by out∣ward means. Our great enemies we have to deal withal, are our vain foolish thoughts. And therefore as he were a mad man, who should hope to overcome a Sword or Dart with a thought; so is
he as mad who thinks to conquer thoughts and imaginations with a Sword or worldly weapon. Yet such hath been the madness of the Cainish generation from the beginning; that what opinions they cannot subdue with spiritual weapons, they confute them with a Prison, Fire, and Fagot. But indeed herein they much betray their own weakness, and their bad cause, who stir up the Magistrate to make Lawes to put men in prison, or put them to death for suppo∣sed Heresies, or erroneous judgements of divine matters; which because the ignorant zealots cannot prove to be such, or convince them by spiritual armes, they betake themselves to temporal and outward. It was the custome of Nero the Emperour to go up and down Greece like a Fidler, and to challenge all Minstrels of the best note, to sing and play with him. If he overcame any, he got the prize; if he were worsted, he took a course with his Adver∣sary, that he should never sing or play more, causing him one way or other to be put to death. Nero was the first persecutor of the Christian Church, whom all follow to this day; and as all men judge of him, so may they of all such absurd and ridiculous men, men of corrupt mindes, reprobate concerning the faith; and their folly (or madness, ,) shall be made manifest unto all men, as Nero's, Jannes and Jambres, their predecessors hath been, 2 Tim. 3.9. For they declare evidently, that they want spi∣ritual weapons, when they trust to carnal and temporal. This our Lord Jesus Christ shewes and will shew, when he conqures An∣tichrist, not with fire and sword, but with the spirit of his mouth, 2 Thes. 2.2. Thoughts and opinions are spiritual things, and can be discerned only spiritually, and by spiritual weapons only be overcome; but never in others, unless first they be mastered and subdued in our selves. And how shall that be done? 1. Hate vain thoughts. These are enemies which thou hast a warrant to hate. Yea, hate them with a perfect hatred. Do I not hate them that hate thee? saith David. It could not be otherwise. He was a man according to Gods heart, a friend of God; and friends have communionem consiliorum & voluntatum, communion of counsels and wills. And therefore David hates vain thoughts, Psal. 119.113. 2. Entertain good thoughts and highly esteem them: they are  sent of God unto thee. Thou canst not think any thing of thy self, as of thy self, thy sufficiency is of God. So Da∣vid esteemed his good thoughts; How pretious are thy thoughts un∣to me O God! How great is the sum of them? Or,Psal. 139. v. 17. how strong are the heads of them? There are leading good thoughts, which, if they be followed, will prove exceeding strong. Such was that of David, Psal. 119.59. I thought on my wayes; and what came of it? and I turnd my feet unto thy testimonies. I made haste, and
delayed not to keep thy Commandements. The Apostle knew full well, how powerful good leading thoughts are, Phil. 4.8. Ha∣ving reckoned up things true, honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report, what ever vertue, what ever praise, think, saith he, on these things: and then, The God of peace shall be with you. These are able to cope with Sihon King of Heshbon, both in strength and number: for so it followes, if I number them, they are more then the sand. More, and more mighty were they with David, when all nations compassed him about; yet so strong was he, that, in the Name of his God, he doubted not but he should cut them off, Psal. 118.10, 11, 12. But when did all Nations com∣pass David about? The Psalm; how ever some understand of David in the history, yet it cannot be made good of him, but of Christ the spiritual David and his Church, as it is plain by evi∣dent proof, v. 20.—26. And most true it is, that all Nations have compassed him about. Yea, swarms of temptations from evil thoughts, as of Bees, have compassed him about; for he was tempted in all things ,Hebr. 4. v. 15. according to similitude, with∣out sin, Hebr. 4.15. And in that he hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour those who are tempted, Hebr. 2.18. And therefore he being the minister of circumcision for the truth of God, even the true circumcision of the heart, Rom. 15.8. He cuts off all the vain sinful thoughts,Psal. 118. v. 10, 11, 12. from the heart, and so circumciseth it. And thence it is, that Psal. 118.10, 11, 12. he saith, , I will circumcise them: so  properly signifies; and its thrice there used, importing the circumcision 1. Of the Father, in the place named, Rom. 15.8. 2. Of the Son, Col. 2.11. 3. Of the Spirit, Rom. 2.29. Phil. 3.3. And accordingly he circumciseth his Church under all these dispensations. What though the Gyants, the , the earth-born thoughts arise against thee? Are any, are all of them too mighty for thy God to overcome? Retyre unto thine own heart, and to thy God there, and to his pretious thoughts. When the heart is let loose, and the thoughts not kept at home, thousands of wicked imaginations break in, and fill the soul, and indispose it towards God, and weaken it and disable it for resistance of the spiritual enemy. Nunquam tam bene quis exit, quin sit intùs manere melius. Never does any go abroad, but its much better to stay at home. The mighty God is the good mans dwelling place, Psal. 90.1. Through him the Zamzummim the wic∣ked thoughts are subdued, and brought under the obedience of Jesus Christ, Deut. 2.20, 21. 2 Cor. 10.5. 3. Let us put on the whole armour of God, that we may be able to stand against the wile of the Devil: For we wrestle not onely against flesh and blood, carnal thoughts only, which are as Flesh-Flyes, but also against the spiritualities of wickedness, Ephes. 6.11, 12. Wherefore let us gird about our loynes with truth. The
loynes are the seat of lust, both inherent and acquisit. The beast he stirs up evil affections there, Job 40.16. His strength is in his loynes, and his force is in the Navel of his belly. The Apostles coun∣sel is therefore to gird up the loynes of our minde, , of our reason or discursive faculty, 1 Pet. 1.13. There's great danger to be foyld at the weapon. While Eve, a figure of the thoughts, 2 Cor. 11.3. (, are not mindes, but thoughts and acts of the minde,) adventured, without this girdle,2 Cor. 11. v. 3. to reason with the Ser∣pent, she was conquered. And while Eves children are un-girt in their thoughts, while they do—ad morem discincti vivore Nattae, live without regard had to their thoughts, Sihon soon prevailes over them. The brest-plate of righteousness; Lights and perfections were in Aarons brest-plate; and they are required in all those who are made Priests unto God, to be so armed, Levit. 8.8.Ephes. 6. v. 14. and having your feet shod; shooing your feet  with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, or, with the confirmation and establishment. Thou walkest in the midst of snares, Ecclus. 9.13. Briars and Thorns are with thee, Ezech. 2.6. while we have to do with Sihon and his Heshbonites, evil thoughts, spirits and men, we had need to be well shod. Not so when we converse with good thoughts, good spirits, and good men. When Moses came with his feet shod towards the Mount of God,Exod. 3. v. 5. Josh. 5. v. 15. the Lord bad him put off his shooes, Exod. 3.5. So said the Angel to Jehoshuah: And there is the same reason alleaged to both; because the place was holiness. No Briars, no Thorns there; there's no need of fencing and arm∣ing our selves, unless against thoughts and words and men of Belial, 2 Sam. 23.6, 7. Adde to these arms, the shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; praying with all prayer and supplication at all times, (or in every season , in every opportunity: yea, in season and out of season, conti∣nually) in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseve∣rance and supplication for all Saints. This part of the spiritual ar∣mour is not fixt to any part of the body, as others are: for here∣with the whole armour of God is knit together. Thus being armed with the weapons of our warfare mighty through God for the pulling down of strong holds,2 Cor. 10. v. 5. casting down reasonings () and every height or high thing exalted () against the knowledge of God, and captiving every thought () unto the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. So will the Lord of hosts give Sihon and Heshbon into our hand and power, and tread Satan under our feet shortly. For this end, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. Rom. 16.20.
What nation is there so great that hath God so nigh unto them,Deut. 4. ver. 7. as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for?] The Translators here have understood Moses, as if he had compared the only true God and his presence with other nations, and with his own people. As if he had said, God is more present with Israel, then with any other nation. But the comparison stands between the Heathen gods, & the true God of Israel. For 1. Therefore there is added the proper name of the true God Jehovah; and appropriation of him to his people, Jehovah our God. Such comparison we read, Deut. 32.31. Jer. 14.22. 1 Cor. 8.4.5. and often elsewhere. And because the Heathen worshipped many gods, the word here is to be turned plurally, gods. And thus the Vulg. Lat. Pagnin, Castellio, Munster, the French and Spanish Translations, Martin Luther, two translations in the Low Dutch, five English Tran∣slations; all these render the word plurally, gods; and Diodati, though he render it in the singular number, yet he acknowledgeth that some understand the word plurally, the gods of the Gentiles, which could not succour their own worshippers. So the Tigurin Bible; and Vatablus acknowledgeth, that in the Hebrew the words are gods nigh. Herein Tremellius and Ainsworth mislead our Translators, who understood the word , in the singular number, and of the true God. And Drusius is mistaken with them; who, though  be plural, and signifie gods neer, excuseth it by saying, that Elohim is of the common number; and that  was put in the plural to answer the termination, not the sense. A strange reason; as if the Spirit of God had more regard to an  or a like ending of words, then of the sense and matter. And although Tremellius alleage a like example, Josh. 24.19. and Ainsworth another, Deut. 5.26. Yet the common name  applyed to the other nations, and the proper name , with his re∣lation joyn'd to his people, evidently prove, that there is not the same reason of these testimonies, and the Scripture now before us. Beside, there was no doubt or question could be made, whe∣ther the God of Israel were so neer to any other nation, as to his own people in covenant with him. Which yet is all, that these men contend for. Whereas indeed the comparison stands between the presence and help of other gods to their respective people, and the presence and help of the only true God to his people of Israel. 2. The words following in v. 8. make this sense clear and evi∣dent; what great nation is there which hath so righteous statutes and judgements, as all this Law, which I set before you this day? So that the Lord God of Israel is compared and preferred before the gods of other nations in regard of his nighness and accessibleness
when his people call upon him; so in respect of all his righteous Law set before his people, in comparison of the statutes and judge∣ments of other nations, which how ever they might, at least, many of them be called righteous; yet were they mixt with unrighteous Lawes: As those of the Lacedemonians, which however they had many just lawes delivered to them by Lycurgus, yet theft was tole∣rated among them, yea, commanded; provided, that the thing stoln were kept so close, that it could not be found, ; It was held lawful, or commanded by the Law, to steal, but it was accounted dishonest to be discovered, saith Plutarch. And although some Law-givers, as Numa and Lycurgus, for the credit of their Lawes, pretended the authority of a Deity; yet, beside that, their subtilty was soon known, the vanity and superstition of the Lawes themselves Ex insitis argumentis, easily made manifest, what god was the author of them. I wish therefore, that the words were thus rendred: what great nation is there, whose gods are so near unto them, as Jehovah our God is in all things we call upon him for? The truth of this hath hitherto appeared in the histories of the Egyptians, the Amalekites, the Midianites, the Moabites, and the Ammonites; whose gods were not so nigh unto them, nor helpful at all in the necessities of their respective worshippers, as the Lord God of Israel had been unto his people, in all things for which they called upon him. So that the words are an appeal to the peoples experience, touching the truth of all these Histories; and a strong argument obliging them to believe and obey the Lord their God so nigh unto them in all things they call upon him for. 1. Take notice hence, O thou Israel of God, what God that is whom thou worshippest; how near he is unto thee; and can he be neerer then in the midst of thee? Levit. 26.11, 12. Numb. 5.3. Deut. 23.14. Ezech. 37.26. even in thy heart and in thy mouth, Deut. 30.14. Rom. 10.8. James 1.21. 2. How ready he is to hear thee and answer thee, when thou callest upon him, Psal. 145.18. Esay 58.9. Yea, before thou callest upon him, Psal. 32.5. Esay 65.24. 3. How reasonable therefore is it that we should renounce those false gods, who cannot draw near unto, or help their own people? Such are the gods of the Edomites (earthly men) whose god is their belly, who minde earthly things, 2 Chron. 25.15. Phil. 3.19. Yea, how unreasonable is it, that we draw near unto the Lord our God, the only true God, who is most near, most able, most wil∣ling, and most ready to help his people? By so doing, we shall invite the Lord to draw nigh unto us. It is the exhortation of S. James, Chap. 4.8. Draw near unto God, and he will draw near unto you.
But how shall we draw near unto our God? How else but by humbling our selves under his mighty hand, and opposing the temptati∣ons of his and our enemy; therefore the same Apostle premiseth immediately these means,Jam. 4. v. 7. v. 7. . They are all Military phrases; S. James, as a Captain or Leader, gives words of Command; Be sub∣ject or subordinate unto God (the Commander in chief,) withstand the Devil, (the great enemy, and then he warrants them, they shall rout him) he will flee from you. Such were the antient engage∣ments of the person baptized, who being turnd toward the West, said, , I renounce Satan. And then be∣ing turnd toward the East, he said, , I am co-ordinate or conjoyn'd as a Souldier unto Jesus Christ. And so, much of antiquity there is extant in that excellent form of Bap∣tism, though antiquated; wherein the person baptized is admit∣ted into Christs matricula, his Military Roll and Army for this end; Manfully to fight under his Banner, against Sin, the World, and the Devil; and to continue Christs faithful Souldier and servant unto his lives end. When such Souldiers are foyled and wounded by the enemy, and are sorrowful for their wounds, the Emperour of the World, the Commander in Chief vouchsafes to visit them. So saith that man of war who had experience of it,Psal. 34. v. 18. Psal. 34.18. The Lord is near to the broken of heart, and will save the wounded or contrite of spirit. And, his salvation is nigh them that fear him; that glory may dwell in our land, Psal. 85.9. Now who would not serve under such a Commander, who disdains not to visit, yea, to be billetted with the meanest of his common Souldiers?Esay 57. v. 15. Hear what he saith, Esay 57.15. Thus saith the High and Lofty One, who dwelleth or abideth for ever, and whose Name is holy. I dwell in the high and holy; even with him who is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. And there∣fore it is no mervail that his Name alone is exalted,Psal. 148. v. 13, 14. and his Maje∣stie is above the Earth and the Heaven, who exalteth the horn of his people, the praise of all his Saints (or mercifull ones, ) the sons of Israel, the people nigh unto him, Psal. 148.13, 14. Then followes the , or last triumphal song, Revel. 19.1. God grant, we all may sing our parts in it! Hallelujah.
Attende Tibi.SER. XIII. Look to thy Self. SERMON XIII. Deuteronomie 4. ver. 9. Onely take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart, all the dayes of thy life, but teach them thy sons and thy sons sons.] THis Text containes precepts of greatest moment; yea, as the first. is here propounded, its of only moment, Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently. And the precept of conveying the doctrine to after ages, is of like mo∣ment; Thou shalt teach them thy sons and thy sons sons. Which is the same, but in a more large sense, which S. Paul saith to Ti∣mothy, 1 Tim. 4.16. Look to thy self, and the doctrine. The words may be considered in themselves, or with reference unto those preceding. In themselves, they contain two general precepts. The former may be divided into two formally differing one from another, but really one and the same. 1. Only take heed to thy self. 2. The next is very like unto it, and indeed the same with it, or little differing from it; And keep thy soul diligently. This is demonstrated from the end, and the adjunct caution. The end is two wayes expressed, and the later the effect of the for∣mer: 1. Lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen; and 2. Lest they depart from thy heart; which later will follow, in case of our fail in the former.
This precept or precepts must be observed for this end or ends,SER. XIII. without fail, without interruption, all the dayes of thy life. And thou must take care of the transmitting what thine eyes have seen, to thy sons and to thy sons sons. In the words are contained these divine sentences. 1. Israel had seen some things or words. 2. Israel ought only to take heed to himself, and keep his soul diligently. 3. Israel ought to take heed to himself, and keep his soul dili∣gently, lest he forget the things or words which his eyes have seen, and lest they depart from his heart. 4. Thus and thus Israel ought to do, for these ends, all the dayes of his life. 5. Israel ought to teach them his sons, and his sons sons. 1. Israel had seen some things or words. Wherein we must enquire, what these things or words were; and how Israel had seen them. 1. What they here turn things, are properly words, , and indeed so to be rendred as I shall shew anon. Those things or words, if we look for 1. In the former part of the Chapter, they are either the Law of the Lord taught by Moses, v. 1.5. Or Examples of the breach, and observa∣tion of the Law, with their suitable events, v. 3. Your eyes have seen that which the Lord did, because of Baal-Peor: For every man which went after Baal-Peor, the Lord thy God hath destroyed him from the midst of thee: But ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God, are alive all of you this day. 2. The things or words which their eyes had seen, are expressed in the tenth Verse following the words of the Text. Take heed to thy self and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things or words which thine eyes have seen, &c. The day when thou stoodest before the Lord thy God in Horeb, &c. For the words, they had seen, are understood of those which follow, v. 10. viz. the words of the Law, v. 13. the Ten words, Deut. 10.4. which therefore Israel is commanded to convey to their sons and their sons sons. Accordingly the LXX have , all the words which thine eyes have seen. So Hierom, Ne obliviscaris verborum, that thou forget not the words, &c. So likewise the Chald. Par. and Arias Montanus. But could Israel see words? The use of the sight for hearing, is very frequent in Scripture. All the people saw those thunderings or voyces ;Exod. 20. v. 18. Luke 2. v. 15. and they are said to see the noise of the Trumpet, Exod. 20.18. So Luke 2.15. Let us go even unto Bethle∣hem, , and let us see this word. John speaks of himself and his fellow Apostles and Disciples, That which we have seen with our eyes, that which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life, 1 John 1.1. And again, v. 3. That which we have seen, &c.
But why must Israel see these things or words? 1. Surely what is purely divine, cannot otherwise be revealed unto man, but by a divine Oracle, could Plato say. 2. Nor can there be an intercourse between God and man otherwise then by divine words. But how could this be truly spoken to Israel, That their eyes had seen the words of God, namely, the Decalogue or Ten Words, as they are called? For many of Israel, to whom Moses spake, were yet unborn when the Law was given, as all under 38 years of age. And how then can it be said of them, that their eyes had seen the Ten Words? It is well known, that the Lord deals with a whole Nation, as with one man; so he speaks of Moab and Ammon, of Elam, of Assur, and to Israel here; Thine eyes have seen. For although the persons may be diminished or increased, yet the Nation is the same; as a River alwayes ebbing or flowing is yet the same River. Beside, the parents had a charge to transmit the knowledge of the divine words to their children and posterity: which there∣fore they must regard, as if their own eyes had seen what their Parents convey unto them. Yea, succeeding ages accounted what their forefathers did or suffered, to be suffered or done by, and to themselves. Hos. 12.4. He found him in Bethel, and there he spake with Us, saith Hosea many ages afterward. However this be true and satisfactory, yet are there inward and spiritual words, and an inward sight of them. What other words are they, whereof the Psalmist, Psal. 19. and the Apostle speak, Rom. 10.18. Have they not heard? Yea verily; Their sound went into all the earth, and their words into the ends of the world. 1. Hence it followes, that Gods words are visible words. S. John saith, as before, That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life. And again, v. 3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you. The Word of life was visible unto S. John and his fellow Apostles. For howsoever some men may satisfie themselves and others, with saying, that S. John here speaks of the dayes of Christs flesh, when the Apostles saw and heard him; surely the same may as well be said of those who apprehended him, smote him, crucified him. For these saw him, heard him, handled him, and that roughly. Be∣sides, the humanity and flesh of Christ is no where called the Word; but the Word is said to be made flesh, and to dwell in us, John 1.14. Adde hereunto, that what S. John saw, heard, and hand∣led, was from the beginning, 1 John 1.1. Whereas the flesh of Christ was not from the beginning; but in time and the fulness of time, Gal. 4.
There are inward and spiritual senses, whereby the man of God sees and hears, savors, tastes, and handles the words of God. Such senses there must be, because there is an inward man of the heart; which must not want his due powers and faculties. For since his words are spirit and life, John 6. how can they be otherwise per∣ceived then by spiritual senses? according to the Apostles reaso∣ning, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural, animalish, or souly man, perceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him;Hebr. 5. v. 14. and he cannot know them, because they are spiritually dis∣cerned. And therefore the perfect men have their senses exerci∣sed  to the discerning of both good & evil, Heb. 5.14. The words of God are sure, firm, and certainly true, as being demonstrable, and that by the most principal demonstration, even from the evidence of sense; The words which thine eyes have seen. For although the words of God are conveyed by hearing, whereby faith cometh, Rom. 10.17. Yet the most certain sense is that of seeing; according to that well-known and approved speech of the Poet, Tardiùs irritant animos demissa per aures, Quàm quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus— Things heard more slowly move the minde, then they Which are committed to faithful eyes— Hence proceeds the tactual, approbative and experimental know∣ledge of the divine words. So that unto such experienced men, we may appeal; Do you not see this truth? do you not handle with your hands this word of life? do you not taste, that the Lord is gra∣tious? 1 Pet. 2.3. This is the most certain knowledge, and most beneficial attainment of the living Word of God, when we relish, savor, handle, see, and taste it; when we have our share of what we know. Thus according to the old Etymologist, Sapientia est sapida scientia; Wisdom is a savory knowledge of divine things. I shall end this point with the Apostles prayer for his Philip∣pians. For this I pray,Phil. 1. v. 9. that your love may abound  in acknowledgement and all or every sense, Phil. 1.9. 2. Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently. In which words, we must inquire, 1. What this self is; 2. What the taking heed and keeping of thy self, is; and 3. What it is only and diligently so to do. 1. Moses explaines, thy self, by thy soul; and thy soul, by thy heart. For so no doubt Animus cujus{que} is est quis{que} every mans soul and minde is himself, and is very frequently so used in Scripture, as I have heretofore shewen. Thus what S. Luke 9.5. cals him∣self, S. Matth. 16.26. cals his soul. And the soul is here explained by the heart: for although the heart sometime be specially taken for the affective part of the soul,Phil. 1. v. 9. and is so distinguished from the minde, Matth. 22.37. Yet most-what its understood more gene∣rally
of all the parts of the soul, and the whole inward man: so, what is called the heart, Matth. 15.19. is what is within, Mark 7.21. This is thy self here understood, when Moses saith, Take heed to thy self. The word  turnd take heed, is passive, and properly signifies, Be thou observed, or kept; and it is the Passive of the same Verb following; howbeit the force and use of it, is reciprocal and reflex, as Deut. 2.4.23.10. Josh. 23.11. Mal. 2.15. The LXX ren∣der this word by , to heed, which is elliptical and defe∣ctive in regard of the sense: For it signifies no more then adhibere, to apply and lay to, as , to apply the minde, the understanding, the thoughts, the heart, the memory: as we say, adhibere, applicare, adjicere, advertere animum, to apply ones minde to something. This we often meet withal in Scripture, Esay 42.25. he laid it not to heart: and 47.7. and 57.11. Ezech. 40.4. Set thine heart up∣on all that I shall shew thee, Dan. 10.12. Thou didst set thine heart to understand. This is done, when we fix our wandring thoughts and desires, by meditation, and laying them up in our memory, and reserving them for life and practice. As for the manner, measure, and degree of keeping, its two wayes expressed in the text; 1. Only. 2. Diligently. 1. Only excludes all other keeping and care of any thing else to be kept, except thy self, thy heart, thy soul; at least comparatively; so that the keeping of thy self, thine heart, thy soul, is either sufficient of it self, in lieu of all other duties; or to be preferred before and above all other. To which is also added, , that which they render dili∣gently, which imports two things; 1. Not only care; whence Hierom turns it Solicitè, carefully: and the Orator defines care, Aegritudinem animi cum cogitatione, a pensiveness of minde, with taking thought. 2. It implies also strength to be used, that thereby we may prove and improve our care: whence its rendred by Valdè, which is Validè, strongly, mightily. The Wiseman exhorting to the same duty, keep thy heart, saith he, with all diligence: which is better rendred in the margent,Prov. 4. v. 23. keep thy heart above all keeping; which answers to the Hebrew, ; where  is a note of comparison; so that the Wiseman requires a great degree of keeping the heart, above all other keeping. And therefore Moses having exhorted Israel to keep himself, adds,  and keep thy soul diligently. The first precept is, only keep thy self, let it be thine only care. And when he thought that was not enough, he added, and keep thy soul diligent∣ly. The like addition we have, Zeph. 2.1. Scrutamini vos ipsos, search your selves, an act of great diligence;Zeph. 2. v. 1. yet the Prophet presently adds, & scrutamini, and search. But a man cannot take heed or observe himself as he ought, unless he first know himself; and therefore that precept which was fa∣mous
among the wise Heathen, Know thy self, was said to come down from heaven. That we may the better understand this, we must be very care∣ful to make a Spagyric separation, and exactly sever that which is truly the mans self, from what is untruly so called. For although a man hath in him, much of the brute nature, while he lives according to sense; and though every man hath in him some degree of rea∣son, though most-what corrupt and defective, while he lives ac∣cording to what is called the  the natural, animalish or souly man; yet neither of these are truly and properly thy self. Thou camest forth from thy God; thou art his off-spring, Acts 17.29. and thou mayest truly and properly be said to be thy self, when thine heart and thy soul is defecated and purged from the defile∣ment of the earthly man, and livest according to the words which thine eyes have seen, which are the precepts of the heavenly man. And this is thy genuine self. And therefore Solomon, after long inquisi∣tion and search after wisdom, in the conclusion of his Ecclesia∣stes, Chap. 12.13.Eccles. 12. v. 13. Fear God, saith he, and keep his Comman∣dements; (the words which thine eyes have seen;) for this is All man. The reason why Israel must onely keep himself, his heart, his soul diligently, may appear from consideration 1. Of the thing to be kept: 2. The words to be kept in it. 3. The manner, measure, and degree of keeping them. 1. The thing to be kept, is thy self, thy heart, thy soul. Of thy self, O man, thou art weak, and the heart and soul which is either thy self, or the principal part of thy self, its weak and tender, and wants keeping. And therfore when the Wiseman gives the same precept, Prov. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, he useth the word , which is properly to keep what is yong, tender, weak, and in danger to be destroyed. Whence  has the name, which sig∣nifies a tender shoot, or weak plant in danger to be troden down by the beasts, and therefore its fenc'd about and kept. Such, and so chary ought to be the keeping of the heart. Yea, nature it self, in the natural heart, directs, with what care we ought to keep the ra∣tional and moral heart. It hath about it, for a covering, a strong skin which they call capsula cordis; and about that, to fence it, a strong wall of ribs; and that which we call the  or brest. How much more ought the rational and moral heart, the minde, will, and affections, to be kept with all, yea, above all keeping? Nam pretium pars haec corpore majus habet; This, then the body, hath a greater price. Thou, thy heart, thy soul, is in danger to be lost, and that many wayes, especially two. 1. Its in danger to lose it self, by turning away from the Lord, Deut. 29.11. running forth to outward things and so corrupting it self. 2. Its in danger to be lost by others; yet
not without the mans own betraying of his own heart. As Dali∣lah stole away Samsons heart: But his heart had first run out and followed his eyes, Judges 14.2. and then she got his heart, 16.16. and betrayed him to his enemies. 2. If the Casket be so pretious, how much more pretious and excellent is the Jewel in it? It is no less no other then the Lord himself. Hos. 4.10. They have left off to keep the Lord; that is, to observe and wait on him, as his Priests and Levites were wont to do, Numb. 1.53. and 3.36. and to retain him in their acknowledge∣ment,Rom. 1. v. 28. Rom. 1.28. . 3. There is reason also why the heart should be thus kept, from consideration of the manner, measure, and degree of keeping it. Which in reason must arise with the excellency of the thing to be kept; and what is kept in it; as also from the tenderness of it, and danger to be corrupted and lost. All which considerations inforce upon us an exact keeping, yea, such a keeping as is above all other keepings as the marginal reading hath it, Prov. 4.23. Yea, adde to these the Wisemans reason on that place: Out of the heart are the issues of life; whether we speak of the natural heart and the issues of it; or of the moral heart and the issues of it, both are true. For the natural heart is the cause of the natural life, Primum vivens and ultimum moriens, first living, last dead. And if we speak of the true life, it is Christ, which is our life, Col. 3.4. who dwels in our hearts by faith; with whom, when he appears, we shall appear in glory. Whereof S. John speaks, now are we the sons of God; but it appears not what we shall be, 1 John 3.1. meantime with the heart, man believeth unto righteousness, Rom. 10.10. And the righteous man lives by his faith, Hebr. 10.38. And by faith his heart is purified, Acts 15.9. And the pure in heart see God, Matth. 5.8. And this is the eternal life, to know thee the only God and whom thou hast sent, Jesus Christ, John 17.3. So that, whether we understand Christ our life, or our faith or righteous∣ness by faith, and life by faith, and purifying the heart by faith, or seeing and knowing God and Christ by faith, all these refer unto the heart; and so out of it are the issues of life. Whence it appears, that the keeping of the heart, is a business of the greatest mo∣ment in the world; and therefore, in all reason, it requires a keeping above all keeping. Whence we may take notice, that, 1. The precept is not, Take heed or look well to what is thine; or to those things or persons that are about thee; no, nor is it, look to thy body; nor for what is needful for thy body; nor for what may be an ornament un∣to thy body. The precept is directed to thee, to thy heart, to thy soul, to thine immortal soul; which is none of all those things, but above them all; and the taking heed to this, the keeping of this, must be above all the keeping of them all.
2. Hence it appears, that Moses supposed in Israel a power to take heed to himself and to keep his heart and his soul diligently. For surely Moses would not have given such a serious admoniti∣on from the Lord, nor would the wise Salomon directed by the onely wise God, have injoynd the same in vain, that every one should keep himself, his heart, his soul diligently, If no man had power so to do. At least they were confident that the Sons of wisdom, the Israel of God, Believeres in Christ, (such as we all profess our selves to be) that such as they have power over their own soules hearts and spirits, to keep them: Because they have in them the power of God, which is Christ himself, to keep them, 1 Cor. 1.24. 3. A man cannot be too strict, too carefull, too diligent in the keeping of his own heart. He must keep it with all keeping, yea, above all keeping. So that what care and regard men have to their houses, their fields, their treasures; the safety of their wives, their children, their friends, their servants; Such care, such vigilancy, yea, greater care, greater regard ought to be had of the heart. If these must be garded, the heart must be re-garded, the gards must be doubled, in defence of the heart. If we set on locks, for the preservation of our treasure, we must set on locks, double locks and barres for the preservation and keeping of our heart. 4. If this care, this watchfullnes be required of every one, in regard of himself,Hebr. 13. v. 17. how great must their care, their observation be, who watch for others souls? Hebr. 13.17. Obey  them that lead you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your soul, &c. How much greater must their care be, who have charge of all, 2 Cor. 11.28. the care of all the Churches? Such was S. Pauls charge. But the keeping of others, and Watching over them, is not the ministers duty onely; but even every mans in re∣gard of every man, according to his power. And therefore the wiseman, Ecclus. 17.14. He, (that is, the Lord) said unto them, Beware of all unrighteousnes; (that's a command to look to our selves, and to keepe our owne hearts) and he gave every man com∣mandement concerning his neighbour that's the care for others. And, that men are grown careless and regardless of others, it pro∣ceeds from that Cainish nature, which men have gotten by long walking in the way of Cain; It was his speech, Gen. 4.9. Am I my brothers keeper? 1. This justly reproves the gross mistake (if we may so call it) of this precept. Moses saith, only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently: And how many of the Apostate Israelites take heed to their brutish, those carnal selves, and keep their body diligently, take care of their flesh ?Rom. 13. v. 14. Rom. 13.14. pamper their bodies, feed them riotously and gluttonously, clothe them gorge∣ously.
They who wear soft raiment, are in Kings houses, saith our Lord, Matth. 11.8. Should some one of our Saviours genu∣ine Disciples behold our Congregations, he would think we were all Courtiers. 2. Others, when they are counselled by Moses to take heed to themselves, and keep their souls diligently, let them alone to provide for their natural, their animalish selves, and they keep their souls diligently: Their money is their souls, , Gold is the blood and soul of these men. Meantime that divine self that off-spring of God its troden under the feet of the beastly the brutish self, the sensual self. The immortal soul born out of God, and created to bear the image of the heaven∣ly, its wholly neglected, miserable, poor and naked. This, this is the wisdom of the carnal man to take great heed un∣to the flesh, which is corruptible, and must shortly perish; to pro∣vide with greatest care for the body, which is no better then a man∣case, feed it, clothe it, deck it, wash it, trim it, rub it, paint it, powder it, spot it, &c. In cute curanda plus aequo operati, Too busie men and women are in caring for their skin. As for the immortal soul bought with an inestimable price, which should feed on faith,Psal. 34. v. 3. Psal. 34.3. and be gloriously clothed with the Lord Jesus Christ and his Spirit, made to be the dwelling of the Deity; its so little cared for, so slighted and disregarded, as if indeed it were not at all. Minima maximi, maxima minimi aestimantur, least things are most regarded, the greatest least. O thou degenerate, unworthy, brutish man! Consider once what thou art, and know thy self. Call thy self seriously to an ac∣count, whence thou art; and of how noble a stock; who was thy maker, and for what end he made thee; and how unlike thou art unto thy God to whose image thou wert made; and how unlike thy self when thou camest out of Gods hands. Humble thy self, and sit in the dust, whereinto that flesh thou tamperest, is ere long to be resolved. Put off thine ornaments, that the Lord may know, what to do to thee, Exod. 33.5. Clothe thy proud flesh with beasts skins, as our God clothed sinful Adam, to teach him thereby mortification of his sin, Gen. 3.21. Be exhorted, O Israel to take heed to thy self, to keep thy heart, to keep thy soul diligently. Care, O care for thy soul as a thing of greatest price; as that, whose worth cannot be countervailed by all the creatures, as being better worth then all the world. For what shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world,Mark 8. v. 36, 37. , and lose (or be punished with the loss of) his own soul? Or, what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Mark 8.36, 37. Consider how easily the heart walks after the eyes, Job 31.7. How slippery our standing is, how dangerous our fall; that be∣ing fallen, we can never rise by our selves; that sin which defiles
the soul, may be engendred by an evil word; yea, by a vain thought, Jer. 4.14.Jer. 4. v. 14. O Jerusalem cleanse thy heart from wickedness, that thou mayest be saved: How long  wilt thou cause thy vain thoughts to lodge in the midst of thee? That, consent unto the tempta∣tion, compleats and perfects the sin. That sin being perfected, brings forth death. O what great need therefore is there that we take heed to our selves, and that we keep our souls diligently, that we keep our hearts above all keeping! The meanes to keep thy self, thine heart, thy soul, O Israel, is not here prescribed by Moses! The most effectual meanes was reserved for him whom the Lord would raise up, who should be like unto Moses. For surely the Lord (such is his , his moderation and equity) would not injoyn such an hard duty, as this is, to be done, but he would also shew the most effectual meanes and way, how it should be done. Wherefore the Lord Jesus, whose main end of comming into the world, was to save mens soules, he prescribes two powerfull expedients and meanes to be used by his disciples, for the effecting of it, Luke 9.23. 1. Self-denyall, and 2. Taking up the Cross. 1. Self-denyall stands as a Porter to keep the dore of the heart; And there∣fore , which we turn to keep, signifies all the Porters duty, in three acts, Observare, Cohibere, prohibere. 1. To observe who comes in, and who goes out. For so every one ought to take heed, what thoughts enter into his heart, and what desires run out. 2. To keep the heart at home, that it go not after the eyes, Num. 15.39. 3. To award and keep off temptations, Job. 31.1. 2. The Cross and patience of Jesus Christ is as a strong dore, with locks and barrs to withstand and bear off all forcible entry. And therefore  signifies a Prison-house, Gen. 40.3. Accor∣ding to our Lords precept,Luke 21. v. 19. Luke 21.19. In, or by your patience,  possess ye, or, gain ye the possession of your souls. Such diligent heed must be taken, for the avoiding of great evills that otherwise will follow. That's the third divine Axiom. 3. Israel ought to take heed to himself and keep his soul diligent∣ly, lest he forget the words which his eyes have seen, and lest they de∣part from his heart. This point adds to the former, the consideration of the ends, why Israel ought to take heed to himself, and keep his soul; and these ends are powerful reasons of this important duty, from the great and imminent danger which will ensue upon the neglect of it. Wherein we have 1. The caution or warning; only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently. 2. The peril and danger that otherwise will follow, lest thou forget the words which thine eyes have seen; and this danger brings in another; lest these words de∣part from thine heart.
Herein we must enquire, what forgetfulness is; which, because its a privation, and privatives are best known by their positives, we must first learn what memory is, and what it is to remember: which according to Plato, Speusippus, and others of that School; is Cogitationes conservare, to keep our thoughts. And they say, that the better memory is Dispositio animae inhaerentem veritatem custodi∣ens, a disposition and frame of the soul keeping truth inherent in it. But these descriptions seem too strait for the nature of memo∣ry. Others therefore ascribe two offices unto it; others three. 1. To lay up in memory. 2. To retain. 3. To recall to minde. The two former may be reduced to one; 1. As to keep and retain the thoughts. 2. To recal them when they are lost, or in danger of losing, when we have use of them. Thus Jacob  laid up and kept in his memory the dreams of his son Joseph, Gen. 37.11. So did Mary keep in her heart , all the words which were spoken of Christ, by the Shepherds, Luke 2.19.Luke 2. v. 19.51. And again v. 51. His Mother kept  all these words. Our Translators turn  in the former place, things, in the later, more advisedly, sayings. And as to remember, is to commit and retain our thoughts in memory, so likewise it sig∣nifies to recal them, as Luke 22.61. Peter remembred the words of the Lord, Luke 24.6, 7, 8. To forget therefore is to lose our thoughts, and let them slip out of our custody and keeping. So the Apostle un∣derstood forgetfulness, Hebr. 2.1. If we inquire into the reason of this warning, it proceeds from the great love of God toward his Israel. 1. He knowes the excellency of the words and things commit∣ted to our trust, and the custody of our memories, even the holy and blessed Trinity, and the work of our creation, Eccles. 12.  thy Creators: the Law of God the Father, Malac. 4.4. The Redempti∣on by Jesus, figured by bringing Israel out of Egypt, Deut. 16.3. Jude v. 5. Vulg. Lat. Sins committed against so great grace, Deut. 9.7. Ceasing from our sins, figured by the Sabbath, Exod. 20.8. and many the like: which is not a bare memory, but such as puts us upon sutable duty. Verba sensuum innuunt affectum, & effectum; words of sense (inward and outward) import affection and effect answerable thereunto, as Deut. 8.18, 19, 20. Psalm 22.27. and ma∣ny the like. 2. These are too sublime, and of too high a nature, for the foolish heart of man left to it self, to contain, Prov. 24.7. And there is in us, by corrupt nature, a stupidity and dulness in re∣gard of spiritual things, Hebr. 5.11. And Satan with his evil spirits (interpreted by our Saviour the fowls of the air) is watch∣ful to catch the Word of God, out of the heart, when it is sowen, Matth. 13.19. He is ready  to drink and swallow up the
precious liquor of the spiritual doctrine, if we let it slip, and it run out of our vessels,1 Pet. 5. v. 8. Hebr. 2.1. 1 Pet. 5.8. 3. The memory it self is frail and weak, as a vessel that has got a fall, that's crackt and riven. So saith the Wiseman, that the in∣ward parts of a Fool are like a broken vessel: he will hold no know∣ledge as long as he liveth, Ecclus. 21.14. 4. The memory is too often full of somewhat else; and so intùs existens prohibet extraneum; a vessel full of one liquor, will not hold another. Non datur penetratio dimensionum, two bodies can∣not be in one place; nor two contrary spirits in one soul. The Fool full of his own knowledge, cannot receive divine understanding, Proverbs 30.22. Great need therefore there was that the Lord should warn us of this danger. 1. Whence we may observe, the Lord hath given us the tutelage and gardianship of our selves, our souls, our hearts; and what is that but our memories, whereby we retain holy thoughts and the divine words which our eyes have seen. Plato tells us, that Mnemosyne is the Mother of the Muses. The meaning is, that the memory brings forth, and nourisheth all the good thoughts. It is the true inward Eve, the Mother of all the Living ones; which brings forth unto us spiritual Children: According to which, whosoever doth the will of God, he is the Mother of Christ, Matth. 12.50. For all the senses outward and inward were made for the life, especially the two disciplinary senses, Seeing and Hearing. The Lord hath given them both for this end. And therefore the eye is a seeing eye, when a man sees the divine Words, and discerns aright what the will of the Lord is: and the ear is an hearing ear, when he obeyes the commands of God. And therefore the wiseman tells us, that the hearing ear and the seeing eye, the Lord hath made even both of them, Prov. 20.12. Whence our Lord, he that hath an ear to hear, saith he, let him hear, Matth. 13.9. Rev. 13.9. Thus the retentive memory and the heedfull thoughts are given unto man as his meet help before him, Ephes. 1.4. Thus the woman was created for the man, 1 Cor. 11.9. to bring him forth living children, and to keep the house of his heart. Thus the thoughts are brought under the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. and they are serviceable unto God and Christ who is our life, and heed and keep his words, the words of life. This is the wife of which Solomon speaks; and thus the Wise man gives excellent counsel, Eccles. 9.9. See, or injoy life, with the wife which thou hast oved, all the dayes of the life of thy vanity, wch he hath given thee under the Sun, all the dayes of thy vanity; for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labour which thou takest under the Sun. And an excellent portion it is, in this vain life; that with our wife, our memory and thoughts we may see and enjoy the divine life, and the words of life, and keep the words of life in our heart and in our soul all
the dayes of our vain life. For unless thus, or in like manner, the advice of Solomon be understood, a sensual Epicurean might make notable use of it, to confirm himself in his voluptuousness. 2. There is danger, imminent danger, lest our memory preg∣nant with good thoughts, miscarry through forgetfulness, , which the LXX turn , least happly, or unhapply rather, or lest at any time. In this expression some evill instrument is imported, as doubted or feared; and so Danger is defined, , the neerness of evill. 3. Note hence the goodness of our God, who warnes us of the danger. So often we finde the Lord warning us to take heed, lest the evill surprize us, Gen. 3.3. Touch it not lest ye die. Fly to to the Mountaines, lest yee be consumed in the iniquity of the City, Gen. 19.15. Num. 18.32. Pollute not your selves lest yee die. Circumcise your selves unto the Lord, lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it; because of the evill of your doings, Jer. 4.4. 4. If thou takest not heed to thy self, and keep not thy soul dili∣gently, thou wilt forget the words which thine eyes have seen. The remembring of Gods words, requires an exact, a diligent an onely taking heed to thy self, an onely keeping of thy soul; otherwise thou wilt forget them. 1. This is a just reproof of all those who heed not the words which their eyes have seen, but carelesly forget them, and let them slip. 2. Yea, though they have many monuments and memorials of Gods favour, which might put them in mind of him and his will and his words; Yea, the whole world of the creatures might mind them of their Creators, yet how many are there , even Atheists and without God in the world? Ephes. 2.12. 3. Nay, through the depraved nature of man, it comes to pass, that what, in all justice and reason, should remember us of our God, even that occasions men to forget him and his words. The Lord supposed this possible, Deut. 8.9.—14. & 32.15. and the prophets feared it, Prov. 30.9. 4. But most reproveable are they who oppose and maligne the remembrance and remembrancers of God, his will, his wayes, and his words unto them. Against such, our Lord denounces an heavie judgment, Matth. 23.34.35. I send unto you Pro∣phets, and wise men, and Scribes, and some of them ye shall kill &c. From the bloud of righteous Abel to the blood of Zachariah whom ye slew between the Porch and the Altar;—all shall come upon this generation. It seemes an harsh sentence. For the Lord saith, I the Lord thy God am a jealous God visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children, to the third and fourth
generation; but here the Lord revenges the bloud of righteous men to the Thirtieth and Fortieth generation; for so many, yea, more generations passed from the bloud of Abel, to the Scribes and Pharisees, whom the Lord threatens here. So dangerous it is to persecute righteous men, especially the Lords Prophets, Scribes, and Witnesses Ambassadors, Agents, and Remembran∣cers: 'Tis a serious dinuntiation; Touch not mine annointed and do my Prophets no harm, Psal. 104. He that toucheth them, toucheth the apple of his eye, Zach. 2. And do we think, it be∣longs no neerer unto us? Would God it did not! But I appeal to any soul, who hath taken notice of its own actions and the workings of God upon it, how many godly motions, how many pious inspirations, how many breathings towards this God, hast thou received from his spirit, yet hast thou killed and crucified them, put them off with worldly mirth? And so hast thou killed Abel in the field; Abel is a mourning according to Philo, and a breathing towards God, &c. He was slain in the field, that is, the world, saith our Saviour, Matth. 13. even the field of the earth∣ly and worldly heart; wherein the world is set, Eccles. 3.11. How often hast thou been moved by the feare of thy God, to depart from all sin and all iniquitie? How often hast thou been put in mind by thy God, yea, how many pious purposes and intentions hast thou had to mortifie them, and to consume them upon the Altar of Christs patience? Yet instead of killing thy sinns, thou hast killed those holy and godly admonitions and counsells of the spirit, and what is this but to kill Zachariah, that is the memorie of the Lord, or the admonition of the Lord, and that between the Porch of the Temple (that's the fear of the Lord, and the Altar, that's the patience of Jesus Christ, and so deprive our selves of the birth of Iohn the true grace of the Lord. But malum accidit malo, as links of a Chain, one drawes on the other. The peril here whereof thou art warned, O Israel, is con∣catenatum malum, the evil of forgetfulness drawes in another evil, the departure of these words from the heart. And that is the second danger, lest they depart from thine heart. These words some understand to be no other then a second expression of the same danger, lest thou forget the words which thine eyes have seen, lest they depart from thine heart. Others rather under∣stand by the heart here the affective part of the soul; whereby it be∣comes retentive of the words which our eyes have seen, and in love cleaving unto them. But we must remember, that the memory retains God him∣self and his Christ and holy Spirit, and the words of life, the , the living Oracles of God. And therefore when these are neglected, slighted and forgotten by us, they depart from us in fury and indignation. When his words and commands are neg∣lected
and contemned, the Lord himself is neglected and con∣temned. Wherefore be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, (it is the the Lords exhortation to his Church, Jer. 6.8.Jer. 6. v. 8.) lest my soul depart thee. Most unwilling the Lord is to depart from the soul. Our soul is, as it were, a part of his; and we are as it were joyn'd and continued unto him as one with him, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joyned un∣to the Lord , agglutinatus, glued as it were, and inti∣mately united unto the Lord, he is one spirit (the Syriac adds,) with him. And therefore it must needs be irksom, and painful to part from him, as a bone dis-joynted and parted from its bone; & so the word in Jer. 6.8. signifies, as the Translators acknowledge in the margent; and it is so used, Gen. 32.24. And indeed it most concerns us, and in all reason we should be most sensible of it, when our soul is dislocated and out of joynt, and so it is, when the Lord departs from it; because we have first departed from him. And therefore he complains, Ezech. 6.9. I am broken with your whorish heart that hath departed from me. And therefore the Lord, out of his great love, seems sensible of such paines as accompany dis-joynting, or wounding, or breaking of the body part from part. Wherefore the Lord out of intense love, exhorts us, Be in∣structed, or corrected, or instruct thy self, O Jerusalem, Ne avel∣latur anima mea, (so Arias Montanus turns it,) lest my soul be vio∣lently pluckt away from thee as unwilling, yet forced by thee to depart from thee. And what will come of it? lest I make thee as a Desart, a wasted desolate land not inhabited. These words must not depart from thy heart all the dayes of thy life. Thou hast no warrant to neglect the heeding of thy self, or keeping of thy soul, no, not one day of thy life. The reason is; 1. Our God is the God of all our times, all our dayes. 2. His words are the words of this life, Acts 5.20. Be exhorted, O Israel, only to take heed to thy self and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the words, which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart, all the dayes of thy life. Solomon having exhorted his son or disciple, to heed his words, and give attention to his sayings, Prov. 4.20. well knowing the common guise of hearers, to let what they hear, , slip, or drop like water thorow a riven dish, as that word properly sig∣nifies, Hebr. 2.1. he adviseth his son to beware, lest the wicked cause these words to depart from his eyes. For so the word is in Hiphil, and requires  to be understood, out of the verse before,Prov. 4. v. 21., Ne recedere faciant, let not the wicked cause them to depart from thine eyes; but that he keep them in his heart, as an hid∣den treasure laid up in the midst of his heart, as most dear unto him.
This keeping of them will not be in vain; for they are words of life to those who finde them, v. 22. And whereas some Physical Receipt may be soveraign for the cure of some one or other disease, this  this Receipt or received doctrine, as he calls it, ver. 2. of of that Chapter, its a Catholicon, an universal medicine, its health to all their flesh. Which is literally and really true; for the healing doctrine of the Word,1 Tim. 1. v. 10. as the Apostle calls it, 1 Tim. 1.10. not on∣ly restraines the concupiscible from all excess and riot, from all surfeting and drunkenness, from all chambering and wantonness, all foolish and hurtful lusts, which betray the soul unto these ex∣orbitancies; but it moderates also the passions of the irafcible, as anger, fierceness, indignation, desire of revenge, vain fears, vain hopes. Which spiritual maladies, the learned Physitians in their , plainly declare to be the causes of many bodily diseases. But though the words of wisdom be attended unto, though laid up in the heart, yea, in the midst of the heart; yet unless the heart it self be well kept, we are in danger to forget the words which our eyes have seen, and they will depart from our heart. To prevent so great an evil, its needful that we learn an Art of memory, a method and way to keep these words; For certainly, by cor∣rupt nature, we are not able to keep them. Herein we must proceed . Somewhat that hinders, must be removed, and some positive helpful means used. 1. As for the former, I shall name some impediments of the natural memory, and the removal of them, with Analogy unto spi∣ritual hindrances and removal of them also. The corrupt animal spirit hurts the natural memory. And many unclean spirits there are which destroy the remembrance of those words which our eyes have seen. One ye read of in Mark 1. Yea, Mark 5.2. there's a whole Legion of them in one man who dwels in the tombs, even in dead works. He cannot be bound with the bands and fetters of the Law, but he breaks them, and casts them a∣way, Psal. 2. Such unclean spirits ye read of, who have destroyed the memory of God and his Word, extreamly in these last dayes, Revel. 16.13, 14. Jer. 23.14.27. How needful therefore is it, to discern of the spirits, whether they be of God or not, 1 John 4. 2. The Physitians say, Delirium & phrenitis causat oblivionem; when the reason is lost, the memory is lost. 'Tis the , the guide and rudder of the soul. The Prodigal for this reason, forgat his fathers house; as it is evident from hence, that afterward he is said to come to himself, Luke 15. 3. A third hurt of the memory is said to be negotiorum moles, incombrance with many businesses, Mark 4.19. the cares of this
world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things, choak the word. And therefore the Apostle exhorts us to lay aside every weight, and the sin that besets us in every circum∣stance, Hebr. 12.1. 4. That which they say, helps the natural memory, hurts the spi∣ritual, namely, images. For experience hath proved that hereby forgetfulness of God and divine things, hath crept into the Church of God. Hereby the antient people of God were extreamly de∣ceived. They made an Idol to help their memory of God, and thereby the lost it, Psal. 106.19, 20, 21. They made a Calf in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image, &c. Then followes, they forgat God their Saviour. And it is a vain impiety to set men to look Pictures and Images of God the Father, Son, and Spi∣rit, which draw down the thoughts from conceiving a-right of God to be a Spirit, unto corporeal and sensible things. 2. Come we to positive helps. Certain it is, Quae curamus, meminimus. Those things which we take heed unto, and take care of, those even when we are old, we remember; especially when we fasten them in our souls by meditation on them day and night, Psal. 1. They are wont to preserve the natural memory, with cer∣tain ointments applyed to the head. Such a spiritual unction we receive from the holy One, 1 John 2.20. which remembers us of all that ever we have done, John 4.29. which will teach us all things and bring them to our remembrance, Chap. 14.26. For although the memory be the keeper of those words which our eyes have seen, yet Quis custodiet ipsum custodem?—who shall keep the keeper it self? unless God himself through faith and pati∣ence keep the heart and memory, it will forget the things which our eyes have seen. And therefore Solomon exhorts us to keep our heart above all keeping. Surely his meaning is not, that we should keep it above all power we have to keep it; the keeping of the heart above all keeping, is the committing of it unto God by prayer and resignation of our selves unto him. Prayer therefore is to be made unto him by lifting up the heart and minde unto him: as naturally when we imagine any thing, we lift up the fore-part of our head. When we would recall any thing to memory, we lift up the hinder part of the head towards heaven. From him descends every good giving and every perfect gift. He it is who preserves us from all evil; yea, he it is who will keep our soul, yea, the Lord will preserve our going out and our comming in, from this time forth and for evermore, Psalm 121.7, 8.
Hitherto we have heard the former precept touching the keep∣ing of our own hearts, that we forget not the words which our eyes have seen, and lest they depart from our heart all the dayes of our life. We should proceed unto the next Axiom touching the conveyance of them to our sons and our sons sons. But that precept is more fully delivered, Deut. 6.6, 7. and there I shall speak of it, if the Lord will.
The Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his Name in vain.] The word which we turn, To hold guiltless, is .Deut. 5. v. 11. The word  signifies to be clear from a fault, or from a punishment: And accordingly there are different translations of the words. The LXX render them , the Lord will by no means purge the man, &c. Arias Montanus also turns the words, Non mundificabit, the Lord will not cleanse the man. So Exod. 20.7. and 34.7. Numb. 14.17. In which sense, the Arabic and Chaldee may be understood. Other Translations in all languages that I have seen, render the words as ours do, or to the same effect, as not to clear from punishment. The phrase 'tis according to a figure called in Rhetorick , containing much more in it, then the words seem to express. Such is that in the Poet, Nec tibi cura canum fuerit postrema,—if applyed to one who spent his time in following Hounds: as if he should have said, you spend much of your time and care that way. We have like examples in Scripture, 1 Sam. 12.21. Follow not after vain things, that will not profit, he means Idols; which not only not profit, but do the greatest mischief, Jer. 32.35. They caused their sons and their daugh∣ters to pass thorow the fire to Moloch, which I commanded them not: No, he severely prohibited it, Levit. 18.21. Such a figure we have in these words, if understood in this sense, he will not hold him guiltless, that he will certainly punish him.; he will not leave him unpunished: so Luther in his translation. Both Translations are divine truths; and the truth saith, let nothing be lost. They are serviceable unto two sorts or degrees of men. 1. One under the Law; such are acted by the spirit of fear; and so it is a demonstration, the Lord will not hold him guiltless, but will cer∣tainly punish him. 2. Others are under grace; and to them the Law is spiritual; and so it is the will of God revealed unto them, that the Lord will not cleanse him from his sins, who takes his Name in vain. And that its such a revelation of grace, appears, Exod. 34.7. Numb. 14.17. where it is reckoned among all the names of God, wherein he declares his goodness and grace unto Moses. The name, nature, and being of God, may be taken, or born in vain or falsly (so  signifies) two wayes; 1. More especially by false swearing, so the Chald. Paraph. the Syriac and Arabic versions here. 2. By hypocritical pretences and arts of seeming holy, just and good, like unto God, without the reality, truth and being of these in the heart and life. The holy Ghost meets with both these, James 5.12. Where first the Apostle prohibits vain and false swearing; Above all things my brethren swear not,James 5. v. 12. neither by the Heaven, nor Earth, nor any other oath, (then he forbids hypo∣crisie:) but , that your yea be yea, and that your nay be nay,
, lest ye fall into hypocrisie. So the Tigu∣rin Bible, Arias Montanus, Castellio, Luther, two Low Dutch, and four of our old English Translations. I would now propound the question to the godly Reader, what might be the cause of so great conspiracy among the Tran∣slators in different tongues, that they have enclind to render , the Lord will not leave him guiltless and unpunished, ra∣ther then, the Lord will not cleanse him? There is no doubt but the words will bear both Translations, as hath been shewen. But I much fear, the true reason is, men rather desire to be clear'd from the guilt and punishment of their sins, then to be cleansed from the sins themselves. Is it not so? why otherwise do so many under∣stand the Angel Gabriels etymologie of the Name Jesus, Mat. 1.2. For he shall save his people from their sins, rather of the punishments, then of the sins themselves? And the like mis-understanding there is of many like places, as I have formerly shewen. The reason why the Lord will not cleanse hypocrites who bear his name vainly and falsly, may be, because hypocrisie pollutes and de∣files the name of God, Ezech 20.39. they offered outward sacrifice to the true God, yet inwardly had their idols in their hearts, as Ezech. 14.2, 3. These are said to defile God name. So are they said to pol∣lute the Sanctuary of strength, who take away the daily sacrifice, that is, the mortification of sin, and our daily dying thereunto. And therefore, according to that Lex Talionis, the law of rendring like for like, the righteous God will not cleanse such hypocrites, 1 Cor. 3.17. ,1 Cor. 3.17. If any defile Gods Temple, him will God defile. That is, he will leave him in his pollution, and not cleanse him, according to Revel. 22.11. He who is filthy, let him be filthy still. 1. Whence it appears, that the alone outward performances of duties, wherein the Name of God is pretended, do not purifie a man from his sin. Such are giving of almes with a Trumpet, praying to be seen of men, and fasting for the same end. Unto all these our our Lord adds, they have their reward, Matth. 6.2.5.16. What they desire and aim at, they have; namely, the applause and praise of men. But the inward cleansing from sinne is not obtained by these outward performances; that's gotten by righteousness, Dan. 4.94. It was Daniels counsel to Nabuchadnezzar, do away thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by being merciful to the afflicted. And therefore the inward good intention of the heart, mercy, and compassion, and the like spiritual graces must accompany almesgi∣ving, and thereby the cleansing is obtained. So our Lords speech is to be understood, as its clear by the context, Luke 11.41. , &c. which our Translators turn, Give almes of what ye have, which they render otherwise in the margent, as ye are able; neither way well  are inexistentia,
as Arias Montanus well renders that word, and so the words will afford this sense, give or offer ye the things which are within (such as I named before) your almes or merciful gift ( and behold all things are clean unto you. For that which cleanseth and purifieth, is somewhat of God and Christ, not the outward work, although that also ought to be done. So the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.11. but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified by the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Unless there be that inward purger and cleanser, the work is not wrought. Outward shewes and pretenses how specious soever, are uneffectual. This the sons of Sceva found with a mischief, when they adjured those who had evil spirits, by the Name of Jesus, Acts 19.14, 15. The evil spirit answered, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye? And the man who had the evil spirit, prevailed over them. As the Galls having taken Rome, they came upon the Senators, who were invested with their Robes and all En∣signes and shewes of majesty, whom the Galls slew like beasts, whom at first they had looked upon as gods. 2. What a poor opinion, hypocritical men have of the true God and his Name: they make him and his Name inferiour and ser∣viceable to their poor base ends, a little wealth, a little honour, a little pleasure. Ahab wanted but a little spot of ground; and the Kings name and Gods name must be taken in vain for the ob∣taining of it. What a preposterous inverting and perverting things is this? , Sursum deorsum, sus{que} deque, turn∣ing of things upside down, setting the means above the end, the end below the means; God and his name must serve a turn. What ever any hypocrite does, though evil, yet somewhat of God, is pre∣tended for the warrant of it, as when he saith, its just, its equal, its true, its right, Jer. 50.7. John 16.2. In nomine Domini incipit omne malum, mischief begins with the name of the Lord, as they said of old, concerning the Popes Bulls. But this taking of Gods name in vain, shall be in vain to them who so take it. For though the hypocrite, by his turning things upside down, may possibly deceive a man, yet God his Maker he cannot deceive. And therefore the Lord denounceth a woe to those who seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord,Esay 29. v. 15, 16. and their works are in the darkness; and they say, who is seeing us, and who is knowing us? This woe shall be 1. To their work; that shall be frustrate. Your subversion or turning of things, shall be esteemed as the Potters Clay. For shall the work say to him that made it, he made me not? or shall the thing framed say to him that fra∣med it, he understood not? 2. And this woe shall be to their pre∣sent state, which, in requital to their subversion, shall also be changed. Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon (figuring the Gentiles state) shall be turn'd into Carmel (very fruitful, as the
Jewes had been, through the blessing of God upon it,) and Car∣mel shall be esteemed a Forest. Whereby the Prophet implyes the conversion of the Heathen unto Christ, whom the Jewes should reject; as the words following evidently prove. And what was charged as a crime upon the Apostles, that they turn'd the world upside down, Acts 17.6. had yet a truth in it, when, what was above and high in men, Luke 16.15. so that they called the prowd happy, Malac. 3.15. that is, brought low; and the brother of low degree glorieth  in his height,James 1. v. 9, 10. and the rich  in his abasement, James 1.9, 10. when every valley is fil∣led, and every Mountain and hill is brought down, Luke 3.5. 3. Learn what manner of people, Gods Israel is; no vain and empty men; no, they have God and his fulness in them, Ephes. 3.19. filled or filling unto all the fulness of God.Ephes. 3. v. 19. They have his name written on them, Revel 3.12. Jehovah is the being; so that great name signifies; not the shew, not the seeming only. They have his mercy, his grace, his long suffering, his goodness, his truth in them, that's his name for ever, Exod. 34.7. They have his love in them, John 5. that's his name, 1 John 4.8.16. These are the true Esseni which have their name, saith Epiphanius, from Jesse, the father of David. Jesse is the very being it self, without fiction, without hypocrisie. Be we exhorted to a most serious earnestness and sincerity in the bearing of Gods name. Tis worth all thy love, all thy reverence. And why then hadst thou rather seem to be, then in earnest and indeed to be, what thou wouldst be thought to be? If the shew and form be so highly esteemed by thee, how much more will the substance it self, if thou knowest it? It is worth our inquiring what name thou bearest, and whether the name of thy God and his Christ; and if so, whether in vain yea or no. John sent his Disciples unto Jesus, Matth. 11. to inquire, whe∣ther he were the Christ or no; our Lords answer was, the blinde see, the lame walk, &c. Many there are, penitent men, disciples of John, who would gladly come to Christ; they enquire after Christ; would gladly bear his name: canst thou answer them so? canst thou shew by thy life and works, that thou bearest Christs name? So when the Greeks came to Philip and Andrew, desiring to see Jesus, John 12. Our Lord shewed them himself, and his Disciples, in their death and life, a grain of Wheat dead and li∣ving, and bringing forth much fruit; that is Iesus. Canst thou shew them Iesus, in his death or life? canst thou shew thy self dead with him, and risen with him? Then will mighty works shew them∣selves in thee; as Herod reasoned. Thus doing we shall not bear the Lords name in vain, while we are bringing forth fruit; but he will purge us, and we shall bring forth more fruit. Hereby the name of the Lord shall not be polluted or dishonoured by us; but in this, the
Father shall be glorified, that we bring forth much fruit,SER. XIV. and be made the disciples of Iesus Christ.John 15. v. 2.8. So will he cleanse us when we thus bear his name. Even so, O God, make clean our hearts within us; and take not thine holy spirit from us! Thou shalt not kill.] What? not according to Law and justice?Deut. 5. v. 17. Is the act of the Magistrate here inhibited, who proceeds accord∣ing to the Law of God, when he adjudgeth him to die, who bath shed mans blood? Gen. 9.6. No act of justice, is hereby forbidden, but established rather. But what if a private man kill another ignorantly, whom he hu∣ted not before time? Deut. 19.4, 5. Casually comes not under this pre∣cept. Its possible a man may not lie in wait to shed blood, yet may God deliver a man into his hand, whom, though he slay, yet he is excusable; for the Lord hath provided Cities of refuge, and propounds a case, whereby he, who kills another, shall not be put to death, Deut. 9.4, 5. Yet the act of the Magistrate, and of him who slayes another, without laying wait for him, both acts come under the word kil∣ling. Which therefore is not adequate and proper to this prohi∣bition before us. Yea, the taking away life, from the beast, for the sustenance of man, is killing also, but not forbidden. The killing here forbidden in regard of the object is of an inno∣cent person; in respect of the act, its wilfully and felloniously com∣mitted, and out of propense malice, as our Lawyers speak. And that is Murder; as our old Translators have held forth this Com∣mandment, in these terms; Thou shalt do no murder. The old is better. Touching this word, as I remember, I spake somewhat on Exod. 20. parallel unto this place before us. But because in the book of Deuteronomie there is , an iteration and repetition, as of the Law, so of divers other matters formerly spoken of in the former books, I shall either wholly waive, or very briefly touch upon what arguments I have spoken unto. The Law is spiritual, whereunto our Lord here directs us. As for the outward murder, of what extent it is, and what punish∣ment is due unto it, humane lawes, civil and municipal take cog∣nisance of it. The spiritual murder is committed 1. Against ones own soul; or 2. Against ones neighbour, or against ones God and his Christ. There is a murder committed against ones own soul, Prov. 6.32. and 29.24. Job 5.2. In these and like cases a man is felo de se, a self-murderer. 2. Spiritual murder is also committed against ones neighbour, Matth. 5.21, 22. 1 John 3.15. 3. There is also a spiritual murder of the divine nature and the
Lord Christ, three wayes: 1. In Adam, when his innocent na∣ture in us is murdered, Revel 13.8. 2. In the flesh upon the Cross, 1 Cor. 15.3. 3. In the spirit, so often as his good motions in us are suppressed, Hebr. 6.6. These, and such as these he calls murderers. For whereas every sin hath the name from the end, whereat it aimes, and is to be esteemed according to the will and purpose whence it proceeds; as wrath, envie or hatred against our neighbour may be called murder; because they tend thereunto, and the will and purpose of him, who is angry, envious, or malitious, is a murderous will and purpose, although really and in the event, they murder not their neighbour. Even so the wrath, envie, and malice against the Lord and his Christ, may be called murders, although they proceed no further then the perverse will. Ye go about to kill me, saith our Lord, John 8. So Traytors are esteemed and suffer death, ac∣cording to their will and purpose, although they effect it not. What reason is there for this? There are in the heart these three notable parts: 1. The Rational, the 2. Concupiscible, and the 3. Irascible; which answers unto these three necessary Of∣fices in a City; the chief Magistrate, which is , the rational ordering all things by reason: the  the concupiscible, which is the Quaestor or Treasurer, who provides and layes out for what is necessary for the support of the City. Now if any obstruction or hindrance happen in the execution of the Questors office, then ariseth in the heart , the irascible, which answers to the Militia and Garrison-souldiers, who re∣move those impediments and obstructions. This irascible, though it be the seat of more compounded affections, yet the principle here understood is wrath or anger; which is not sin, because im∣planted of God in our nature; and the Psalmist really distin∣guisheth them, and after him the Apostle; Be angry and sin not: Howbeit from the exorbitancy of the concupiscible, the appetite inflamed toward something desirable, and hindred from fruition, naturally there is a boyling of the blood about the heart, whence the Questor or Treasurer desires the help of the Militia, the soul∣dery, for the removing of the impediment. The wrath being kindled, sometimes burnes excessively and beyond measure; and it is a sin. We shall observe this in the way of Cain, as S. Jude calls it, v. 11. Cain signifying possession and peculiar propriety in the flesh, de∣siring, yea, ingrossing all things natural, humane and divine; all must serve it, as Psal. 73.9. According to Martin Luther, what they say, must be spoken from Heaven; and what they speak, must prevail upon Earth. Whence it is that the sensual proprie∣ty challenges Gods acceptance of whatsoever it doth; yea, and ingrosseth it unto it self; so that Gods approbation being given
to the simple, harmless, and righteous Abel, wrath, and envie burns against him and all the holy Prophets, from the blood of Abel, to the blood of Zachariah. This inordinate desire, and wrathful, and envious disposition, is from the evil one, who is called Abaddon and Apollyon, Revel. 9.11. a murderer from the be∣ginning: and by the Jews at this day,  a destroyer. This we finde, 1 John 3.11, 12. Whence the Greek tongue retains the memory of the first murderers name, , which signifies to kill. Quaere. Since it is murder, while yet in the heart, and such in Gods sight, whether is any thing added by performing the out∣ward act, yea, or no? surely there is. For proof of this, let the first murder be examined, Gen. 4.4. It was such in Gods sight, when Cain was very wroth and his countenance fell. But all that time the Lord was patient and dehorted him, and reasoned with him, If thou do well, shalt thou not be accepted? And if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the dore, &c. All this time Cain was guilty before God, and in danger of the judgement; but having performed the outward act, then the Lord denounced his judgement against him. This will further appear from Gods different rewards of good or evil works intended and performed. For since God re∣wards every man according to his works, the reward of good works and the punishment of the evil finished must be greater then of the same intended. God was patient all the time that Da∣vid was plotting the death of Ʋriah; but when it was effected, then he sent Nathan and denounced his judgement. Hence we learn, that 1. The heart is Murdrorum officina, the flesh-bank, the slaughterhouse, the murdering den, wherein the wic∣ked one slayeth the innocent, Psal. 10.8. 2. A man may possibly be a murderer, who yet layes no vio∣lent hands on any. Is he angry with his brother? he is guilty of the judgement, Matth. 5.22. yes, if he be angry, , without a cause. S. Hierom and S. Augustin both agree, that  without a cause, is not to be found in any old Greek copy; Ut scilicet ne cum causa quidem debeamus irasci, saith Augustin: nor indeed is it ex∣tant in the vulgar Latin. 3. Hence we learn to judge our selves and others if angry and malitious, if hateful and hating one another. 4. Yea hence learn the bloody-mindedness of this present gene∣ration, what murdering and malitious hearts, full of rancor and ha∣tred they bear one party against another, one man against ano∣ther. Shall not the Lord be avenged of such a nation as this? This is harsh doctrine. Alas! if to be angry with my brother, be no less then murder; if he, who hates his brother be a murderer, what shall become of me? I have been angry and hated my bro∣ther,
and spoken despitefully against him, said to him, Racha, called him out of bitterness of spirit, a fool. Cease from wrath; redeem thine envie and malice with love and mercifulness. As all thy doings before were done in malice and ha∣tred, let them now be all done in love and kindness, 1 Cor. 16.14. John 3.21. But alas! thoughts of revenge assault me. These are the messengers of Satan, like him sent to kill Elisha, 2 Kings 6.32. even God the Saviour in thee; and therefore take his counsel there, keep these revengeful thoughts fast at the door, give no consent unto them: they rome to take away thy head. The head of every belie∣ver is Christ, 1 Cor. 11. If thou consent unto them, thou openest the dore of thy heart, and lettest them in: while thou keepest them without dore, they cannot hurt thee. No evil without thee, no, not the Devil himself the murderer from the beginning, not he, nor any evil can hurt thee, while it is without thee; no more then any good can help thee, if it be without thee. Alas! I have crucified the life of God, even the Christ of God in me. I have murdered the Lord Jesus. Haply this thou hast done; indeed who hath not done it? yet despair not. There is a two∣fold killing, as the Scripture distinguisheth, Deut. 19. the one wil∣ful and presumptuous; the other at unawares. And both these wayes the Lord Jesus hath been killed. There are who have slain him wilfully Heb. 6.4, 5. and 10.26. There are who slay him igno∣rantly, who suppress the motions of Christs spirit in themselves, not knowing that they proceed from him. God was in this place, and I knew it not, Gen. 28. There is one in the midst of you, whom ye know not. Such an ignorant manslayer was Paul, who persecuted the Lord Jesus, 1 Tim. 1.13. but he obtained mercy, because he did it ignorantly. Yea, and he is a patern to them that offend. Acts 3.17. The greatest sin without hatred is pardonable, Deut. 19. The greatest good work without charity is nothing worth, 1 Cor. 13. Yea, in this case, the Lord hath made provision of a refuge, if we have slain the man Christ ignorantly, if we have slain him by our unholy and profane life; we must then fly to Kadesh, that is, unto holiness. This counsel the Prophet Esay gives, Esay 1.16, 17, 18. and Daniel to Nebuchadnezzer, Dan. 4.27. This Kadesh is in Galilee, that is, conversion or turning about, Jer. 18.11. Therefore when S. Peter having told the Jews, that they had crucified the Lord Je∣sus, he directs them to Galilee, that is, to turn to the Lord, Acts 3.19. This City of refuge is on a Mountain, as the Church of God is. Esay 2.2. a state hard to be attained unto. And we must contend and strive for it; therefore it is said to be in the Tribe of Neph∣tali. Such an one was S. Paul, 1 Cor. 9.26. Phil. 3.14. not with flesh and blood, &c. Ephes. 6. 2. Yea, we must go about this work early. Therefore the se∣cond City of refuge is Shechem, which signifies early. This also is
in a Mountain, hard & difficult in ascent; in the Tribe of Ephraim, in fruitfulness, growing, and increasing. Thus doing, we shall come to the third City, even Hebron, the society of all  the  ∣ting our hearts unto the living God, that's Hebron. This is  a Mountain, Heb. 12. and in the Tribe of Judah, praysing and glori∣fying our God, confessing to his name, and singing Hallelujahs for ever. Yea, the Lord Jesus prayes for his persecutors and murderers. Father, forgive them, &c. This is proper to the Christian spirit, as appears Luke 9.5, 6. they as yet were of a legal spirit. Abels blood cryed from the earth, Zachariah the son of Jehoiada, 2 Chro. 24.22. Jer. 11.0. and 20.21. But what saith our Lord? Father forgive them. And S. Stephen, Acts 7. Christs blood of sprinkling speaks better things then that of Abel. This is the strength of the Spirit of Jesus, which rejoyceth in tribulation. So S. Paul prayes for the Colossians, Col. 1.11. that they may be strengthned with all might, according to his glorious power unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness.
Attende Tibi, & Doctrinae. Look to thy Self, and the Doctrine. SERMON XIV. Deuteronomie 6. ver. 6, 7. These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children.] BEfore we can consider a-right and speak to these words particularly, let us render them, and read them right; as thus. These same words which I am commanding thee this day, shall be in, or upon thine heart: And thou shalt whet them upon thy sons. I shall shew this to be the true translation of the Text, as I come to the Axiomatical handling of it. The words contain an injunction to parents, and those in place of parents, to transmit and conveigh the Commandements of God unto their sons, and all under their care. Wherein we have a Series, Process, or Succession of commands, one in order to other. 1. These same words I am commanding thee this day. 2. These same words which I am commanding thee this day, shall be in or up∣on thine heart. 3. These same words which I am commanding thee this day, shall be upon thine heart; and thou shalt whet them upon thy sons. 1. These same words I am commanding thee this day. Wherein we must inquire, 1. What these same words commanded are; 2. What is the commanding of these same words, and this day.
I render them the same words; because there is a double em∣phasis upon them, . These same words are either extended unto all the Commandements of God, as often else∣where, so especially in this Book; or else they have special refe∣rence unto the words next preceeding, even the great Commande∣ment of the Law. 1. These same words are extended to all the Commandements both affirmative and negative; more specially to those principal precepts of the Decalogue delivered in the former Chapter. So Aben Ezra. And this is clear out of the context: For v. 1, 2. Mo∣ses propounds to Israel, all the Commandements, the Statutes, and the Judgements. 2. By these same words, those next preceding may be under∣stood, even the first and great Commandement, as our Lord calls it, Matth. 22.37. Mark 12.29. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. Then followes, and these same words shall be upon thy heart, &c. In the fourth verse is contained the Object of our duty; in the fifth the duty it self. The Object of our duty is Triunus Deus, the Unity in Trinity; The Lord, that's the Father; our God, that's the Son, Immanuel, God with us; and again, the Lord, who is the Lord the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1.17. and these are one God. There's the Uunity of the Object. There is also an Universality of the duty required of all Nations, inhabiting in the four quarters of the World. For so  hear; hath  a Capital letter, and bigger then the other; which, being numerical, signifies the LXX Nations, which may be reckoned up, Gen. 10. and are implyed by Moses, Deut. 32.8. which Seventy Nations inhabited the four quarters of the Earth; which is intimated in the letter , another Capital letter, which is the last in . Then followes the Ʋniversal duty of all the Seventy Nations in∣habiting the four parts of the World; Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy might. These same are the words, which the Lord is commanding, may be understood both wayes, both generally of all the Commande∣ments; and more specially of the first and great Commandement; which comprehends vertually all the rest. 2. Now what is the commanding of these same words? As for this manner of speech, [I am commanding;] It is no nice or formal difference, but indeed a material and real one, between these two expressions, I command, and I am commanding; For the former imports only a present act; the later signifies the continua∣tion of the act. Ye have a like example v. 2. of this Chapter, and very often elsewhere; where the act is put for the conntinuation of
the act; which is no doubt a wrong to the holy Text, and that a greater then men at first conceive; as I shall shew more fully hereafter, if the Lord will. For although it seem to some no more then a circumlocution of the present, yet we shall finde that there is more in it. This will appear in part, by one or two brief Observations from these words; and so I shall leave this point. 1. Observe hence, what an excellent Lawgiver the Lord our God is; he has given Commandements, and he is yet command∣ing them, he is yet giving them. Inferiour Lawgivers, as Lycurgus, Numa, Solon, &c. when they have once published their Lawes, they leave them to the people to observe them at their peril. Not so the Lord our Lawgiver, as he is called, Esay 33.22. He gives Lawes, and Lawes for publication of those Lawes, and himself is still giving them. Artificers having done their work, they leave it to the care of others whom it concerns; as the Carpenter having built an house, he takes no more thought for it. The Shipwright having made a vessel fit to sail, it concerns him no more, whether it sink or swim. The Husbandman having planted a Vineyard, he leaves it to the weather, and to the ordinary providence of God. Our most gracious God having done any spiritual work like these, or any of these, though he has done it, yet he has not so done it, but that he is still doing it. Gods people are his Vineyard, Esay 27.2. I the Lord , Custodiens eam,Esay 27. v. 3. 1 Cor. 3. v. 6.7. I am keeping it; I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. I have planted, Apollo hath watered; the words are indefinite, , but God  Dabat, did give, that is, he so gave, as he is yet giving increase. And so the Apostle expresseth himself in the next words, Therefore , he that is planting is not any thing, nor he that is watering, but God who is giving increase. Ye are Gods building, ; which Pagnin and Beza turn aedificatio, a work in fieri, which is yet a doing, 1 Cor. 3.9. And therefore the Apostle, I commend you, saith he, unto God, and to the word of his grace  able further to buiid you; which Beza turns Superstruere; the Son of God saith, My Father worketh hitherto, and I also work, John 5.17. 2. Whence appears the great goodness, love, and care of the Lord our God toward his people, in that he is alwayes in∣structing, informing, counselling, admonishing, reproving, cor∣recting, chastening, comforting, exhorting, dehorting, and per∣forming all other acts of a fatherly Lawgiver and Teacher. Who like him? saith Elihu, Job 36.22. That spirit which spake very often to the old Romans, whom therefore they called Locutius, at length lest speaking, when they had built him a Temple. But
the Lord who is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, hath spoken in every soul even from the beginning; whence he is called , the Word, by S. John. This is very often expressed in the Chald. Paraph. when God is said to say or do something, the Paraphrast adds  or,  or  by his word. Thus Psal. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand; the Thargum hath, the Lord said unto his Word; and Psal. 144.2. where the Hebrew hath, I will trust in him, the Chaldee paraphraseth it, I will trust in his Word. Where it is in the Hebrew, your new Moons and Feasts my soul hateth, the Paraphrast puts, my Word hateth, Esay 1.4. and 45.17. Israel is saved by the Lord, is express in the Chaldee, by the Word of the Lord. So Jer. 1.8. where the Lord saith to the Prophet, I will be with the, the Paraphrast ex∣presseth it, my Word shall be with thee. And many the like. Which it were much to be wished, that they well considered, who confine the eternal Deity of the Son of God unto his temporal dispensation and manifestation in the flesh. Surely they would judge otherwise, if they remembred that the Father hath never been without his Son, the , the Word, which hath spoken all things from the Father; and the infinite works which he hath wrought, whereof S. John speaks, John 21.25. 2. These same words shall be in thine heart, or rather, upon thine heart, ; so Arias Montanus, Munster, and the Spanish Translation. Martin Luther, and two Low Duch Tran∣slations, express this phrase, by Nemen ter herten, which Co∣verdale turns, take them to heart. The words may be considered as a precept; and so Piscator explains In corde erunt, by Sunto in corde, let them be in your heart; and Castellio turns them imperatively, In corde habetote; have ye them in your heart. And they have good reason so to render them, from the parallel place, Deut. 11.18.Deut. 11. v. 18. Ye shall put, or put ye these my words upon your heart, and up∣on your soul. Howbeit, because these same words are so beneficial unto us; nor can we our selves; of our selves, put them upon our own hearts: and, because the Lord hath said, I will put my Law (or Lawes) in their inward parts (or minde) and I will write it (or them) upon their hearts, Jer. 31.33. Hebr. 8.10. I doubt not to call these same words a promise also. They are a precept which puts us upon our utmost endeavour to be obedient, and to use all meanes for the effecting of it. And they are a promise importing thus much, that, when we have done our utmost endeavour, we we have done all we have done, and God himself also does what he does, out of grace, when he puts these same words in or up∣on our hearts. So that the parts of that distinction, that Ronum is either officii or praemii, good is is either of duty or of reward, may coincidere, meet in one and the same sentence, as here they do.
We have a phrase among us, that such or such a thing is upon our spirits: when we say so, our meaning is, that we have actual and present thoughts of it. And so these same words are to be understood here to be upon our hearts, and upon our Spirits, when we actually think of them, have them present in our mindes, wills and affections, and are in a rea∣diness to do them. It we inquire into the reason why these same words must be in or upon our hearts, we shall finde them exceedingly necessary and behoofull for us; For indeed, through our fall, we have a dark heart and blinde eyes; Yee were darkness, Ephes. 5. and he that walketh in darkness, knoweth not whither he goeth, Joh. 12.35. And therefore there is great need of the pure and holy commandement of the Lord which is a Lamp and the law a light, Prov. 6.23. Which is inlightning the eyes, Psal. 19.8. 2. And whereas the heart and soule has gon a stray, and lost it self, the law of the Lord is perfect converting or restoring the soul. 3. And whereas the heart is defiled, and who can say, (for he is a very rare man who can say,) my heart is clean, these same words bring with them the fear of God, Exod. 20.20. Which is clean, Psal. 19. and cleanseth the heart, Ephes. 5.26. and perfects the holyness and purity of it, 2 Cor. 7.1. 4. And whereas there is a kinde of Acidia, as it's called in the School, a deadness and laziness in regard of our cold affections unto any spiritual good, these same words, are  fiery words, such as come out of the fire tryed and proved, Deut. 4.33. And therefore they are called a fiery law, Deut. 33.2. Even the law of the spirit, which is as fire, Rom. 8.2. These same fiery words enflame the heart, and make it zealous and ready to every good work. 5. And least the heart should be transported with an heady zeal without a guide, which is a kind of wild fire, or Ignis fatuus; these same words regulate our zeal, Gal. 4.18. They stere the course of our whole life; and therefore they are said to be our life, Prov. 3.22. 6. And as the naturall heart is seated as a King in the midst of the body; So these same words sit in the heart, and rule it with divine wisdom, and make it a wise and understanding heart. These same words satisfy the soul which is commonly taken for the desire. And because the affections are seated  in the irrational part of the soul, these same words quiet the tumultuous perturbations and passions of the heart. So that when the affections begin to mutany, the love and peace of God empires all differences, according to Col. 3.15. But touching these same words in, or upon the heart, I spake somewhat on Deut. 4.9. Come we now to the transmitting of
these same words unto posterity. And that's the third divine sentence. 3. These same words which I am commanding thee this day shall be in or upon thine heart; and thou shalt teach them dili∣gently unto thy children. I turn them rather, thou shalt whet them upon thy sons. For why should we loose so elegant a metaphore chosen by the spirit of God? For although to whet, be diligently to teach as the phrase is explained, Deut. 11.19. yet is it not the native signification of  the word here is used, which R. Solo∣mon interprets by  to sharpen or whet. And so Luther and Pis∣cator and one low Dutch translation, Tremellius also turns it, acutè ingeres, thou shalt sharply put into, and one of our old English. Munster recensebis. Pagnin turns the word repetes; so the Spanish and the French, thou shalt recite them. Castellio inculcatote, and the Tigurin Bible hath the same word. Two things are to be inquired into; 1. what these children are, which indeed are to be turned sons. 2. What it is to whet. 1. By sons whether natural or spiritual, we are to understand such as are to be begotten unto God, by the immortal seed of the word; such are disciples. Thus R. Solomon interprets them the sons of the Prophets. And so John Baptist had his sons, thus Simon is called the son of Jonah, Josh. 1.42. Jonah is the Syriack contraction of Johanna, as may appear from hence, that whereas our Lord had called Peter, Si∣mon son of Jonah, he calls him thrice, without contraction, Si∣mon son of John; so St. Hierom, Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. Simon fili Johannis. And accordingly Nonnus in his paraphrase, hath those words, thus, . Simon thou son of John father divine. The ministers of God are fathers unto those whom they beget unto God and Christ; thus St. Paul calls the Corinthians his sons, 1 Cor. 4.14. as my beloved sons I warn you: For, though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet ye have not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you, through the Gospel. And thus he calls the Gala∣tians his little Children, Gal. 4.19. Now what is it to whet these same words upon our sons. David Kimchi turns it,  assignè loqui, to speak dayly of them. One old English Translator, who turns the phrase to whet the commandements upon our children, explains it by exercising them in speaking and hearing, and causing them to practise them in their living. The metaphore is taken from souldiers, saith Tremellius, who whet their weapons that they may easily pierce into their ene∣mies: And so the Lord commands parents to propound the do∣ctrin of God unto their children quàm accommodatissimè, most con∣veniently for their profit. So he.
To whet or sharpen, is to work off the rust and soyl that cleaves to sword, knife or other weapon, tool or instrument, to make it bright, to make it sharp, to set an edge upon it, to make it fit to pierce, and cut. This is done by often and often repetition, by in∣culcating again and again of these same words. The book of Deute∣ronomy may have the name from the frequent iterating, repeat∣ing, inculcating, and so whetting and sharpening these same words up∣on the sons of Israel. For howsoever there seems to be a frequent rehearsing of the same things over and over, yet if it be well ob∣served, the main conclusion, that is principally aimed at in that Book, is, that we hearken to the voice of the Lord, obey and do the commandements, which conclusion is inferred by great variety of arguments; which the divine Logitian, who is taught by the , the inward and living word, can easily understand and distinguish. And because others know them not, that E∣vangelical Book seems irksome and tedious unto them; though these same words be Gospel words; and so much is intimated by the often repetition of  Hodie, to day, which answers to , Heb. 13.8. as  answers to the Law, under which Jesus was a minister, Rom. 15.8. and , in secula, respects the everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14.6. And such variety ought to be used in whetting and sharpening these same words upon men in this time of the Gospel. There is reason for transmitting of these same words unto poste∣rity, whether we consider these same words; or Israel in whose heart these same words are; or the sons of Israel, on whom they must whet and sharpen these same words. 1. As for these same words; they are not proper to any one person, or nation, or age, but common and coextensive to all persons, nations and ages. So saith the Prophet, Psalm 119.142. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousnses, and thy law is the truth, and ver. 144. the righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting. 2. Israel in whose heart these same words are, has received them, and that not for himself only; but he ows to his sons, Esse neutriti∣vum & instructivum, as the school speaks, nutrimentum & docu∣mentum, nourishment, and nurture or education. 3. The sons of Israel have an equal share in the promises of God, with their fathers, as being made to them and to their seed for ever; and alike capable they are of Gods image, and the divine nature promoted and advanced by these same words. But must Israel teach only those same words? Must he whet no o∣ther words upon his sons? What think we of tongues and arts and other secular learning? Must Israel sharpen those words upon his sons or not? It is true, that secular learning is exceeding useful; but as an handmaid, not as a mistress; no, by no means. And therefore
if Hagar be proud and saucy (as she has been long in the Church) her mistress Sarah must chasten and correct her; yea, and if she will not humble her self, turn her out of doores, till she learn better manners. Hagar signifies advena, peregina, a stranger. Now Israel might entertain strangers to be servants unto them, Levit. 25.45. And what do these strangers signifie in their mystery, but forraign arts and tongues and other learnings of the strange nati∣ons, which Sarah the Lady (as her name imports) may receive into her service; and very serviceable Hagar may be in Abrahams house; but she must not pride her self, above her mistress; no, nor equalize her self unto her, this servant must not abide in the house always, John 8. When Isaac is born and growen up, Ha∣gar and her son Ishmael must be both thrust out of doors, Galati∣ans 4. Hear what the law saith; when thou seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and hast a desire unto her, that thou would∣est have her to wife, Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house;Deut. 21. v. 12. and she shall shave her head and pare her nails.] As to the literal meaning of these words, what is here turned to pare her nails, is, word for word, make her nails. Now whether to make her nails, be to pare and cut them off, or to let them grow, it is much questioned. And the Translators themselves seem to have been divided concerning this question, since they put the one in the Text, and the other in the margent; but as unhappily, as often elsewhere; for, beside the reason intimated before, that to make nails, as it is in the Hebrew, is rather to let them grow, then to cut them off; the end here aimed at, viz. to deform the captive maid; lest he who hath a desire toward her, should perditè ama∣re be too much enamoured with her; that end requires unhan∣someness, and uncomeliness in her; that thereby the heat of his affection might be cooled, taken off and abated. Now that this end is here intended, appears by the context; wherein it is re∣quired, that this maid be shaven; which would be a shame unto her; as on the contrary, , to nourish her hair, let it grow, and so to have long hair, is a glory to the woman, as her comely or∣nament, 1 Cor. 11.6.15. Beside, the law saith, ver. 13. she shall put of the rayment of her captivity from her; (wherewith her Amoretto was taken;) then she must be in sordibus, in mourning attire, a full moneth, for her father and her mother. All this being performed, he might go in unto her; but its sup∣posed to be likely, that his love may be allayed toward her, ver. 14. And thus the learned Jews understood this law. Now because the law is spiritual, St. Hierome understood by this maid, the learning of the Gentils, which hath a ravishing beauty, and capta capit, being taken, it is much taking also; and wins very much upon mens affections; and very great danger
there is, Ne depereant, id est, perdite ament, lest men court the Handmaid rather then her Mistress, (the divine wisdom to their own destruction. Very, needful therefore it is, that the Hand∣maid be humbled, that the proud Slut be brought under, and that her glory be turned into shame, that she may be made to know her self; that she was born to be a servant, and to perform the drudge∣ry about the letter, and serviceable word of the Lord. And therefore Moses, who was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7.22. he was a servant in Gods house, Hebr. 3. And S. Paul a very learned man in Arts and Languages, as appears in all his Epistles, was a servant of God in the Gospel of his Son; and the Lord found use for both kinds of learning in his Church; and both may be taught as serviceable unto these same words. 1. Observe with how great caution, how warily Moses com∣mends the Commandements of God unto Israel, to be conveyed unto their sons; they must be these same words. Moses no doubt foresaw, that there would be a generation who should afterward teach for doctrines the commandements of men; as the Pharisees and Scribes laid aside the Commandement of God, and held the tradition of men, Mark 7.8. That if they own'd the Law, yet so as to pick and choose among the Ten Commandements of God, take some one, and reject all the rest. As in the dayes of Christs flesh, yea, and at this day, great account is made of the Sabbath; as if it were indeed the onely Commandement of God, and that extream∣ly misunderstood; and all the rest are neglected. And will not our Lord call us to a reckoning for all these same words, and say, like what he spake of the Lepers, were there not ten words, ten cleansing, healing, saving words given? but where are the other nine? 2. Take notice hence, that Moses speaks not this to Eleazar or any other teaching Priest only, though that was their duty also, but to Israel, v. 3. Hear, O Israel; and again, v. 4. Hear, O Israel; Moses speaks this to thee and me, to every one who hath these same words in his heart, and hath others under his care, who ought to be as his sons. S. Paul wrote not to the Priests, but indifferently to all in like condition with those to whom he saith, Hebr. 5.12. For the time, ye ought to be Teachers, &c. Nor were they Priests only to whom he orders Timothy to convey these same words,2 Tim. 2. v. 2. 2 Tim. 2.2. , the things (or words) which thou hast heard of me by many witnesses, these commit thou to faithful men who shall be able to teach others also. 3. Gods truths are not so committed to any person, or genera∣tion and age of men, as to rest there; there must be a conveyance of them unto others, who ought—Vitae lampada tradere, to hand the Lamp of life from age to age, Deut. 4.9. and 11.19.
4. It is not enough, that these same words be in or upon our heart, unless they be there as a form of words, whereby, and out of which we may instruct others. 5. How stupid, how dull we are in receiving these same words; Israel must sharpen and whet them, often and often inculcat them, iterate and repeat them again and again, yet hardly do we receive them. Such improficients the Apostle met withal, Hebr. 5.11, 12. 6. Though the sons of Israel be dull, & fungantur vice cotis — and are as a Whetstone, yet must Israel with unwearied patience whet and sharpen and inculcate these same words unto them. 7. Take notice how qualified he ought to be, to whom the only wise God gives licence and authority to teach the sons of men. He must have these same words of God written in his heart, as a li∣ving form and Idea or exemplary cause and principle, according to which he must speak, Jer. 23.28.Jer. 23. v. 28. The Prophet with whom a dream is, let him tell his dream; and with whom is my word, let him speak my word faithfully; or rather, the truth of my word: what is the chaff with the Wheat? saith the Lord. The Lord would, that the truth and spirit of his Word, be spoken; as for the Letter only, without the spirit and truth, it is but as the chaff. Now my words, saith our Lord, are spirit and they are life, John 6.63. and what is the chaff to the wheat? what is the letter to the spirit? And the Lord himself is that word, and that spirit, and that life; and unless he be in the heart, and speaks these same words there, what authority hath any man to speak these same words? what else means the A∣postle, Gal. 1.15. when God was pleased separating me from my mothers womb, and calling me by his grace,Gal. 1. v. 15. to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach (, the glad tydings of) him to the Gentiles, Gal. 1.15. the Son must first be revealed in the Preacher, before he can preach the Son, or whet these same words up∣on his sons. 8. These same words are a form, patern, and example, according to which the thoughts are inwardly molded, and made up out∣wardly into words, and so conveyed unto men. But whereas a form is either good or evil, as the Rabbins say, that there is  the good or evil frame of the heart; which may be understood as well of the minde and thoughts, as of the concupis∣cence, unto which many restrain it. According to which, our Lord saith, that a good man out of the good treasure of his heart, bringeth forth good things, and the evil man out of the evil trea∣sure of his heart, bringeth forth evil things. Of the former of these, David speaks, 1 Chron. 29.18. where, when the people had offe∣red willingly to the Lord, David prayes, Keep for ever, saith he, in the frame or form (wch ours turn, imagination) of the thoughts of the heart of thy people. The word is . For whereas the heart of the people was willing, and joyful in offering to the Lord,
David prayes not for a floting and unsetled imagination, but for a constant, permanent and setled form to be imprinted on their heart. Such is that form of doctrine,2 Tim. 1. v. 13. Rom. 6.17. that form of sound or rather healing words, 2 Tim. 1.13. 9. If Israel must teach his sons, then must the sons of Israel learn these same words. This necessarily followes according to the Law of relation. 1. They are much to blame, who when their fathers whet these same words upon their sons, they oppose their hard, their sto∣ny hearts unto them; they say really, and in their life and practise, unto God; Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy wayes, Job 21.14. 2. How justly may this reprove parents, and those whoare in place o parents, who whet not, inculcate not these same words upon their sons? I doubt not to say it, that some men take more pains and care to teach a Colty to pace or amble, then they do to instruct their sons to walk in the way of Gods Commandements. What enemies are they to the Church of God, and to the Common-wealth wherein they live, who whet not these same words upon their sons? This is utterly a fault, a great fault among us in this nation, espe∣cially in this City. Parents honour their sons before, and above their God. This was Eli's sin. He rebuked his sons indeed, 1 Sam. 2.23, 24, 25. but softly, but gently, but friendly; that reproof in another mans mouth for a less sin, might have done well; but the high Priest should have reproved his sons  cuttingly, sharply, severely, and put them out of the Priests office. Sure I am, many Priests among us, have been so dealt withal, and been made offenders for a word, and that ill placed. For the neglect of this severity, the Lord sware, that the ini∣quity of Eli's house should not be purg'd with sacrifice nor offe∣ring for ever, 1 Sam. 2. 3. But much more to blame are many spiritual parents, who whet not these same words upon their sons. Liceat enm vobis aurem secretam purgatum{que} personare, non coràm & audiente plebe, sed ha∣bitâ veluti ad clerum conciunculâ. Siquidem ad vos nunc jam (fratres è clero, qui ministri estis,) ad vos, inquam, opportunè se convertit oratio: Vos cujâ potissimùm interest haec ipsa verba in populum fidei vestrae concreditum acuminare. Quin vos prae caeteris eadem, par est, in animo atque in corde habere, haec etiam eadem & facere & docere; quippe qui gregis exemplaria sitis, ei∣dem{que} , 1 Pet. 5.3. Liceat apud vos his de verbis expostulare paucis atque con∣queri, quid in causa sit quòd haec ipsa verba pro concione saepiùs ad populum non habeatis. At potiùs de Christi merito, qui haec omnia pro nobis, at non citra nostram cooperationem, praestite∣rit; De fide sine operibus otiosa; de praedestinatione, electione, repro∣batione,
ut plurimùm agatis; quae vestros auditores vel planè se∣curos reddit, vel animum despondentes: Quò factum, uti vel perditâ licentia aestuent, & Rantores, quos vocant, evadant, vel omnem planè spem salutis objiciant, fiant{que} . An non multò rectiùs his ipsis de verbis; de lege per fidem in Christum praestanda, de obedientia, de mortificatione peccati, de vitâ Dei redintegranda & caelitùs acquirenda, &c. An non de istis majori cum fructu sermo haberi potest, ut eo modo populus habeat, quo collimare possit? Atqui quod è catechismis & confessionibus conjicere licet, haec ipsa verba penitùs impossibilia putantur, at{que} eodem nomine po∣pulo traduntur; eadem{que} operâ praeciditur omnis eadem prae∣standi at{que} implendi spes. Quis enim vel tantillùm id facere co∣nabitur, quod nullâ potentiâ, nullâ virtute à Deo datâ, intra hu∣jus vitae cancellos unquam posse fieri arbitratur? Siquidem spes conatûs omnis initium est at{que} fundamentum, quâ semel amotâ, quicquid superstruas omninò corruat, necesse est. Hinc factum uti plurimi frustrà spirituali soboli dent prius o∣peram procreandae, quàm fuerit in ipsis immortale semen, haec ipsa verba. Quod autem si quid inde oriatur boni, non illud ho∣minis operâ velut aequivocâ, sed quasi univocâ boni Dei virtute generatur. Praeter enim alias quae suppetunt abundè, rationes, accipite vulgare illud à signo argumentum. Quae quis habet intimo in animo, at{que} super{que} in corde agitat, ille uti{que} probabile est, ea∣dem recitare memoritèr, adhibitâ saltem operâ, potest. Quod autem si horum verborum fuerit memor, cur eadem libris inscripta semper habet ob oculos in pulpito, haud aliter ad populum con∣cionaturus? Certè si haec eadem prae manibus essent, uti fierent à nobis unicè; si prae pedibus ut in iisdem ambularemus, quod sanctus ait Paulus, Ephes. 2.10. si perinde curae nobis essent (Tertulliani vox est) uti diu noctu{que} meditationi essent, haud uti{que} necesse esset è libro eadem populo praelegere. Nostrum enim est (viri fratres,) uti scribas decet ad regnum Dei eruditos, è thesauro nostro nova & vetera depromere, fon∣tem aque viventis in animo intimo possidere. Nimirum aliàs cuivis est è plebe admodum proclive dicere: Hem, bellum con∣cionatorculum! Legit ut Clericus. E fonte non exhaurit, at ex∣antlat è cisterna. Quantum infudit aquae, tantum, nihil quic∣quam amplius, ne guttulam quidem effundit; haud facturus ip∣se, fontem si penitùs haberet in seipso ad vitam aeternam prosili∣entem. Siquidem vos, opinor, haud latet uti scurrae suggillant: Ita non nemo; vel puerulus meus, ait, praescriptam sibi concionem le∣gere potest. Alius, Parechus noster, inquit, similis videtur esse plau∣strario caballo, qui os non commovet agitat{que} nisi plena faeno corbis ad os appendeat.
Imò dicam apertiùs quod harum rerum periti autumant, ve∣rendum esse ne lectores isti verba vitae, quae  sunt, in corde habeant. Quod enim si forent inibi, ex animo, tanquam è charta Socratis illa meliori, expromerentur: Si cor sermonem coqueret, esset uti{que} lingua, ceu scribae calamus expediti, Ps. 45.1. Sic enim  ebullire at{que} adeò coquere significat veluti sacrifi∣cium cibarium in sar tagine mixtum oleo, Domino{que} offeren dum. Fuit enim, uti vos probè nostis, hoc ipsum olim cuivis è clero Episcopali maximo tum crimini datum, quod sermones ad po∣pulum legeret. At certè nemo tum fermè quisquam id fecit, nisi forte grandior aetate qui causari justè potuit memoriolam, eò quod effaetus esset; quod nemo non satetur esse rationi conso∣num: Eò quod memoria primùm deficiat in sene, quod medici monent. Quòd autem si fuerit aetate provectiori probro datum, quantò illud erit juveni magis? Cui memoria non deficit, at ipse suae, suâ segnitiâ, deficit memoriae. Dicam clariùs: illis esto pecca∣tum: Sit sanè, atqui non id ipsum peccatum sanctificabitur exemplo nostro. Quocirca (fratres mei) haec ipsa verba nobis, uti forma intima, vivum{que} exemplar insint: At{que} inde arduum non erit memoritèr eadem in linguam nostram ebullire. Nimitum si r nostrum hisce verbis imbuatur, spiritus in spiritum auditorum spiri∣tualia eructabit. Certè quicquid aliàs humanitùs ab hominibus in homines pro∣fectae ordinationes apud homines authoritatis habeant, uti liceat hominbus praedicare; At si divinitùs tamen haec ipsa non fuerint animis nostris inscripta verba, nihil ipsa penitùs divinae virtutis, nihil energiae quicquam sunt habitura. Quod enim à carne ori∣tur, id etiam caro est; dicente Domino; quod autem est à spi∣ritu profectum, id ipsum etiam spiritus est. Ne{que} locutus unquam priùs ad populum propheta, quàm verbum Domini ad populum ve∣nisse memoratur. Ita fiet, uti, qui loquimur, , pro{que} ut ipse spiritus eloqui dat, eloquamur, Acts 2.4. 1 Pet. 4.11. At à Clero tandem sermonem ad populum convertamus. O Israel! take these same words to heart, and let them be in thine heart, and whet them, sharpen them, inculcate and repeat them of∣ten to thy sons. These same words, for want of use, are become even rusty: they have been laid by, and out of the way, as unprofitable and useless things are cast into a corner, and not at all regarded, 2 Kings 22.8. Hilkiah the high Priest found the book of the Law in the house of the Lord, and he tels Shaphan of it, as of a strange thing. The book of the Law had been lost all the reign of Manasseh and Amon, Cum blattis tinis, it lay among the Worms and Moths; and now in the time of Josiah, Hilkiah findes it. And truly it is even so. All the time that Manasseh and Amon reigns, while we for∣forget
the Lord, and are true to our own false knowledge, and the lusts of our own hearts (ther's Manasseh and Amon) the book of the Law is lost, forgotten, and quite out of minde; it lies, as commonly our Bibles do, all the week long upon the dusty shelf, till the first peal remembers us to keep the Sabbath with it. But when Josiah, the fire and spirit of the Lord rules, (that's Josiah) then Hilkiah, that Divinae particula aurae, that portion of the Lord in us, findes the book of the Law, and brings it out of the dust, and rust, and rubbish of forgetfulness. The book of Gods Law is become like an old Sta∣tute repeald and out of date; so saith the Psalmist, They have made void thy law, Psal. 119.126. And therefore he saith, its time for the Lord to work. In the dayes of Josiah (the fire and spirit of the Lord) the law of the spirit of life that is in Christ Jesus our Lord, its furbished and made bright. It comes out of Sion; its sharpned and made fit to pierce and cut, Hebr. 4.12. these same words are sharp to prick unto the heart: and as a two edged sword to cut off the known sin and the false righteousness, both the outward and in∣ward iniquity, the filthiness both of flesh and spirit. And blessed be the Lord! there are in these dayes of Josiah, in the dayes of the spirit, some who are pricked to the heart, with these same sharp words, Acts 2.37. who have suffered unto blood, striving against sin; whom these same words have pierced, and let-out the life-blood of sin and iniquity, and lodged themselves in their hearts. And these are, as Noah and his family were, before the deluge. O Israel! save thy self from the untoward generation while the preach∣ing of Gods true righteousness lasteth. The overflowing scourge certainly draweth nigh. 2 Kings 23. Ye read of the reformation that Josiah had made; and many, no doubt, had received these same words; as for Josiah himself, let them who say, that these same words are im∣possibie, read, and be ashamed to read, what effect they had in him, v. 25. He turnd to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses. Notwithstand∣ing, maugre all that glorious reformation, mark what the Scripture saith, ver. 26. Nevertheless the Lord turned not from the fierce∣ness of his great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah,2 Kings 23. v. 26. because of all the () wrathful provocations where∣with Manasseh had wrathfully provoked him. And may not we justly expect, that, for the sin of Manasseh, for our forgetfulness of these same words, the fierceness of Gods great wrath will be kindled against us also? If the real reformation of Josiah could not avert the anger of the Lord, shall our hypocritical and pretended reformation turn his wrath away? The Lord will not cleanse him who takes his Name in vain, as hath been shewen. And will he convert them,Amos 2. v. 4. or give them repentance who continue in their sins, and in contempt of these same words? The Prophet as∣sures
us from the Lord; For three transgressions of Judah and for four, I will not turn them or cause them to repent; because they have despised the law of the Lord, and not kept the Commandements; but their eyes have caused them to erre after which their fathers have walked. Such traditional lies () have caused our Judah to erre; as that the Law is impossible to be performed, yea, by those who are in Christ, &c. Remember what the Lord saith, Deut. 32.41. If I whet my glittering Sword, and my hand take hold on judgement, I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me, &c. And certainly that of Psal. 7.12. is most true, if he turn not, if the man who hath for∣gotten his God, and these same words, and returns not unto God, and to his fear, as the Chald. Paraphrast explaines it: if he ad∣mit not these same words to be sharpned upon him, the Lord will whet his Sword, pierce him to the heart, and cut off his iniquities; he hath bent his Bow, and made it ready. O Israel! Because the Lord saith, he will do thus and thus, let us timely prevent him; let us prepare to meet our God, O Israel. Let us return unto him. Let us believe in the mighty power of our God, who will enable us to do all these same words, Phil. 4.13. and write them in our hearts, Hebr. 8.10. Let us believe the doctrine of the old holy Fathers; who taught, that, if any one should say, that God commands any thing impossible, let him be accursed. Let us unbelieve the traditions received from our forefathers of ye∣sterday, who taught their sons a Lesson quite contrary to these same words; and let us say with that believing Father, Mark 9.24 Lord! I believe, help mine unbelief. Lord help us to unbelieve the false principles received from our late fathers. Help us to believe in Christ thy power enabling us to do thy will. This is the doctrine of the holy Church received from the antient holy Fathers. And this do∣ctrine hath been delivered unto this Church, whose sons we are, in many of her Homilies, and her pious Liturgie. Let us conclude with one or other of her prayers; one in Prose; That all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do alwayes that which is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Let us adde one also in Meeter, commanded by the authority of the Church to be used, and accordingly practised in the Church of England. The spirit of grace grant us, O Lord, To keep these Lawes, our hearts restore; And cause us all, with one accord, To magnifie thy Name therefore. For of our selves no strength we have, To keep these Lawes after thy will; Thy might therefore, O Christ, we crave, That we in thee may them fulfil.
And thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God shall deliver thee.] The words are a command, or in another respect,Deut. 7. v. 16. a promise touching the disposing of those nations, which the Lord would give into the power of Israel. A threefold just exception lies against the translation of these words. If they be rendred right, they sound thus: And thou shalt eat up all the peoples, which the Lord thy God is giving to thee. 1. What they turn people, is  in the plural, those peo∣ples; which though harsh to our English ears, yet, by use, it may be made familiar. 2. These peoples are the same which before are called , Nations, v. 1. whom the Lord is delivering, or giving unto Israel. For the words are, The Lord thy God is , Dans tibi, giving unto thee: which imports the continuation of the act; so that, what God hath done, he is yet doing. So that Hierom renders the words, Daturus est tibi, he is about to give to thee. Thus the Lord is said to have given Sihon and his land, into the hand of Israel, Deut. 2.24. Yet hereby is implied a beginning, pro∣gress, and continuation of the act of giving: And therefore,Deut. 4. v. 31. v. 31. he saith, See, I have begun to give Sihon and his land before thy face. Begin, inherit, that thou mayest inherit his land. As I shewed on v. 24. of that Chapter. 3. The Lord commands, or makes promise unto Israel, that they shall consume all these peoples. The word is , Thou shalt eat them up. So Arias Montanus renders it, Comedes; and S. Hierom, Devorabis omnes populos, quos Dominus Deus tuus daturus est tibi. Ac∣cording to which, Ainsworth turns the words, Thou shalt eat up all the peoples, &c. Its true, there is analogie between , to consume and sustain, and  to eat: yet they have their diffe∣rent significations. Nor are these two, to eat, and to consume,  equipollent, or of equal power and extent one with o∣ther. For to consume is a degree of evil beyond eating up and de∣vouring. , Gal. 5.15. which S. Hierom turns, Quodsi invicem mordetis & comeditis, videte ne ab invicem consumamini. And our Translators, But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed (or see ye) that ye be not consumed one of another. Where, to devour or eat up, is a lesse degree of evil, in order to a greater, to consume. But some will say, These Seven Nations were to be consumed. Be it so. Howbeit, since the Spirit of God thought meet to ex∣press it self by eating, not consuming; is it not reasonable Sequi Deum? Thus the metaphore is borrowed either from evil beasts, as Gen. 49.9. or from fire, wch devoureth. Howbeit, its literally true of certain people in Africa, who eat up their enemies, the
Locusts; which were allowed the Jewes as a clean food, Levit. 11. whereon John Baptist fed, Matth. 3. For remedy of such mistakes, (which seem light and slight to a careless Reader, not so to him who precisely and seriously considers what he reads,) it were to be wished, that every word, if possible, in our English tongue, answered in property to its proper word in the Hebrew: And if a metaphore be founded upon it in the He∣brew, let the proper word be expressed in English, and the mo∣taphore in the Hebrew, be understood out of it; so let the origi∣nal precede, and other tongues follow it. Nor is this metaphore uncouth in holy writ: For the Psalmist complains to the Lord,Psal. 14. v. 4. that the ungodly eat up his people, Psal. 14.4. Have all the workers of iniquity not known? eating up my people, as they eat bread. So these Nations are said to be bread for Israel,Numb. 22. v. 4. Numb. 14.9. Nor is that metaphore unlike this, when Moab saith of Israel, Now shall this company lick up all round about us, as the Ox licketh up the grass of the field, Numb. 22.4. which Balaam confirmes, Chap. 24.8. Whence also Amalek hath his name, Populus lambens, a people licking up their enemies. Com∣pare Psal. 79.7. Mich. 3.2, 3. 1. Let the people of God take notice of his gratious promise unto his Church here signified by Israel, who must lick and eat up their enemies. And this the Lord speaks by the mouth of his Churches enemies, Numb. 22.4. Moab saith, Now shall  Ecclesia, the Church or Congregation lick up all round about us. And Balaam sutably to the words before us, Numb. 24.8. He shall eat up the nations his enemies. To like effect, we read other Prophesies; as, that the Lord will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling to all the people round about, Zach. 12.2. And ver. 3. A burdensom stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered against it. (Such opposition must the genuine Israel of God expect from all the divided judge∣ments of the religious World; and they may assure themselves of like deliverance. Take notice of it; for it shall certainly come to pass, according to that history of future time, 2 Esdr. 13.) v. 6. The Governours of Judah shall be like an Hearth of fire among the wood, and like a Torch of fire in a sheaf; and they shall devour all the people round about. All which, and many like prophesies, bode a consumption of the Churches enemies; whom it shall eat up and assi∣milate unto it self, and subdue them unto the obedience of faith: or if desperately obstinate and incorrigible, that of the Prophet Esay 60.12. shall take place; The Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish; yea, these nations shall be utterly wasted. Note hence Gods main designe, whereunto the Scripture be∣fore us is serviceable; viz. That the body of sin be destroyed, that the kingdom of Satan, Sin and Death be abolished, Rom. 6.6. and that the
Kingdom of God may come and be raised up in us, Dan. 9.24. This is typified by the burning up the sin offering and burnt of∣fering, and by the destruction of the seven Nations figuring the seven capital sins according to Lyra, and diverse of the Antients whom he followeth. This is meant by the Prophet, if rightly translated and understood; Behold, the eyes of the Lord God, are  in regnum peccati, upon the kingdom of sin,Amos 9. v. 8. and I will destroy it from off the face of the earth, Dan. 7.14. Mat. 6.10. Wherefore be couragious, O ye faithfull Israelites, who march against your spiritual enemies; ye have the promise of the Lord of hosts, that ye shall eat up all the peoples which the Lord your God is giving to you. Hearken not to the faint-hearted and unbelieving Spies; who say, that the people are greater and taller then ye are; and that ye are as Grashoppers, (or rather, as Locusts,Num. 13. v. 33. ) in your own eyes, and in the peoples eyes, Numb. 13.33. Let them not discou∣rage (or rather) melt your heart. Why should that significant metaphore be obscured, and lost, by mis-translation? whereof the Spirit of God makes use, as taken either from Ice resolved into water, Josh. 7.5. or from Wax melted, Psal. 22.15. Unbelief and fear, soften and melt the heart; which is strengthened by belief and courage, Gen. 45.26. Psal. 27.13, 14. Believe the faithful and valiant Spies and witnesses of God, Je∣hoshua (the Lord the Saviour) and Caleb (the hearty and couragious man, according to the heart of God;) these will assure us, that we are well able to overcome, and eat up the peoples: For so they say, Numb. 14.9. Fear not ye the people of the land, for they are bread for us. If we be thus strong in the Lord, the Lord will strengthen us, Psal. 31.24. and the Lord Jesus will take away the sin, John 1.29. and the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the pretiousness of Lambs, they shall con∣sume into smoke, Psalm 37.20. For so the Altar of Christs pati∣ence, consumes and eats up the Sacrifices: Therefore the Altar is called Ariel, that is, the Lion of God, Ezech. 43.16. which devours the flesh of sin which is laid upon it. And thus the spiritual ene∣mies of the Lord, and his people, are consumed by the fire and spirit of love burning on the Altar, the patience of Jesus Christ. So the Prophet prayes, Consume in wrath; consume, and let them not be. He prayes against the sinnes, not the persons of his enemies; for ver. 11. he had prayed, slay them not. He prayes, that the Lord would consume the iniquity, that it might not be. For should he pray here against the sinners, that they should not be, how could he pray for them in the words next following? Let them know, that the Lord ruleth in Jacob, and to the ends of the earth. And to shew, that what he had said, is worth our consideration, he adds, Selah.
Which imports the suppressing of our earthly thoughts, and raising up our heavenly meditations: like that, Psal. 9.16. Higgaion, or medidation. Selah. Even so, O Lord, impower us by thy mortifying spirit, Rom. 8.13. which may kill, eat up, and consume all the wicked populacy, all the seven nations the deadly sins, (which will otherwise eat up and consume us.) And quicken us unto the life of thee, our God, through the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Gods request unto his People.SER. XV. OR, Gods Petition of Right. SERMON XV. Deuteronomie 10. ver. 12, 13. And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his wayes; and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul: to keep the Commandements of the Lord and his Statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good.] SOme of these words are otherwise to be rendred, as I shall shew in the particular handling of them. Meantime we may know, that they contain a summary comprehension. These words are a summary comprehension of the peopses du∣ty to their God, inferred from the consideration of his goodness in renewing the Law, continuance of the Priesthood, and adding thereto the Levites. Whence the words before us are deduced as a conclusion. The 1. And, is here collective, as gathering all the promises together, conclusive and illative, as inferring from those pro∣mises Israels obedience, and very emphatical, as often elsewhere. If for our better understanding of these words, we take in the two following verses, which depend upon the two former, we shall finde that this Paragraph hath two parts: 1. , a Request or Desire: 2. , a Rendring of a reason for that Desire and Request.
In the former, which is , the Request and Desire, is the , the thing desired and requested, and the end why it is requested and desired. 1. The thing desired and requested, is either the peoples holy af∣fections, or the sutable effects issuing from them. Their holy affecti∣ons are either the holy fear of the Lord; whose effect is, walking in all his wayes: Or the holy and intire love of God; whose effect is, serving him with all the heart and with all the soul. The common effect of both these holy affections, is keeping Gods Com∣mandements and Statutes. 2. The End aimed at in all this, is either Cujus, as they call it, for which the request is made, that is, for good; or Cui, for whose sake, and for whose benefit, this duty unto God, is requested for thee. 2. The  or reason of this Request and Desire, is either negative implicitly set down; not that the Lord needs thee, O Is∣rael, or any thing of thine; For behold, the Heavens, and the Heavens of Heavens are the Lords thy Gods; the earth also, with all that therein is. 2. Positive and express, the affection of God toward the holy Fathers, only the Lord did cleave unto thy Fa∣thers to love them:Deut. 10. v. 16. out of which, he chose their children above all other people. Which was the special grace of Christ to∣ward his Church, Ephes. 1.3, 4, 5. Ye perceive by this Analyse, that the Text is Oratio argumen∣tosa, a speech full of Arguments, and may afford manifold Axioms of greatest regard. But I have elsewhere spoken to diverse of them. The divine Axiomes contained in these words, are either, 1. Gods Requests unto his people: or 2. Gods Requesting these of them; or his servant Moses Requiring of them; or the ends why the Lord requests and Moses requires these of Israel. Gods Requests are, that, 1. Israel fear the Lord their God. 2. That Israel walk in all his wayes. 3. That Israel love him. 4. That Israel serve the Lord their God with all their heart, and with all their soul. 5. That Israel keep the Commandements of the Lord and his Statutes. 6. The Lord requires all these of Israel. 7. Moses requstes or commands all these this day. 8. The Lord requests nothing more, nor does Moses require any thing more of Israel but these. 9. For what end doth the Lord request, or Moses require these of thee, O Israel, but for good, and to thee, O Israel? I intend not to treat of all these, having spoken to many of them upon their Texts of Scripture. Wherefore I shall waive
the Press handling of what I have formerly delivered, and speak to what more properly concerns our present purpose. 1. The Lords first Request to Israel is, to fear the Lord their God. But what fear of the Lord, is here understood? And why is that fear his first Request? 1. The fear of the Lord here meant, is not only servile; which is a necessary introduction unto a better; but filial, initial, and in∣genuous fear also, which hath the temper of love with it. 2. This fear of the Lord, is his first Request unto Israel; be∣cause fear and reverence properly belongs to his soveraignty and supream Majesty, Mal. 1.6. For it is the property of Saviraigns to expect reverence from their Subjects. To this man will I look, to the poor (or humble) and broken of spirit, and trembling at my word; viz. so trembling as the balances in aequi pondio, when they are one weight, ready to turn with the weight of the word. And therefore this fear of the Lord appertains ad primam mensu∣ram divinitatis, quae janua est ad intrandum in palatium Regis, to the first measure of the Deity, which is the gate and in-let into the Pa∣lace of the great King, saith Georgius Ʋenetus, out of the antient Divines. Hence it is, that this fear of the Lord, is said by David, to be the beginning of divine Wisdom, Psal. 111.10. which is confirmed by his wise son Solomon, Prov. 1.7. Here is then the first service of the Lord, and his first Request unto Israel; to fear the Lord his God, Ezod. 20.20. 2. This fear of the Lord is the principle of walking in all his wayes: That's the Lords second Request. And what are those wayes? There are many of them, but they may be reduced unto three. 1. There is a way of Gods Commandements, Psal. 119.1.Psal. 119. v. 1. and 128. v. 1. O the blessednesses of the perfect in the way, walking in the Law of the Lord, wherein they walk who fear the Lord. O the blessednesses of every one fearing the Lord, walking in his wayes. This is the way of the Law. 2. There is a way of faith, which is Christ: For so the Lord saith of himself, I am the way, John 14.6. and Christ and faith in him, are promiscuously taken sometime, as 2 Cor. 13.5. Gal. 3.23, 24, 25. And this is the way of the Gospel. 3. There is a way of love, a most excellent way, 1 Cor. 12.31. , and yet I declare unto you a way,1 Cor. 12. v. 31. and 13.1. Secun∣dum excellentiam, according to eminency and excellency. What that way is, the Apostle shewes in the following Chapter; If I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, but have not love (or chari∣ty,) &c. Whereby its evident, that Archbishop Stephen Langhton, who divided the Scriptures into Chapters, though elsewhere very happily most what; yet herein he violently brake the last verse of the twelfth Chapter, from the first of the thirteenth. For the
Apostle in the last verse of the twelfth Chapter, begins a new argument or subject distinct, by way of excellency, from the former part of that Chapter, which he prosecutes Chap. 13. This is the third way, the way of love, the way of the everlasting Gospel, Matth. 24.14. Revel. 14.6. 1. Whence it appears, that the fear of the Lord, is only a soveraign and effectual preservative against sin, according to that of the Wiseman, The fear of the Lord driveth out sin, and wrath, Ecclus. 1.26. And, by the fear of the Lord, men depart from evil. But also it is a means as helpful for the advancement and promoting of every positive good, as here, for the walking in all the wayes of God. 2. The Lord expecteth of Israel, an universal obedience, a walking in all his wayes; obedience of fear, Exod. 20.20. Obedi∣ence of faith, Rom. 1.5. and 16.26. And obedience of love or cha∣rity, 1 Pet. 1.22.1 Pet. 1. v. 22. So Hierom read : and so he rendred the words, Animas ve∣stras castificantes in obedientia charitatis; having purified your souls in (or by) the obedience of charity. And this reading suits best with the context: For the Apostle having spoken of faith and hope, two of the Theological vertues, v. 21. he proceeds to the third, which is charity, ver. 22. 1. Whence they are justly to be reproved who have all the wayes of the Lord propounded unto them to walk in,Esay. 65. v. 2. yet choose rather to walk in a way not good, after their own thoughts, Esay 65.2. 2. Such as pick and choose one or other of Gods wayes to walk in, especially such as seems to them to be most smooth and easie. Such are they who leave the way of the Law, under pretence ei∣ther of impertinency, and that it belongs not unto them; or, which amounts to the same, of impossibility for them to walk in; and choose to themselves that way which they call the Gospel; as if Christs walking in the way of the Law, excused them from walking in it; not remembring, that the righteousness of the Law is to be fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Rom. 8.3, 4. Not considering, that the Lord Jesus saith of the Gospel, that strait, (or, how strait) is, the gate, and narrow is the way,Mat. 7. v. 14. () leading unto life, Matth. 7.14. Yea, full as much obedience, and as tedious travailing there is, in the way of the Gospel, as in that of the Law; as will appear to him who shall consider these Scriptures advisedly, Matth. 5.17.18.19.20.48. and 7.14. 2 Cor. 7.1 . Col. 4.12. beside many others to be named in due place. Only under the Gospel, the Lord giveth more grace and strength to run the way of his Commandements. 3. But most abominable are they who walk in lasciviousness, excess of wine, in rioting and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness, yet pretend to walk in the way of pure and holy love.
These at this day are the close civil Ranters. These are they, of whom the Apostle saith, that they turn the grace of our God into lasciviousness. These are spots in our feasts of charity,Jude v. 12 14. feast∣ing with you, feeding themselves without fear. Enoch the seventh from Adam () prophesied unto these. So far are these from walking in all Gods most holy wayes, that they dare affirm, (Os blasphemum & impudens! O blasphe∣mous and bold-faced men!) that the most holy God walks with them in all their most unholy and most unclean wayes. Yea, these set the Devil in the seat of God, and make God like unto their ungodly selves; of which the Lord will convince them in his judgement. Thou thoughtst that I was altogether such as thy self;Psal. 50. v. 21, 22, 23. but I will reprove thee, and I will set in order (thy sins, so the LXX) in thine eyes. Now, (or, I beseech ye) consider this, ye forgetful of God, lest I tear in pieces, and there be none delivering. He who is offering praise, shall honour me; and I will cause him to see into the salvation of God, who is disposing (or ordering) his way, Psalm 50.21, 22, 23. But away with false and hypocritical pretences of love: Its a pure and holy love, which the Lord intreats of Israel. 3. And it is the Lords third Request unto Israel, that we love the Lord our God; and a most just and reasonable Request it is. Of which I have elsewhere spoken more fully: as also of, 4. The fourth Request, That we serve him with all our heart, and with all our soul. Now as the first and second Request make up the first service of God, viz. the service of fear, Exod. 20.20. out of which, we walk in all the wayes of the Lord: so the third and fourth Request of the Lord, contain his last and greatest service, his service of love. From the consideration of both the services, take notice, that the service of love, doth not make void the first; viz. that of fear. For there is a Copulative that unites them, to fear the Lord, and to love him. But the time will come, when the service of love, shall cast out the fear, 1 John 4.18. viz. that fear which hath torment (or punish∣ment, .) But as for the filial and reverential fear, that en∣dures for ever, Psal. 19.9. And although love be perfect; and though that which is perfect, be come; though the spirits of men be made perfect, and perfectly partakers of the divine nature; yet none of these, no, not all these together can make the creature its Creator. Although the will of God be done perfectly in earth, even as it is done in heaven; yet this standing compleat in all the will of God; this running the way of Gods Commandements, this perfect follow∣ing of God, cannot equalize the creature to its Creator; as some have vainly imagined. The two later wheels of the Chariot, though they run as fast as the two former, yet can they never overtake the
former;SER. XIV. they must still follow; they must ever come behinde. TThe Lords fifth and last Request unto Israel, is, to keep the Commandements of the Lord and his Statutes. The fifth and last Request, though it differ formally from the rest, yet it summarily containes all the former; Thou shalt keep the Commandements of the Lord thy God; to walk in his wayes, and to fear him, Deut. 8.6. And it is indeed as reasonable and just a Request, as the other are. For obedience unto all the Commandements of God, pro∣ceeds from the two fore-mentioned principles, fear and love. Whence it is, that the keeping of Gods Commandements, issueth sometime from fear, as Eccles. 12.13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God and keep his Commandements. Or, according to the Vulg. Latin, Finem loquendi pariter omnes audiamus, Let us all a like hear the end of speaking. Or rather, according to Pagnin, the end of every word hath been heard. Wherein  in  the End, is a Capital letter, importing the End at which the whole word aimeth, under the first dispensation, the service of the fear of the Lord; viz. that, out of that fear of the Lord, we should keep his Commandements. Sometime the keeping of Gods Commandements, is said to proceed from Love. So, Deut. 5.10. the Lord saith, I am  doing mercy to thou∣sands, to the lovers of me,Deut. 5. v. 10. and keeping my Commandements. As Israel is loving God and keeping his Commandements, so the Lord is concurring with his continued and collateral act of doing mer∣cy unto those who are loving him, and keeping his Commandements. And as Solomon said of the first dispensation, that the End of every word hath been heard,1 Tim. 1. v. 5. Fear God, &c. So S. Paul saith of the third Dispensation, 1 Tim. 1.5.  but the end of the Commandement, is love out of a pure heart, and a good consci∣ence, and faith unfeigned. I put the note of diveristy [But] an∣swering to , as Hierom, Arias Montanus, Pagnin, and others have done: whereby a diversity is put between the effect and end of fables & endless Genealogies, and the Commandement of God; they minister questions; but the end of the Commandement is love. Which , though a very small word, yet it is of very great pow∣er, which suspends the understanding, as the little Echeveis, or Remora stayes the course of a Ship, though under sail, saith Aelian. Yea, and oftentimes it is no less then Totius negotii cardo, the Hinge of the whole business, as the learned Logician knowes. And therefore it should not be rendred copulatively, as yet our Translators have done in the New Testament, I believe, more then one hundred times. These two services of fear and love, the Lord so countenanceth, that he is styled after their names. So, what Laban calls the God of Isaac, Jacob calls the fear of Isaac, Gen. 31.29.42.53. But where∣as
he is here so named with relation and application unto Isaac,SER. XV. we finde him called absolutely The Fear, Psal. 76.11.Psal. 76. v. 11. Vow and pay to the Lord your God, all round about him; let them bring a gift , to The Fear, which in the former part of the verse is called The Lord. Thus he so honoureth the service of love, that he is styled absolutely by the name Love, 1 John 4.8. And again, v. 16. God is Love. And therefore S. Augustin affirms, that eve∣ry good work proceeds from these principles; Ad omne rectè factum Amor & Timor ducit; Love and Fear leadeth to what ever is rightly done. 6. Hitherto we have heard the , the Lords five Requests unto Israel, in so many divine Axioms. Come we now to , the Lords requesting these of Israel. The word here used, is , which signifies to intreat, ask, petition for, desire; Yea, it imports the lowest degree of petitioning; as to beg, Prov. 20.4. Its commonly used when men petition for any thing of God, as, 1 Sam. 1.17.20.27. & 12, 13. and often elsewhere. Whence  signifies a petition put up unto God, Job 6.8. Psal. 20.5. This word, our Translators turn here by Require; What doth the Lord Require of thee? Which is not properly rendred; as may appear, partly by what hath been alrready said; partly by the distinct significations of words which seem equipollent, but in∣deed, in their use, much differ one from other. The Latin Criticks distinguish peto, posco and postulo thus. 1. Petimus prece, we entreat and desire by prayer. And it is com∣monly the act of an inferiour, who intreats and petitions for some thing, by prayer, of his Superiour; and the foot of a Petition, is therefore called the prayer of it. 2. Poscimus pro imperio, we command with authority; and it is the act of a Superiour, who commands somewhat by authority to be done by his inferiour under his power. 3. Postulamus jure, we demand by right; and it is an act com∣mon to all who have right, to make demand, that right be done. The word here used, to require, answers to the two later sig∣nifications. And indeed it is a word used by the supream Magi∣strate; as in that usual form of speech, We will and require, we require and command, &c. Now although the most high God have soveraigne authority and independent right unto his creatures, especially to man; in whom he hath a manifold right, of 1. Crea∣tion; 2. Preservation, (which is a continuing and perpetuating creation;) 3. Covenant; 4. Forefeiture; 5. Redemption, and 6. New Covenunt; of which I have spoken heretofore particular∣ly; yet here the Lord Non postulat, he requires not his right; Non poscit, he interposeth not his authority and command: but Petit, he desires, intreats, and requests, which last word, in our language, is equipollent to the two former: And though it be of the same
Latin Original (Requiro,) yet it differs in usu,SER. XIV. whence vis & nor∣ma loquendi; use is the rule of speech. O the wonderful conde∣scent of the most high God, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and the only Ruler of Princes! He hath all authority, all right, beyond all compare, yet he deigns to petition for that which he hath inde∣pendent right and authority to command and require of his Israel. But lest this discourse should seem to be meerly critical, we shall finde a like condescension expressed by S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.20. We are therefore Ambassadours for Christ, , tanquam Deo precante, or, exhortante, as God praying you, (so Beza) or, exhorting you, (so Pagnin,) we be∣seech you, &c. The word is in the Participle present, The Lord is praying, is exhorting you, by us. And so in the Text, the Lord is  Pe∣tens (so Arias Montanus,) requesting, desiring, entreating thee, O Israel. Thus the Lord hath done, thus he is still doing. And what reason is there, that the Lord intreats, and is conti∣nually intreating these duties of us? 1. He knowes our necessity, and how extream needful these are for us. 2. He loves exceed∣ingly our immortal souls, which being come forth from God, whose off-spring we are, Acts 17.28. and by sin separated from God, he would not that our immortal souls should perish in sin and death: And therefore he labours their return unto him, by all means, both by fear, whereby we may depart from the sin; and by lave, whereby we may be reunited and adjoyned unto him and his righteousness. This is the scope of the Apostle in the place now named, 2 Cor. 5.20. God is entreating you by us, we beseech you, be ye reconciled unto God. But why does the Lord thus continually sollicit us hereunto, en∣treating and beseeching us daily to be reconciled unto him? He knowes the daily necessity of his Israel in all successive generati∣ons. He has a right unto all these duties, which he requests of us. And hence it is that he continually moves us inwardly and outward∣ly: And this continal claim preserves his right. 1. Behold, O Israel, what thy debts and engagements are unto thy God, to fear him, and to walk in all his wayes, and to love him and serve him with all thine heart and with all thy soul, and to keep his Com∣mandements and his Statutes. These are , the things which are Gods, Matth. 22.21. These, and such as these are the debts which we confess and acknowledge, that we owe, when we pray the Lord to forgive them, Matth. 6.12. 2. Hence also it appears, that Israel detains these dues and debts from his God, and aliens them, to whom Israel is not in∣debted, Rom. 8.12. We have given his fear unto men, Esay 51.12, 13. which is his due, and he claims it, Mal. 1.6. A Son honoreth his father, and a servant his Lord. If then I be a father, where is
mine honour? And if I be a Lord, where is my fear?SER. XV. saith the Lord of hosts. I rather turn  Lord then Master, as ours have here done: both, 1. Because [Master] is doubtful, as an∣swering to Magister, and , John. 13.13, 14. 2. Its the same also with Herus , which hath relation to any private and obscure family; to any one, Cui servus est atque arca; who hath a servant and a Chest; as the Poet describes him as a very poor man, Cui neque servus neque arca, who hath neither. Whereas  is here used in the plurall, to render the Lord more illustrious, so Esay 19.4. We have walked in our own wayes, which are extreamly diffe∣rent from Gods wayes, Esay 55.8, 9. We have withdrawn our love from our God, and placed it on vain things which will not profit in the later end, , ambitious, and lovers of vain glory, lovers of money, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, 2 Tim. 3.4. Yea, and thus we become abominable, according to the things which we have lo∣ved, Hos. 9.10. For, Amor transformat amantem in rem amatam, love transforms him who loveth, into the thing which is beloved, whe∣ther it be good or evil. We have served our own lusts, and the idols of our own hearts, all the other gods, and have not served the one and only true God, with all our heart and with all our soul. We have detained the truth in unrighteousness, and the power of our God in pretence of impotency and weakness; So that we have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his lawes which he set before us. All these Rights, Debts and dues, Israel hath with-held from the Lord his God. And for these, the most high God condescends even to petition Israel. He takes on him the form of a servant; Yea, and what a servant would not do, what a servant was ashamed to do, Luke 16.3. He vouchsafes to do, even to beg for that, which he might most justly require and command. 3. The most eminent and highest degree of Majesty and the very meanest and lowest degree of humility, are not , they may well consist and stand together. The most high God con∣descends to petition and beg for his own right, of his own sub∣jects. 4 Since the King of the worlds,1 Tim. 1. v. 17. () conde∣scends to entreat and request his Israel, for what is his right, it will not misbeseem the greatest Monarchs and Potentates upon earth, to petition and supplicate their subjects for their right. Yea, it is their safest way for the obtaining of it. When, maugre all the con∣spiracy and opposition of the Kings and Rulers of the earth, the Lord had set his King upon his holy hill of Sion, he gives serious warning, Be wise now therefore, O yee Kings, be instructed
(or, chasten your selves;) yee Judges of the earth. The spirit of God in David,Psal. 2. v. 10. Matth. 20. v. 25. well fore-saw, that the Kings and Princes of the earth, would , Matth. 20.25. Domineer and Abuse their authority over Christs Church. (So Beza well renders those words, by Dominari and Licentiâ uti.) Yea, and that some mistaking their honourable and holy calling, to be made Kings and Priests unto God, Revel. 1.6. would forget their duty to Kings and Potentates on earth. And therefore the Apostle exhorts Titus to remember them, or put them in mind () to be subject to principalities and powers,Tit. 3. v. 1. 2 Esd. 15. v. 16. to be obedient, Tit. 3.1. Which also the Lord foretells unto Esdras, that there should be inconstabilitio unsetledness (not sedition, as our Translators turn that word,) among men; and invading one another; that they would not regard their Kings and Prin∣ces; and the course of their actions should stand in their power, 2. Esd. 15.16. which we finde in part to be fulfilled. And it is to be wished that the Kings and Judges of the earth, be wise, and curb and chastise their exorbitant wills, lest they fall under the contempt of their peoples; and they regard them not. The Horse in time may know his strength. Hence they are justly to be blamed, who, out of their humane providence and voluntary humility, will not allow the great God so demit, empty, and abase himself, as to petition, and entreat; but, out of the pride of their own hearts, they dispense and fashion the dea∣lings of God with men, and they will have him onely Require and command, not request and entreat, as here he doth. Of this stamp, are many of the present generation, who, out of pretence of an high esteem of God,Esay 57. v. 15. and Christ, and their eminencies, will not suffer the Deity it self, to take up its residence in the holy Church and people of God, but will have such expressions of Gods, or Christs dwelling in his Saints and people, to be understood of the Influence of Gods graces. Thus when the Lord saith, I dwell in the high and holy, even with him who is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. This in-dwelling of God, must, according to these mens doctrin, be understood of the influence of Gods grace. And the like meaning they will have of that speach of the Prophet,Psal. 90. v. 1. O Lord! Thou hast been a dwelling for us in gene∣ration, and generation, that must be by the influence of his grace. So they understand, Joh. 14.23. and many like Scriptures. Thus the most gratious and endeering expressions of Gods and Christs favourable presence, being and abiding in us, and with us, are elu∣ded and made void by their influence, a term knowen in Astrology, but denyed to be in nature, of late dayes, by men of like spirit with those; who have promoted it unto Divinity, where it was never knowen; untill a new generation of men, of late dayes,
pointed them to God and Christ neerer to them, then they were aware of; as Jacob said, the Lord was in this place, and I knew not, Gen. 28.16. And Iohn Baptist tells the Priests and Levites sent unto him, Joh. 1.26. , He hath stood in the midst of you, whom ye have not known.John 1. v. 26. Thus at this day, men of John Baptists dispensation, tell the Priests and Levites, that Christ hath long been in them, yea, crucified in them, Gal. 3.1. which our Translators turn, among you; the words are,Gal. 3. v. 1. , crucified in you. And know ye not your selves that Christ Jesus is in you, except ye be reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5. But these men are too high to learn any thing of Johns Disciples, they have otherwise learnd Christ, whom they understand only either according to his humane person and history; or, as their new phrase is, the influence of his graces; so that, what S. Paul cals the mystery hid from ages and generations, but now made manifest to his Saints; To whom God would make known, what is the riches of the glory of this mystery in the Gentiles, which is , Christ in you the hope of glory: All this, to which the Apostle makes so large a Preface, and prepares the Colossians and us, for expe∣ctation of a mystery, its still a mysterie to these men; and reputed no more, then the influence of Christs grace, Col. 1.27. The Heathen Poets had a better and more clear understand∣ing of the Divine Presence, then these men: Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo. God is in us; he moving, we grow hot. Nor can it be truly said of God, that he is omnipresent, unless his Essence and being be every where with his creatures. He no doubt thought so, who said, Praesentem{que} refert quaelibet herba Deum. Even every Herb speaks God present with it. Whence we may rea∣son à fortiori, That if God be present with every herb of the field, how much more with his Creatures of a more eminent degree in na∣ture? according to that of S. Paul, He gives to all, life and breath and all things; and hath made of one blood, ,Acts 17. v. 26. every nation of men to dwell upon all the face of the earth, &c. that they should seek the Lord, if haply they may feel after him, and finde him; though he be not far from every one of us: For in him we live and move and have our being. How is this to be un∣derstood, but by his essential and beingly presence? For although that old verse Enter, praesenter, Deus hîc & ubi{que} potenter, seem to distinguish the omnipresence of Gods power, from his essence and being, yet where ever his power is, he himself is essentially present. That rule in Metaphysicks may convince them of this: Ens depen∣dens non potest abesse ab independente ne momento quidem temporis. That the dependent being cannot be absent from the independent, no, not a moment of time.
Whence we may recollect and infer forcibly thus much; that, if the divine presence be with every creature, how much more with that which is , The creature, Mark 16.15. Col. 1.23. and compendium and breviate of all the creatures? And if he be essentially present with that creature, how much more doth he afford his gracious presence (and not only the presence of his grace,) unto those his excellent ones who are partakers of his divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and his new creatures? 2 Cor. 5.17. All which if duly considered, what can we judge of these mens seeming modesty, but that it is a voluntary, chosen, and groundless humility. And that, whereas some of them despight∣fully term others different in judgment from them, Sadducees, they themselves may be thought to differ little from Epicureans, (if what is said of them, be true) that they confine the divine essence, within the heavenly bodies; and admit no operation of God, below the Moon. Yea, how like those, are they, who say, the Lord hath forsaken the earth? Ezech. 8.12. And however they pretend mo∣desty and high thoughts of God, they are doubtless a daring generati∣on. For what boldness, what presumption is it, to adde unto Gods words? Prov. 30.6. If they say, it is no addition, but only an explication. Surely explication of Scripture (especially such as is of so great moment as this is, touching the being of God and Christ and his spirit in us,) ought to be taken out of Scripture, (which, I am confident, they are never able to do,) not out of their own imagination, and as they think good; which S. Hierom calls Boni opinio, good thinking. Yea, the spirit of God foreseeing such false Glosses, hath left some such expressions, as are not easy to be corrupted; whereby the truth of Gods and Christs being in his Saints is averred. As when Christ is called Immanuel God with us: that he is  the indwelling deity. That the Kingdom of God , is inwardly within you. That the people of God are partakers of the divine nature, 2. Pet. 1.4. That Christ, by himself is making the purging of our sins,Hebr. 1. v. 3. Hebr. 1.3. And many the like. What they say, that it is presumption to think, that God and Christ should be in his Saints, (as the Scripture often holds forth,) unless understood according to their influence; that it is against our modesty to judg that God should entreat and request any thing of Israel, which he should rather require and command. Whe∣ther to understand Gods word  as he hath left it to his Church; or to impose a sense upon it, of our own, be more breach of modesty, and the greater presumption, let the Godly learned judge. Surely the onely-wise God can best determin, what is the  the decorum, and what expressions may best become himself, in his dealing with his Israel. But the entreaties of Princes are interpreta∣tive
their commands; their Requests are their Requirings. And therefore, what the Lord here entreats or, is entreating. 7. Moses commands, or is commanding, this day, whether understood of the Law of Gospel. Lex imperat; Evangelium impetrat, saith one of the Antients. The Law commands; The Gospel obtaines power to be obedient unto the Law. Commands befit the law; Entreatyes and Re∣quests, the Gospel. The Lord leaves no meanes untryed; he makes use of both. But why does the Lord entreat, and Moses command? 1. Our God in himself is Love, sweetness, and goodness; which inclines him to request and desire of us, our bounden duty. And that his goodness ought to lead us unto repentance, Rom. 2.4. But sin, iniquity and obstinacy in sin brings in rigour and austerity, yea, wrath and fury, which is no genuine property of our God, who saith, Fury is not in me, Esay 27.4. and 28.21. vengeance is his strange work, his strange act, which when he executes, he puts on his armour, Esay 59.17. 2. He well knowes our heart who made it, that it being perver∣ted, its not fit to be wrought upon by love, goodness, and mercy; which, by accident hardens it, as in the case of Pharaoh; but then severity, commands, and threatnings are most proper for it. And therefore, since è malis moribus, ortaesunt bonae leges, good lawes arise from, and suppose ill manners of men; hence it is, that they are propounded imperatively, and have their due and respective san∣ctions by punishments annexed. And the Magistrate, in such case, is more feared then God himself. Which was wisely considered by John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, who composed the local statutes of Christs Colledge in Cambridge; in the Chapter de visitatore, he hath these, or the like words; Si Deum non timeant, at visitatorem saltem reformidabunt; if they fear not God, yet they will at least be af∣fraid of the Visitour. They who will not grant the Lords Request, will be obedient unto the Command of Moses. 1. Note hence how wisely and gratiously God deals with his people. He dispenseth his acts of grace, by himself, his acts of severity, by his servant. Israel is the seed of Abraham his friend: He therefore softens the Commands of Moses, by his own entrea∣ties; and, lest his own Requests should be thought too much in∣dulgence, they are somewhat straitned by Mose's commands. Yea, such is the intimacy of his friend-ship with his Israel, that, as friends have mutual power one over the other, he vouchsafes to Israel, power over himself, as Israels name imports: and as Is∣rael entreats his God, so God interchangeably entreats his Isra∣el. Yea, and as the Lord commands Israel, so (a wonderful digna∣tion, and condescent!) he gives power to Israel, to command himself, Esay 45.11. 2. It is in Israels power, or may be obtained by faith and prayer,
to fear the Lord his God;SER. XIV. to walk in his wayes; to love him; to serve him with all his heart and with all his soul; and to keep his Commandements and his Statutes. How does this appear? from the context; what is the Lords requesting, , a tecum, from with thee. Thou hast power with thee. So St. Paul chargeth Timothy, to stir up the gift that was in him. The gift was with him and in him, and wanted onely stirring up, 2 Tim. 1.6. And the Lord tells the Church of Thyatira, that somewhat they had, which he warns them to hold fast, till he came. What ye have, hold fast till I come, Revel. 2.25. And the Apostle knew, what power he had, when he told the Philipians, that he was able to do all things through Christ inwardly enabling him, Phil. 4.13. Much more does the Lord know what Israel can do, when he requests him to fear him, walk in all his wayes, love him, serve him, and keep his Com∣mandements and Statutes. The Lord requests no more, Moses requires no more then we have power with us to perform. The Lord is most wise and most righteous, and would injoyn no more, nor request any more, nor would his servant Moses require more in the name of the Lord, then might stand with Gods wisdom and righteousness to request or require. 8. What doth the Lord request of thee? and what doth Mo∣ses require of thee, O Israel, but these duties named? Does the Lord request or require no more? Are there not 248 affirmative Precepts in the Law, answerable to the same number of bones in a mans body? which also import the strengths and powers of the inward man, to be perfected by the Commandements of God. And therefore when the Lord was now about to give Abraham his name,) which contains in the letters of it the same number,) the Lord saith unto him, walk before me, and be perfect, Gen. 17.1. Implying, that he had given him strength to obey all the affirma∣tive precepts, as indeed he did: For the Lord himself testifies so much; Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my Com∣mandements, my Statutes, and my Lawes, Gen. 26.5. Yea, are there not 365. negative Precepts answering to the same number of sinews and ligaments in a mans body? as the skilful Anatomists af∣firm; and by like spiritual ligatures the strengthes and powers of the inward man are united and bound together, Ephes. 4.26. Col. 2.19. that, when the powers of the inward man are united, and bone joyned unto its bone, the spirit may enter into the body so joyned together, Ezech. 37.10. and the whole man may be compleated and perfe∣cted; as our Lord saith, John 7.23. He made the man every whit sound on the Sabbath day; when men rest from their own workes, and work the works of God, even in that acceptable year of the Lord, figured by the like number of dayes, 365. The Lord having given so many affirmative and negative Com∣mandements, he contracts them unto ten, which are the Decalogue,
or ten better known then practised Commandements of God;SER. XV. and the radical precepts, unto which the whole number of affirma∣tive and negative commandements, being 613, are reduced; and wherein virtually they are contained. Yea, and as there are six hundred and thirteen affirmative and negative Precepts, so there are the same number of Letters in the Ten Commandements. And so every letter in the Decalogue, imports one precept: So that, after a sort, all the affirmative and negative precepts are com∣prehended in the Decalogue. This is the supputation of the Cabalists, reported by Georgius Ve∣netus, which I leave to the examination and judgement of others. Only, thus much we may note, that as the multitude of sins occa∣sioned the multitude of precepts; so God in mercy, contracts the number of his lawes, according as his people cease from their sinnes. Now whereas this book of Deuteronomy was called by the learned Jewes, , the Book of Reproofs or Rebukes,Prov. 15. v. 32. the people being probably amended by their rebukes, according to Prov. 15.32. He who is obedient to reproof, is possessing an heart; that is, getting understanding. And the argument of this Book answering in many parts of it, to the Gospel, unto which, when Israel now became obedient, the Lord was pleased to contract his Ten Commandements to half their number, even to five requests. And, upon supposal of Israels increase and improvement of their obedience, the Lord diminisheth the number of his Commandements. Whence it is, that we read, that the Commandements reduced unto four. Zach. 8.16.17. These are the things or words which ye shall do. 1. Speak yee every man truth to his neighbour.Zach. 8. v. 16, 17.2. Judg truth and the judgment of peace in your gates. 3. And let none of you think evill, against his neighbour, in his heart. 4. And love ye not an oath of falshood. For all these are things which I hate. Which yet another Prophet abbridgeth unto three, Mich. 6.8. He hath shewed unto thee, O man, what is good,Mich. 6. v. 8. and what is the Lord seeking of thee (or from thee) but 1. To do judgement, 2. To love mercy; and 3. Humble thy self to walk with thy God? Our Lord Jesus yet shortens the number of the Commande∣ments, and brings them to two. 1. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy minde, (or rather, reasoning, ;) For the minde, Mens, hath the name from resting; but  imports discoursing and reasoning,) this is the first and great Commandement. But  (which our Translators turn and,) the second is like unto it, 2. Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self. There is reason why our Lord should use , viz. in regard of him who moved the que∣stion, a Pharisee, v. 34, 35. That sect, as it is notoriously known, like the Pharisees of our dayes, pretended much to the first Table
and the love of God; but little regarded the second Table, and the love of their neighbour. Wherefore out Lord having satisfied the Pharisees question touching the first and great Commandement, The love of God; , unexpectedly he infers the se∣cond; The love of our neighbour, which our Lord knew to be more needful for the Pharisees as it is for those of the same faction in our dayes. This was the reason why our Lord directed the Pharisaical yong man to the duties of the second Table only, Matth. 19.18, 19. Mark 10.19. The Commandements can be but once more contracted, viz. unto one; and that's done by S. Paul, Rom. 13.9, 10. He that loves another, hath fulfilled the Law, &c. And this is the end of the Commandement, even love, out of a pure heart, and a good con∣science, and faith unfeigned, 1 Tim. 1.5. and that which advan∣ceth the chief good, even thy good, O Israel! Thats the last Axiom in these words. 9. The Lord entreats, and Moses commands these duties for good, for thy good, O Israel. When we read, that our God entreats us to fear him, walking in all his wayes, love him, serve him, and keep his Commandements and his statutes; and further that Moses Commands all these, we might think, that God and Moses had some notable ends upon us; That God would not request, nor Moses require these duties of us, but for their own great advantage. Whereas indeed the end where∣at all these aime, which the Lords entreates, and Moses's com∣mands tend unto, is  for Good; at which all things indeed aim, or, ought to aim; Finis & bonum convertuntur; good is as large as the end, and the end is as large as goodness: So great an end or re∣ward there is in keeping the Commandements. Psal. 19.11. And in this end, where at all the whole creation aimes, or, ought to aim, the good of Israel, is involved. And therefore there is added, , to thee, or, for thy good, thine advantage; as that word signifies: which is a more full expression then that our Translators give, for thy good. Whence it appears, that the obedience to the Commande∣ments of God, is comprehended in true self-love,; For as the be∣ginning of the Christian Religion, is self-denial, denial of the false self-love, Luke 9.23. So the end of it consists in the true self-love, when we fear the Lord our God, and walk in all his wayes, and love him, and serve him with all our heart, and with all our soul, and keep his Commandements and his Statutes for good for our selves. What an easie precept is it, Love thy self? And that's the end of this Text. Does the Lord entreat us, petition us, yea, beg all this of us, and that for good, for our own good, O Israel? Does Moses command all this, this day? Let us command our selves to obey what Moses
commands. Let us, with all readiness and alacrity, grant, what the Lord requests of us. There is an overture toward this, in thine immortall soul, O Israel! That off-spring of God having departed from him, carnest∣ly, though secretly, desires again union with him. Hence are the many pantings and breathings, the deep sighings and groanings, whereof, there can be no other reason given, but that the immortal soul broken off from the living God, intensely and vehe∣mently desires to be reunited unto Him her true Original. This the Prophet David well expresseth Psal. 42.1. As the Hinde brayeth after the streams of water, so brayeth my soul unto thee, O God.Psal. 42. v. 1. My soul hath thirsted for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God. I render it, the Hinde, the femal; as the LXX have, , and the verb  in the feminin, joynd to it, requires it so to be understood. The desires of the pious and zealous soul after God and his Righteousness, are compared to those naturall appetites of hunger and thirst, Matth. 5.6. Whereof the later is more vehement, and less tolerable then the former, especially in femal creatures, as the Hinde. And thirst is yet more intense and eager, when that beast is chased and hunted. Whence Christ Psal. 22. in the tittle, is compared to the Hinde compassed about with Doggs, Ver. 16. And most justly may the living God the fountain of living waters, Jer. 2.13. and 17.13. elicit and draw forth the height of our most intense affection. And if Amor complacentiae, that love of complacency in God toward his Israel, be so great, surely Amor indigentiae the love of indigency and want in Israel, ought in some measure to be correspondent thereunto. And if the most high God, out of wonderfull condescent, vouchsafe even to petition Israel for his own Right, and for good unto Israel; how much more ought Israel to meet his God with humble petitions and prayers? That the Lord would knit our heart unto him, that we may fear his name, and walk in his wayes. That the Lord will be pleased to circumcise our heart to love the Lord our God, and serve him with all our heart and with all our soul, Deut. 30.6. O Israel! do this right unto thy God; Yea, do this right unto thy self, O Israel! If thou honour thy God, thy God will honour thee, 1 Sam. 2.30. Even with that honour which cometh of God onely, Joh. 5.44. Which is Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Pet. 2.7. To whom be all honour, fear, and love, and service, and obedi∣ence,1 Pet. 2. v. 7. now and for evermore! Amen,
Thou shalt therefore sacrlfice the Passeover unto the Lord thy God,Deut. 16. v. 2. of the flock and of the herd.] So the Vulgar Latin renders the words, Immolabis{que} Phase Domino Deo tuo, de ovibus & de bobus; And thou shalt sacrifice the Passeover unto the Lord thy God of the Sheep and of the Oxen. So likewise the Chaldee Paraphrast. And Pagnin hath De pecudibus & bobus, of the Sheep (or smaller cattle;) and of thine Oxen. So likewise Ainsworth. This Translation leads unto a great errour; as if the yong Lamb for the Passeover, were here changed into a grown Sheep, or an Ox; which at first was instituted by the Lord, to be a Lamb or Kid of the first year, Exod. 12-3.5. And it is enjoyn'd to Israel to be observed in their generations as an Ordinance for ever, ver, 14.17. Some of the learned Jewes were of this opinion. And they feigned a reason, viz. Because in a great family, one Lamb or Kid was no enough. And therefore they conceived, that the Lord here exchanged a yong Lamb or Kid for a growen Sheep or Ox. But the Lord himself wisely foresaw, and graciously provided for such a case, as appears, Exod. 12.4. If the houshold be too little for the Lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house, take it, according to the number of the souls, &c. Beside, the Lamb for the Passeover, was not ordained for the filling of their bellies, but for a thankful memorial of their deliverance out of Egypt; that the heart might be established with grace,Hebr. 13. v. 9. and not with meats; , in which they who have been walking, (or conversant,) have not been profited. But why then are Sheep and Oxen, here added, if they be not the Passeover, or a part of it? I answer, The Lords Sacrifices were to be offered in their appointed times. Howbeit, beside the precise observation of every respective offering, there were certain incidental oblations, which, though offered unto God, the same day, yet they properly appertained not unto the service and offering of that day. Thus the daily burnt offering was com∣manded to be offered day by day continually, Exod. 29.38.—42. Yet beside the daily burnt offering, other Sacrifices were offered; which distinguished from it; as we read expresly, Numb. 28. where the continual burnt offering is again enjoyn'd, ver. 3.—8. But every Sabbath day had its proper service and offering, ver. 9. which yet did not discontinue, nor yet was it co-incident with the daily burnt offering, but distinguiwed from it, ver. 10. This is the burnt offering of every Sabbath, beside the continual burnt offe∣ring, and his drink-offering. The like is observable in the obla∣tions at the beginnings of the moneths, ver. 11. which were offe∣red
beside the continual burnt offering, ver. 15. So in the day of the first fruits, ver. 26. the Sacrifices proper to that day must be beside the continual burnt offering, ver. 31. The like may be noted in the solemnity of the Passeover it self; which, as it was to be observed apart and beside the daily burnt offering, ver. 23.24. So likewise was the service and duty of that day, sacred from the proper services and offerings of the feast of unleavened bread: For so ver. 16. on the fourteenth day of the first moneth, is the Passeover of the Lord. And in the fifteenth day of this moneth, is the feast, according to the first institution, Exod. 12.14, 15. So that on the fourteenth day the Paskal Lamb only was slain and eaten; but on the feast of unleavened bread, be∣ginning on the fifteenth day, and continuing seven days, were Sacrifices offered of Bullocks, Rams, and Lambs, Numb. 28.18.—24. Whence its evident, that where Moses saith, Thou shalt sacri∣fice the Passeover, of the flock and of the herd; he speaks compen∣diously of the Passeover it self, and the Sacrifices of the feast of unlea∣vened bread, annexed thereunto. Hitherto we have considered the Law and rule of the Passeover. Practise and example will best expound that Law and Rule, which we finde 2 Chron. 30.15. Where its said, that they killed the Passe∣over on the fourteenth day of the second moneth, (Num. 9.10.11.) And the Priests and the Levites were ashamed and sanctified themselves, and brought in the burnt offerings into the house of the Lord. First, they are said to have killed the Passeover; then the Priests and Levites ashamed (of their uncleanness) brought in the burnt offerings into the house of the Lord; which must be understood of those offered in the feast of unleavened bread: For we read of no other prescribed in the Passeover, but one Lamb or Kid; and this Rite and Ceremony is said to have been performed according to the law of Moses the man of God, 2 Chron. 13.15, 16. There is another example which speaks more home to this purpose, viz. that Passeover of Josiah, whereof its said, Surely there was not such a Passeover, from the dayes of the Judges, that judged Israel, nor in all the dayes of the Kings of Israel, nor of the Kings of Judah, 2 Kings 23.22. This Passeover is related more particularly, 2 Chron. 35.1.—19. where express mention is made of killing the Passeover in the fourteenth day of the first moneth, ver. 1. which consisted of Lambs and kids, according to Exod. 12. The King also is said, beside the Passeover offerings, to have given to the people 3000 Bullocks, ver. 7. And the Princes are said to have done the like where the Passeover is killed on the fourteenth day, ver. 1.11. and the other Sacrifices are said to be removed, v. 12. The distinct wayes of dressing these offerings prove this; for ver. 13. they rosted the Passeover (which is said before to consist of
Lambs and Kids, v. 7.) with fire, according to the Ordinance: But the other holy offerings sod they in Pots, and in Cauldrons, and in Pans. By all which, it appears, that, although mention be made of the flock and the herd, yet by these are not to be understood the Passeover, (which was offered by it self) but the offerings annexed thereunto in the feast of unleavened bread, v. 17. I could wish therefore, that [of] were left out, and the words read thus; Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the Passeover unto the Lord thy God, Sheep and Ox. Thus the Greek Interpreters render the words, , Sheep and Oxen. So Munster, Ovem & Bovem; Arias Montanus also, and Tremellius: So likewise the Tigurin Bible. Thus also the French and Italian, and Luthers Translation, with that which was turned out of Luthers, in the Low Dutch. To prevent the errour noted before, Piscator turns the words thus; Thou shalt kill the Passeover to the Lord thy God, also Sheep and Oxen. And two of our old English Translators have done the like; whom it had been to be wished, that our last had followed. All this might have been a kinde of Rationale divinorum, or, a Directory to the Levitical ceremonial service of the Passeover; but what is it unto us? It is an Essay towards the amendment of the last English Translation of the Bible; and so a part of my business. But I intended not a bare critical discourse. Surely beside the commemoration of our Lords death, who is our true Passeover, or Paskal Lamb, the Spirit of God requires of us, that we offer up also our spiritual Sacrifices. That we may the better understand this, we must remember, that the Lamb is called the Lords Passeover, Exod. 12.11. as he who gives the Paskal Lamb. Its also called our Passeover, as being given to us, 1 Cor. 5.7. Now its a worn saying, Omne beneficium postulat officium, Every benefit requires an answerable duty. And every holy rite and ceremony, as it imports and holds forth something unto us, so it claims something of us. And such is the Passeover; a divine rite signifying the Lamb of God slain; and the blood sprink∣led on the Lentil or upper door-post, and the two side-posts (which import the , or rational part, and the , and the , the concupiscible and irascible) Exod. 12.7.Rom. 3. v. 25, 26. and the Lord passing over. For God set forth this Lamb a propitiation through faith in his blood for a declaration of his righteousness for the passing over the sinnes formerly commit∣ted, by the forbearance of God, for a declaration of his righte∣ousness at this time, that he may be just, and making him just who is out of the faith of Jesus, Rom. 3.25, 26. Which divine cere∣mony requires also a duty at our hands; but with a difference.
For the same rite was diversly performed, 1. By those who came newly out of Egypt; and 2. By those who were come in∣to the holy Land, Exod. 12.52. 1. By those who were now going out of Egypt, the Feast of unleavened bread was kept, which figured sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. and was required out of the Passe∣over. Purge out of you the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened: For even Christ our Passeover is sacrificed (or slain) for us: Therefore let us keep the Feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice (or naughtiness) and wickedness, but with the unleavened breads () of sincerity and truth. This sincerity and truth was required in those who were coming out of Egypt; and is of those who are coming forth of the straits of sin, the spiritual Egypt, Mich. 7.19. And the good Lord pardons every one who with sincerity prepareth his heart, and endeavou∣reth without hypocrisie, to purge out the old leaven of sin; as in the case of those who were in the same state, 2 Chron. 30.18, 19, 20. Howbeit, this sincerity of endeavour is not all the whole duty which is required of those who keep the feast of unleavened bread: much less is it the perfection of the Christians duty; as our Translators usually render what is in the holy Text, [perfection or perfect,] by sincerity and sincere and upright, as Psalm 18.23. or else, mislead the credulous Reader by putting one or other in the margent, as Gen. 17.1. and often elsewhere. The feast of unleavened bread was alwayes adjoyn'd unto the Passeover. And the sincerity and truth alwayes answereth unto the Lamb slain, even in the childehood; and while Israel is a childe, and the Lord loves him, and calls his fon out of Egypt, Hos. 11.1. Is∣rael is even then sincere in love unto God and his neighbour, Ephes. 4.15. and that love is without hypocrisie. But Israel, though he must ever be sincere, yet not alwayes a childe, but must grow up unto him in all things, who is the Head, even Christ, Ephes. 4.14, 15. This is that which the Apostle prayes for, in behalf of the Phi∣lippians,Phil. 1. v. 9. That their love might abound yet more and more in ac∣knowledgement and in all sense, that they might approve, (or try) things that are excellent, (or, which differ, and so might have the true Discrimen honestorum & turpium, the discerning between things honest and dishonest; and have their senses exercised for the discern∣ing of good and evil, Hebr. 5.14.Hebr. 5. v. 14.) that they might be sincere and without offence, unto the day of Jesus Christ; when there is a Period put, not unto the sincerity, which must continue, but to the childehood; for the childe growes up and becomes fruitful and profi∣table: therefore to the yong Paskal Lamb in the feast of unleavened bread, is added the grown sheep most fruitful, and profitable, and meek, and harmless. And therefore the Apostle having prayed that they might be sincere until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.9, 10.
adds presently, filled with the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God. And of this growth are or ought to be, the common sort of be∣lievers in Jesus Christ. Which antiently were called , Laiks, according to Clemens in his Epistle to the Corinthians, to name no other testimony of the Fathers. There is also another sort of Believers in Jesus Christ, who grow up as Calves in the stall, that they may become strong Oxen, Mal. 4.2. who, in the spiritual old age of the divine wisdom, tread down the wicked. Senilis Bos fortiter figit pedem; the old one treads sure, Psal. 18.38. The Prophet prayes for both,Psal. 144. v. 13, 14. Psal. 144.13, 14. That our Sheep may be bringing forth thousands, and become multiplyed into ten thousands in our streets, (where our Translators leave out the Participle) that our Oxen may be  loaden with flesh, or fatted, or able to bear the burdens of the weak, Rom. 15.1. where the word signifying Oxen,  imports also Teachers, (which ours turn Dukes,1 Cor. 9. v. 9, 10. Gen. 36.21.29.30.) Job 33.33. & 35.11. Whence S. Paul accordingly applyes that of Moses, Deut. 25.4. Thou shalt not muzle the Ox in his treading out corn, 1 Cor. 9.9. Doth God take care of Oxen? or saith he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes it was written; because he who is plowghing, ought to plowgh in hope; and he who is (treading out) or thresh∣ing in hope, ought to partake of his hope. This is the labour of the strong Oxen, who tread out the pure grain of the Spirit, out of the husk of the letter. According to which, the Wiseman saith, , where there are not Oxen (or, Teachers) the Crib is clean;Prov. 14. v. 4. but greatness of increase is in the strength of the Ox, Prov. 14.4. 1. Hence it appears, that the acceptable Sacrifices of Sheep and Oxen, suppose the Sacrifice of the Lamb. All our services offered unto God, have their tincture and vertue from Christs oblation. Whence it is, that the offerings on the Sabbath, new Moons, and first-fruits, they pre-require the continual burnt offering of the Lamb, Numb. 28. And it is by him, that we offer the Sacrifice of praise to God continually, Hebr. 13.15. And, because Christ our Passeover is sacrificed for us, therefore we must keep the feast, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. 2. The Sacrifice of the Lamb, infers and requires our spiritual Sacrifices. This argument is of more general consideration. For the divine bounty is obligatory; and Religion hath its name from that tye of Gods goodness upon us, whereby we are Religati, ob∣liged and bound unto suitable and grateful obedience, which our conscience elicites and drawes from us. For, whereas it is the di∣ctate of nature, saith the Orator, Dei proprium esse, servare & bene∣facere, that it is Gods property, to save from evil, and to do good,
the acknowledgement of this divine grace and favour, inclines us and puts us upon some way or other, whereby we may shew our thankfulness. Whence it is, that the Philisopher saith, , Nature teacheth us to sacrifice. Howbeit, so to sacri∣fice, as to finde acceptance with God, ncessarily supposeth a di∣vine Oracle revealing what is that acceptable will of God; other∣wise all service of God is , no other then will-worship. But since God hath made known his will in his Word, it ap∣pears to him who duely considers it, that Religion, especially that of the Christians, is wholly practical, even in every Article of the Christian faith, and requires our conformity thereunto. As, that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary; it mindes us of being obedi∣ent unto the pure doctrine and doing the will of our Father who is in heaven, out of which, Christ is born; so that every one of us, who believe and obey, may be the Mother of Christ, Matth. 12.50. that he may be formed in us, and we conformed unto him, Gal. 4.19. And as he suffered, so his sufferings may abound in us, 2 Cor. 1.5. As he was crucified, so our old man may be crucified with him, Ram. 6.6. As he died, so we may die with him, and be buried with him by baptism, Rom. 6.5. As he arose, so we may arise with him; and as he ascended, we also may seek the things chat are above, where Christ is at the right hand of God, Col. 3.1.Ephes. 2. v. 6. where we may sit with him in heavenly things, in Christ Jesus. And as he cometh to judge the world; so shall the Saints be his Assessors, and shall judge the world with him, 1 Cor. 6.2. So that the Lord Jesus Christ requires our imitation of his most meritorious death and passion for us. For the love of Christ constraineth us judging this thing, That, if one be dead for all,2 Cor. 5. v. 14, 15. therefore all were dead; And he died for all, that the living may no more live unto themselves, but unto him who hath died, and is risen again for them, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. And hence it is that the genuine and true Christians, how harmless, how profitable soever they are to their generation, yet are they, for Christs sake, mortified all the day;Rom. 8. v. 36. and have been accounted as sheep of the slaughter. For so the most fruitful trees of righteousness, are most cudgeld. The like reason there is of those laborious Oxen who spend their strength in treading out the corn; they are Sacrifices unto God, as that painful Ox, S. Paul, who laboured more then his fellowes, he was offered up unto God as a Sacrifice, or rather as a Drink-offe∣ring, Phil. 2.17. 2 Tim. 4.6. And all the Lords Labourers, as they receive their strength from God, so they spend it in his service, and are spent and offered up as Sacrifices unto God, and so keep the feast of unleavened bread: as we read, that Herod the King laid on hands to vex certain (eminent ones) of the Church. (So I render ,Acts 12. v. 1. eminent ones, according to Gal. 2.6. And so Aliquis is used in
Latin, Sese aliquem credens—Thinking himself Some-body. So Persius.) And he killed James, that labouring Ox; and he proceed∣ed to apprehend Peter also, his painful Yoke-fellow. And S. Luke adds, But they were the dayes of unleavened bread. Why was menti∣on made of those dayes, but to intimate a spiritual celebration of that Feast? 3. The Lord expects a gradual obedience of his people; of eve∣ry one according to what power he hath: And as he gives to every one according to his ability, Matth. 25.15. So he requires a proportionable improvement of what he gives, of every one as he is able; Non eadem à summo minimo{que} not the same of the greatest and least; a Lamb-like innocency and fincerity from the weakest; from those who are better growen, a fruitfulness and profitableness; such are the Sheep of the true Shepherd, John 10. He requires an helpfulness and cooperation with himself, of those who are his strong Oxen, 1 Cor. 3.9. that they break up the fallow grounds, and tread out the corn; and when they have done all, to suffer as Lambs, Sheep and Oxen;Jer. 11. v. 19. as the Prophet saith of himself, I was as a Lamb, an Ox brought to sacrifice, Jer. 11.19. This discovers much hypocrisie in the present generation; For there are who exceedingly magnifie the grace & mercy of God, and his love to mankinde; in that he made Christ the spotless and innocent Lamb to be sin, (or an offering for sin) not having known sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Who exceedingly cried up the dignity of Christs person, that Lamb of God, and the invaluable merit of his personal death and passion; At quis vituperat? But who dispraiseth him? said one to him, who made a long Oration in the praise of Hercules. These can well make large Panegyrical Orations of what God hath done, and what Christ hath suffered for them; but meantime they con∣sider not, nor acknowledge, that they themselves have crucified and slain that innocent Lamb, in Sodom and Egypt, Revel. 11.8. and 13.8.Gal. 3. v. 1. even Christ crucified , Gal. 3.1. in you, by the secret sin, and the open and manifest sin. They boast much of the Paskal Lamb sacrificed for them; yet are they not sincere; nor purge they out the old leaven of naughtiness and wickedness;2 Pet. 1. v. 9. but take forget∣fulness both of Christs expiation and purging them; and of their own duty of cleansing themselves of their own old sins, 2 Pet. 1.9.
One and All. OR, Love the fulfilling of all the Commandements.SER. XVI. SERMON XVI. Deuteronomie 19. ver. 9. If thou shalt keep all these Commandements to do them, which I command thee this day, to love the Lord thy God, and to walk ever in his wayes. THis is Pendula sententia, a sentence which depends on some∣what preceding in the former words, and hath something depending upon it, in the words following. Its necessary therefore to the understanding of these words, that we know the structure and natural order of the eighth, ninth, and tenth verses, which contain one entire Paragraph. The Lord having commanded the building of three Cities of Refuge, in the midst of the Land, v. 2. He gives order to build three Cities more; but this command is upon a condition on Gods part. If the Lord enlarge their Coast, according to his promise and oath, unto their fathers, v. 8. But because there is no question, but the Lord the faithful God will perform his promise and his oath, the two immutable things; the only doubt would be, whether Israel would perform their duty, that the Lord might perform his promise and his oath: and there∣fore the condition on Gods part depends on performance of ano∣ther condition on mans part, which ye have v. 9. If thou shalt keep all these Commandements. If this condition be performed, then thou shalt build thee three Cities more.
The end why these Cities must be built, ye have v. 10. That innocent blood be not shed in thy land. Ye perceive, my Text is the second condition, according to the order of the words, namely, that which is required on mans part, that the Lord might perform the condition on his part, To enlarge their coast;Rom. 7. v. 19.21. and so the three other Cities might be built. Before we can speak as we ought, to these words, we must render them right: For they are not truly translated, as they are now read. I read them thus. If, (or when) thou shalt keep all that Commandement to do it, which I am commanding thee this day, to love the Lord thy God, and to walk in his wayes, all dayes. These words are considerable in themselves, or, with reference unto the neighbour words. In themselves considered they afford us these Axioms. 1. The Lord is commanding thee this day, to love the Lord thy God, and to walk in his wayes, all dayes. 2. Thou oughtst to keep all that Commandment to do it. These words considered with reference to the neighbour words. If thou shalt keep all that Commandement to do it, the Lord will enlarge thy Coast. 1. The Lord is commanding us this day, to love the Lord our God, and to walk in his wayes all dayes. This in nature is first: For there must be a command, before there is an obeying the command. Wherein we have the general duty; 1. Love of the Lord our God. 2. Obedience out of that love. 3. The duration or continuance of that love and obedience. 4. Gods precept enjoyning that love, obedience, and duration of it. 1. The Lord is commanding us this day, that we love the Lord our God. This form of speech notes a continued act of commanding. The Lord gives not his commands of love and obedience , all at once.Esay 3. v. 9. There hath been a dispute, whether the Creator having once in the beginning, put an , Impetus, or, principle of motion, into his creature, that were sufficient for the perpetual motion of every respective creature, according to its kinde: Or, whether the perpetual concourse of the Creator be needful to the motion of every respective creature. This later hath been more generally received in the School. The reason may be, 1. In regard of man averse and turned from his God, and turned into a vitious self-love, a love of the world and the things of the world; and therefore he stands in great need of divine concourse continually reclaiming him, re∣calling him, requiring and commanding him, entreating and request∣ing him, exciting and exhorting him dayly, while it is called to day, continually every way winning upon him, to regain him unto his love.
2. Besides, the Lords continual claim, as I have formerly shew∣en, preserves his right. This discovers mans wonderful apostasie from the love of his God; who, although he be the chief good, and therefore naturally most amiable and lovely, yet the Lord sees it needful to command man to love him. 2. We ought to keep all that Commandement to do it, to love the Lord our God. What our Translators here turn [all these Commandements to do them] in the plural, is in the singular number only in these words, , All that Commandement to do it. Where  and  are emphatical, importing the excellency of that Commandement, and demonstrative and pointing at that Commandement here intended, and expressed in the next follow∣ing words; If thou keep all that Commandement to do it, which I am commanding thee this day, To love the Lord thy God. Its strange, that there hath been so great an inadvertency in the Authors of all the old English Translations, as well as of this last; as also in the French, Spanish, and Italian; yea, in Hierom also, in Luther, and the Low Dutch; that they should not take notice of the singular number, this Commandement, which would have directed them to the first and great Commandement in the next words. Howbeit, a matter of so great moment, past not without due observation of some learned Translators, as Pagnin, Vatablus, Ca∣stellio, Tremellius, Munster, the Tigurin Bible, Piscator, and of our English, Ainsworth, who with one consent read the words to one effect, Thou shalt keep all that Commandement to do it; viz. to love the Lord thy God, &c. Herein we must inquire, 1. What it is, to keep that Comman∣dement; which is the duty here commanded; 2. What it is to keep all that Commandement; which is the latitude and generality of the duty. To keep that Commandement, and do it, are phrases sometime equipollent and of the same extent; for so to keep the Comman∣dement, is to do the Commandement. Sometime they are distinguished; and the former is in order to the later, as Gen. 18.19. Deut. 4.6. and 5.1. Ye shall learn them, and keep to do them. And thus the observing and keeping the Commandement is in or with the heart, as Psal. 119.34. I shall keep thy Law; yea, I shall observe it in the whole heart. Here then I commend unto you the highest service of God, even the love of the Lord our God. That ye may perceive it to be no other, ye may consider the man on whom God first works, to be moved by the spirit of bondage, under which he lives in fear,
Rom. 8. Fear takes away half the understanding from servants, saith Plato, out of Homer. Yea, Timor minuit, it takes away half their strength. A man is not able to do half so much in his fear, as when it is off him. Then is he brought to faith, but that works not, but by love, Gal. 5.6. And at the last he comes to the love of God. And that is the end, 1 Cor. 13. , the perfect that is to come. And therefore we read of a threefold obedience. The first out of fear; and that takes away half the spirit and strength of men: This was figured by the Porch of the Temple; whence they are called , as Acts 10.2. and 13.16.26. 2. There is an obedience of faith, Rom. 1. and 16. This was figured by the holy. Lastly, there is an obedience of charity, 1 Pet. 1.1. Castificantes—sub obedientia charitatis: This was figured by the Most-Holy, where∣in Jesus Christ himself is the High Priest, the Minister of the hea∣venly good. This is tacitly enjoyned, Exod. 20.6. doing mercy to thousands of them that love me and keep my Commandements. This is the most durable service of God. When Faith and Hope have an end, 1 Cor. 13. ult. The true light, the resurrection, and the ever∣lasting life. The new birth, the new heaven and earth wherein righte∣ousness dwels, the kingdom of God and his righteousness; the Paradise of God, wherein is the tree of life, wherein is the fulness of life and peace. In a word, this is God himself, 1 John 4.8.16. The Son of God,Col. 1. v. 13. Col. 1.13. , the Son, his love. The holy Spirit of God shed in the hearts of men, as Peter Lombard ex∣cellently explains that place; Then that which is perfect is come. We have hitherto heard the duty of the first and great Com∣mandement, the love of the Lord our God; now followes the gene∣rality and integrity of that duty of love and obedience; of love; we ought to keep all that Commandement to do it. That we may the better understand the generality and integrity of this duty, I shall refer you to our Lords Commentary upon this Commandement, Matth. 22.37. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy minde: which words com∣mend unto us the generality and integrity of this duty, even all this Commandement, as considerable extensively and intensively. 1. Ex∣tensively, in regard of parts; and so we ought to love the Lord our God with heart, soul, and minde. 2. Intensively, in regard of degrees, with the utmost degree of all these parts; we ought to love the Lord our God, and so to keep all this Commandement to do it, with all our heart, with all our soul; and as it is in S. Luke, with all our strength, and with all our minde. Doubt. 1. But how can we love the Lord our God so intensive∣ly and extensively, and keep all this Commandement to do it? God is immense, unmeasurable, and infinite. But thou, and I, and
every creature of us is finite and hath certain bounds and limits of being. Between infinite and finite, we say, there is no proporti∣on. How then can we so keep all this Commandement, to love the Lord our God with all our heart, with all our minde, with all our soul, and with all our strength? Beloved! we are subject to be much mistaken, as in other things, so most of all, in ourselves: The man was taken, accord∣ing to his better part, out of his God, & therefore he hath greater resemblance unto him, then he is aware of. God is infinite; and man is, in a sort, infinite; Infinite in his thoughts and imaginations. Name the utmost part of the known World, of the Eastern or Western Indies; or toward the Northern of Southern Pole, the thoughts are presently there upon the very first naming of them. Put case there were more Worlds, and those larger then this known World; the thoughts could enlarge themselves according to the number of them, and utmost extent of them. The like we may say of the will and appetite, it is infinite, Eccles. 6.7. All the labour of the man is for his mouth; and his appetite or will () is not filled; no, but it ranges and seeks about for what may fill it: as the Wiseman intimates, v. 9. Better is the sight of the eyes then the wandring of the desire. Yea, by reason of the unsatiable and infinite appetite, the eye is not satisfied with see∣ing, nor the ear with hearing, Eccles. 1.8. nor the desire with lust∣ing. He that loveth silver, shal not be satisfied with silver, Eccles. 5.10. As therefore God himself is infinite; so is the desire an abyss, a bottomless depth which cannot be filled otherwise then by an infinite God. So that by how much the soul desires God more, by so much the more it may desire him. And by how much the more it loves God, by so much the more it may love him. For God in himself is an infinite good without any defect; and the soul was made according to his image, and for this end, to know and love him: and, till it so do, it rambles and wanders about the creatures, and is never satisfied. Fecisti nos Domine propter te, & irrequietum est cor nostrum donec pervenerit ad te. Lord! thou hast made us for thy self. And our heart is unquiet until it come unto Thee. 1. All that Commandement, to love the Lord our God, with all our heart, with all our soul, and all our minde, is a most excellent Com∣mandement: This appears from a double Emphasis upon it in the text: if thou shalt keep  even all that Com∣mandement. And therefore whereas the Jews had four Sections of the Law, in more religious observation; 1. Exod. 13.3. touch∣ing their coming forth of the land of Egypt. 2. Verse 11.—16. concerning the destruction of the first-born. 3. Deut. 6.4.—9. touching the property and service of God. 4. Deut. 11.13. con∣cerning the former and the later rain.
That which the first recited of all these four parts ofthe Law, was this Commandement touching the love of the Lord our God. This they first recited every morning and every evening; and thence it is most worthy of our morning and evening meditation. And therefore the Apostle having treated of spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 12.1.—30. Be zealous of the best gifts, saith he; yet , I shew you a way secundùm excellentiam,1 Cor. 12. v. 31. a way according to excellency, a most excellent way. But what that is, Stephen Langton, who divided the holy Scripture into Chapters, rendred obscure, by dividing the Apostles testimony of that ex∣ultent way, from that excellent way it self, in the following Chapt. This is that which holy David intended,Psal. 119. v. 96. Psal. 119.96. I have seen an end of all perfection, thine exceeding broad Commiandement. The Text is corrupted by the Translation: There is no [But] no diversity at all; but the later part explains the former. This is the end of the Commandement. The end or perfection of the Com∣mandement, is love out of a pure heart, and a good conscience and faith unfeigned, 1 Tim. 1.5. This is that perfect bond, Col. 3. 2. The Lord so speaks to all Israel, as to one man; If thou keep all this Commandement, to do it, to love the Lord thy God; the Lord requires obedience unto this Commandement of all, and of every man. 3. To keep all this one Commandement, is virtually and radically to keep all the Commandements. So much the Lord implyes in the body of the Decalogue, Exod. 20.6. they that love me and keep my Commandements. Yea, S. John tels us, that this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandements, 1 John 5.3. 4. Note hence the integrity of Gods will and Commandement, re∣quiring a like intire obedience of us. But whereas Bonus actus ex in∣tegra causa, malus ex quolibet defectu; every good act requires inte∣grity of causes, and circumstances all good; but an act is rendred evil, by any one defect of these: hence it is, that man having lost his integrity, and fallen into manifold sins and strayings from his God, there was a necessity of a manifold Law, to follow the man, and search him out in his manifold aberrations and wandrings. According to which, we may understand the Prophet Hos. 8.12. I have written to him ,Hos. 8. v. 12. which our Translators turn, the great things; Arias Montanus, Praecipua, the chief things; Pagnin, Honorabilia, the honourable things; which may as well be rendred, the multitude of my Law. Whence we may justly reprove a wicked generation of men, who being exhorted to keep the Commandement to this end to do it, they limit the will of the Holy One of Israel. And, whereas the Lord commands us to keep all that Commandement, to love him with all our heart, minde, soul, and strength, they love him with their minde only. They flatter themselves into a false conceit, that they
are in S. Pauls condition, where he saith, I my self with my minde serve the Law of God, but with my flesh the Law of Sin. Yea, whether with their minde they serve the Law of God, as S. Paul did, it may be very much doubted. For the Apostle saith of himself, or of one in that state, The good that I will, () I do not; but the evil which I will not, that I do. And, I finde therefore a law that evil lies neer me being willing to do good, () & diverse other places in that Rom. 7. The words, ye perceive, are turnd, as if the Apostle spake here of a velleity, or half-will; the good that I would, the evil that I would not. There's no such matter; the Apostle speaks of a compleat and full will, and that which hath no hindrance from it self; the good that I will; the evil which I will not. This man he has a will compleat and ready to do what good he wills, and to depart from the evil which he wills not. Yea, I delight, saith he, in the Law of God, according to the inward man; and, whereas he hath such a good will to the good, and so delights in it, and so hates the evil, to do that evil, its captivity, its misery, its death, its a body of death unto him. And therefore he complaines, Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? And he hath answer (according to the antient reading of S. Ambrose, Origen, S. Hierom, S. Augustin, and others, and the present Vulg. Latin,) Gratia Dei per Dominum Iesum Chri∣stum, the grace of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And by that grace, he is made free from the Law of sin and death, by the Law of the spirit of life. Is it thus with this perverse and sinful generation, who pretend a minde and good will to serve the Law of God? Does not their life declare them? Does not their practice plainly speak, what their minde and will is? Does not the shew of their countenance te∣stifie against them? or rather, as it is in the Hebrew, does not the acknowledgement of their faces answer against them? Do they not declare their sin like Sodom? they hide it not. Wo unto their soul; for they have requited evil unto themselves. Be we exhorted, O Israel, to keep and do all this Commande∣ment, to love the Lord our God with all our heart, soul, minde, and strength. Let us not hearken to that objection of unbelieving and lazy men, which hath more of will then reason in it, that this Commandement is impossible. This opinion hath gotten ground in the mindes of men, partly from the authority of one of the Antients; partly from an in∣bred lightlesness in the most of us; of whom it may be truly said, that Quae nolumus, difficulter credimus, those things which we would not, we hardly believe. And as true is that saying; Pro∣clives sumus à labore ad libidinem, that which is troublesome or chargeable, we have no heart to believe it. Now because to love
the Lord our God, with all our heart, soul, mind, and strength, will cost us all we have, and all we are, we are hardly brought off to think, tis possible ever to be performed. Hence it is that they have made this plausible interpretation of the words, that in them is prescribed Non tam quàm currendum, quà quò currendum. Not so much the way wherein we should walk, as the end of our way, whi∣ther we hope to attain after this life. These, and such like sayings please us well; because they agree with our lazy disposition. But if the command had been reserved for another life, it would not have been prescribed in this, Eccles. 9.10. Acts 5.20. No, nor have been said to be fulfilled in this; as it is said of David, 1 Kings 14.8. so it is recorded of Josiah, 2 Kings 23.25. That he turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses. Nor would it be said to be the practise of the Saints, Psal. 119.2. Whence we may reason thus; If the Saints of God, if Josiah, if David thus loved the Lord their God, under the dispensation of the Law, when the Lord gave a more scanty measure of his spirit, how much more is the same duly expected of us? Zach. 12.8. If they under the Law, loved the Lord with all their strength when the Law was weak; how much more is expected of us under the Gospel? what the Law could not do, &c. Rom. 8.3. Now if ever, . Certainly, by how much the more the Spirit and power of God is vouchsafed unto us, by so much the more we should perform this Commandement, to love the Lord with all our heart, soul, minde and strength. Surely, if the Lord require obedience unto all that Commande∣ment, so as to love the Lord our God with all these, the Lord allowes no place at all, no room within us for any iniquity. He is to be lo∣ved with all our heart, soul, minde, and strength. And therefore there is not left any place, any degree at all for what is contrary to his love. The Church, which is signified by the Kings Daughter, is all glorious within, Psal. 45.13. All that is within me, bless his holy Name, Psal. 103.1. Whose cause then do they undertake to de∣fend, for whom do they plead, for God or Baal, for Christ or Be∣lial, who say, That sin must remain in us? The Lord Jesus Christ tells thee, that thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, &c. They say, That this cannot be done. Our Lord saith, This do, and thou shalt live, Luke 10.28. And, this is the love of God, that ye keep his Commandements. They say, Ye shall live, though ye keep not the Commandements; for its impossible to keep them. Just so the Serpent told Eve, Ye shall not die: A lie, point-blank contradictory to the God of Truth. They say, Christ has kept the Commandements for us, and He has loved God with all his heart, &c. and all for us. And this is imputed unto us, as if we our selves had so loved the Lord, &c. as if we our selves had kept all the
Commandements. Their meaning is, Christ was wise, just, good, humble, loving, meek, sober, chaste, &c. Therefore we may be un∣wise, unjust, wicked, prowd, hateful, and hating one another, wrathful, and impatient, drunkards, lascivious, &c. Why? because Christ was wise, sober, &c. all for us. Grant all this. But hath not Christ suffered, leaving as an example, &c. 1 Pet. 2.21. and 4.1. Object. Hath not Christ paid the ransom and made the atonement? Tis true; Christ hath paid the ransom for all; but for whom effectu∣ally? Is it not for these who believe him, love him, walk in all obedi∣ence unto him? 2 Cor. 4.10.11. and 5.14. 1 Pet. 4.2. A great Prince payes a Ransom for a multitude of Captives: Howbeit, thus he indents with them, that they shall ever afterward relinquish and leave their Prison, and be Subjects and obedient only unto him. The Lord Jesus is that great Prince and Saviour, Acts 5. He hath paid that Ransom for us, who were captives unto Satan, and served sin and iniquity, And He, upon the like terms, agrees with us, that we should no more serve sin, Rom. 6. but that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, should serve him in holiness and righte∣ousness before him, all the dayes of our life, Luke 1.74, 75. But to come home to their own Assertion and similitude; why is not the love of the Lord our God with all our heart, &c? Via quâ currendum, but Scopus the mark whither we must run? Its impos∣sible, say they, by reason of the infirmities of this life, alwayes actu∣ally to think of God, and to be moved in love toward him. And there∣fore so to love him, is not the way wherein we must run. I answer. Nor is it necessary for him who loves God and keeps all that Commandement, alwayes actually to think of God, as he is defi∣ned, or to be moved actually with love towards him. It is enough, if he alwayes think and do what is good, just and honest, and so, what is worthy of God. Yea, so to think, and so to do, is to love God. For this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandements, 1 John 5.3. And therefore he who is alwayes busied about what is holy, just, and good, as the Commandement is, Rom. 7.12. he loves God with all his heart, &c. And what they say, that it is not the way, but the end of the way, surely a Traveller who walkes on in the right way, it is not need∣ful, that, every step he takes, he should think of the end of his jour∣ney; but its enough, that he keep on in the right way toward his journeys end. And therefore holy David doubted not to resolve, I will run the way of thy Commandements, when thou hast enlarged my heart. And he, no doubt, who does so, loves God with all his heart. I know well, the contrary doctrine is and hath long been taught. But , it is an holy thing to prefer the truth before all opinions and authorities of men, could Aristotle say. Our Lord and his Apostles when they taught the Gospel, gave
precepts to be done, not in another life, but in this life. And there∣fore, as was intimated before, the Angel commanding the Apo∣stles to preach the Gospel, calls it, the words of this life. And it is very observable, when the Lord gives this precept touching the love of God with all our heart, &c. Matth. 22.37. He doth not cite the words out of Exodus, wherein is contained the Law out of Mount Sinai; but he quotes them out of Deut. 6.5. wherein many things are contained, which belong to the New Covenant, as it is taught by Christ and his Apostles, and comes out of Mount Sion, and brings with it strength and power. And such is this in the Text. Besides, since the nature of this Commandement, is such, that, without it, eternal life cannot be obtained, surely our God would not have prescribed this precept to be done in this life, if it had been to be reserved for another life. Now that this precept is of that importance, that, without it, the eternal life cannot be obtained; and that, by observing it, the eternal life may be obtained, appears, by what our Lord saith, Luke 10.25. when the Lawyer asked him, What shall I do, inherit eter∣nal life? our Saviour having asked him, what is written in the Law, &c, And the Lawyer returned answer, out of Deut. 6.5. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, &c. Our Saviour then answers to this question, ver. 28. This do, and thou shalt live. Now, Beloved, consider advisedly; It concernes every soul, which hopes and desires the eternal life: If this be a necessary con∣dition for the obtaining of eternal life, surely, if eternal life be possible to be obtained, it must also be possible to perform the condition, where∣by it may be obtained; which is, to love the Lord our God with all our heart, &c. If otherwise the means be impossible, the end also must be impossible whereby that end should be obtained; & its all one to say, Thou shalt not inherit eternal life. The rule is well known; Conditio impossibilis aequipollet negativae; An impossible condition is all one with a negative. But that we may be the more excited hereunto, ye may be pleased to consider what a mans heart is car∣ried unto in this world; what objects, or what in any object, drawes his love most. For the heart, soul, and minde are so swayed and carried by love, as the body is by the weight of it. Amor meus pondus animae meae, saith S. Augustin. And as the weight of the body inclines it to the place proper and most convenient for it, so love swayes and inclines the whole man to that, which is as it were the proper place and centre wherein it rests. Now what objects most incline the love of the natural man? or what most of all does the love of the natural man incline him unto? The Philosopher long since observed that , Beauty or Comeliness most takes our fansie, and wins our heart. And the
Wiseman confirmes it, when he saith, the man loves nothing better, Eccles. 36.22. Why a man loves that which is fair and beautiful, is a blinde mans question. 2. A second object lovely, or the Formale objecti, is , to be loved. So that if one discerned love in another, toward him, he must be inclined to love him again as naturally, as the stone is swayed and moved towards the centre. Whence it is a good rule, (and would God we all observed it!) Ut ameris amabilis esto; that thou mayest be beloved, (as every one would be,) be loving, amiable, lovely, and courteous; and thou shalt win upon his love whom thou lovest. 3. A third Formale objecti, or object lovely, is , bounty, beneficence, doing good, Manifestatio dilectionis est exhibitio operis. This is loving in the deed, saith S. John. Now, Beloved, all these are eminently in God as in their root, their spring, their centre. 1. All beauty and comeliness it is in him most eminently: He is the fairest of ten thousand. The most glo∣rious Angels, who behold the face of God, they cover their own faces and their feet, as conscious of their own desormity com∣pared with Gods beauty. From his beauty, what ever is beautiful in any kinde, receives its beauty. And to love this most beautiful ob∣ject, renders him that loves it, like unto it; otherwise then it is a∣mong the creatures. For a man deformed and ill favoured, loving the most beautiful woman, is not thereby made beautiful himself, but rather he appears more deformed. But he who loves the Lord with all his heart, &c. He becomes like unto him, 1 John 3.2. Amor transform at amantem in rem amatam. Hence it is, that Moses his face shined. And they who beheld Stephen, saw his face like the face of an Angel. This comeliness the Lord imparts unto all those who behold him and love his appearance and manifestation of himself in them, Ezech. 16. We all behold as in a Glass the glory of the Lord and are transformed into the same image, &c. 2 Cor. 3.18. What they falsly said of Helena, that she was so fair, that she was worth all that ten years war undertaken for her sake, is most true of the beauty in God; its worth all our labour, all our warring, all our mortification for his sake, Romans 8.36. The second object is to be beloved; and this is eminent also in God. He prevents us with his love, 1 John 4.10. He so loved the world, &c. John 3. So, without bounds or limits, so, without example. See how he loved him, John 11. The third motive of love is , bounty and liberality: All we are, all we have, yea, all the whole Creation and every creature, is as streams from his Foun∣tain, as beams from his light, as beauty from his beauty. Should we begin to speak of his bounty and goodness and beneficence, where, and when should we make an end?
So that, if the eyes of our understanding were opened, how could we be but ravished with the love of our God? Ut se habet sim∣pliciter ad simpliciter, ita magis ad magis & maximè ad maximè; if , if he be worthy of love, who is good, as the Philosopher could say; then most amiable and lovely is he, who is the best. Amor meus pondus animae meae, My love is the weight of my soul, saith S. Augustine. Whence is it, that all and every creature inclines to the proper place: the Fowles unto the Air, the Fishes unto the Sea, the Stone to the centre? is it not that these are their rest? Tell me, who ever thou art, in what creature hast thou ever found a true, solid, and lasting rest? I believe that we have found that Nihil aequè gratum est adeptis quàm concupiscen∣tibus; there is no creature so amiable in the enjoying, as in the de∣sire of it. Let me appeal to the experience of the Amaretto, whe∣ther he soon lothe not that which he most loved. The example of Amnon, 2 Sam. 13. is of large extent, ver. 2. He was so vexed, that he fell sick for his sister Tamar, and waxed lean from day to day. When he had enjoyed her, he hated her exceedingly, so that the hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater then the love wherewith he had loved her, v. 15. O how contrary to this, is the love of our God! when his love has touched our heart with his finger, that is, with his spirit, when he drawes us with the cords of his love; when he manifests him∣self unto us. The more near we draw unto him, by so much our love more and more increaseth toward him; and in his presence is the fulness of joy, and at his right hand, pleasures for ever more, Psalm 16.11. This Commandement is said to be the first, by our Saviour, Mat. 22. and that both in regard of the Lawgiver; and in respect of man, to whom the Law is given. 1. In regard of the Lawgiver, he is the first and chief good. Since therefore love is naturally car∣ried unto goodness, and first in order of dignity unto the first and chief good, there is good reason why we should first love him; and consequently that this should be the first Commandement. Yea, first it is in order of intention, or the end which the Lawgiver aims at, and that's love, 1 Tim. 1.5. The end of the Commandement is love. For howsoever the knowledge of God must precede in order of time; because Ignoti nulla cupido, there is no desire of that which is un∣known; no, nor love, nor hope, nor fear, nor joy; no affection at all toward that, whereof there is first no knowledge; nor can we love, desire, hope in, or fear God, unless first we know him; yet this is to be understood in order of time. As for the order of intention which God aimes at, he would not, that the man should rest in a con∣templative knowledge of himself, but that he should be affected ac∣cording to his knowledge, which must cease; but love must remain, 1 Cor. 13. Charitas intrat, ubi scientia foris stat; Charity enters, when
Knowledge stands without doores. Yea, although fear go before love, Primus in orbe deos fecit timor; and that it is Prima mensura divinitatis, the first measure of the Deity, yet this is to be under∣stood in regard of the mans fallen estate. For fear of punishment had never been, unless first sin had entred into the World, as ap∣pears, Gen. 3. Yea, and initial fear makes way for love, as a ser∣viceable means for that end; which being obtained and perfected, as being principally intended, fear is cast out, as being used only as a means to obtain the end, with which it cannot consist; as Phy∣sick having brought us to an , or good habitude of body, is it self purged out: and the Needle is cut off, when it hath drawn in the threed and united the cloath. And therefore the Wiseman saith, that fear is the beginning of love, Ecclus. 25.12. 2. In regard of man, to whom this Law is given, this Comman∣dement is first; and that in respect 1. Of mans obligation to act; and 2. In respect of his principle of action. 1. Gods work of creation and preservation, whereby he prevents the man, layes the first obligation and tye upon the man, to love and to be thankful unto his God; which truth the Gentiles held in unrighteousness, Rom. 1.18.—21. 2. In regard of the principle of action, in the man. For howsoever there be diverse principles, whence the observati∣on of the Commandements, is said to proceed, as Fear, Faith, Hope, yet none of them either severally or joyntly brings forth that obedience to the Commandements which God requires, but love. For howsoever faith be the fundamental saving principle, yet that works not but by love, Gal. 5.6. Which principle we finde in the promulgation of the Law, Exod. 20.5, 6. And the same method our Lord observes in the Gospel, John 14.15. If ye love me, keep my Commandements. He saith not, if ye fear, believe, or trust in me. The Apostle gives the reason of it, 1 Tim. 1.5. the end of the Com∣mandement is charity. Now if charity be the end, that is, the perfe∣ction of the Commandement, then is it the first and chief principle, out of which obedience to the Commandements, must proceed; Sapi∣ens incipit à fine, a wise man begins from the end. Yea, till the man keep the Commandements out of this principle, he cannot be said to keep the covenant of his God; nor God to keep covenant with the man. But when the man loves his God, and, out of that love, obeyes his God, then the Lord keeps covenant with him. So Dan. 9.4. O Lord the great and dreadful God keeping the Covenant and mercy towards them that love him, and keep his Com∣mandement, &c. As this is the first Commandement, so it is also called by our Lord the great Commandement. And whereas a thing is said to be great, Quantitate molis, or, quantitate virtutis, in regard of bulk, or power and vertue, this later way, this Commandement is said to be great, or, the greatest, according to S. Hierom, by reason of the vertue,
power, and efficacy of it; and that both in respect of the subject, and of the duty it self. 1. In regard of the subject; whoever thus loves God with all his heart, his heart and minde must be enabled thereunto by the Spirit of God, 1 Tim. 1.5. It is the first fruit and strength of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. And the Lord so circumciseth his heart, that he may so love him with all his heart, and with all thy soul, and keep the Com∣mandements and live, Deut. 30.6. Zach. 11.19, 20. Rom. 6.11, 13. 2. The duty it self is most required, and best accepted by our God. For as love is in nature the first of all the affections, which like the great wheel of the Clock, turns about all the rest. For so we desire, rejoyce in, fear, hope for, grieve for, &c. some thing which we love; such is the divine love to all other graces. The Spirit of God in this great wheel actuates and moves all the other graces. Yea, and this divine love swallowes up all other inferiour affections, all other love, concupiscence, and desire. As the Serpent of Moses de∣voured all the Serpents of the Egyptian Magicians. For he who loves God with all his heart, and keeps all this Commandement, he can love nothing repugnant unto God, nothing but in order unto God; he loves himself only in order unto God, and for God. He loves his neighbour out of his love of God, even as he loves himself, that is, in order unto God. So he loves his neighbour, that he is of one heart, and one soul with his neighbour, Acts 4.32. So that his love of his neighbour, and of himself, are no way contrary to the intire love of God. Yea, howsoever many other duties are enjoyned us, beside this Commandement, yet this of all the rest is the greatest, and most excellent, 1 Cor. 12. ult. and that for two reasons. 1. Its most durable, and outlasts all the rest; and therefore its preferred before Prophesie, Tongues, Knowledge; yea, before Faith and Hope it self, 1 Cor. 13. ult. 2. The love of God is the Seisin, and the common ingredient of all the Christian mans actions; that pretious tincture that turns all, it touches, into gold, as, they say, Midas did. And what ever wants this divine tincture of holy love, tis like the Terra damnata, tis nothing worth. Hence the Apostles general advise is; Let all your things be done in charity, 1 Cor. 16.14. A rule so necessary, that the very best and greatest duties otherwise performed, whether towards God, or towards our neighbour, are of no value, in the sight of God, 1 Cor. 13. I shall adde no more motives. Let us rather come to discover our love to the Lord our God, whether we keep this Commande∣ment, or not. 1. The love of God proceeds from a pure heart, a good consci∣ence and faith unfeigned, 1 Tim. 1.5. How then canst thou love thy
God, when thou sayest, thy heart cannot be pure? And how can thy faith be unfeigned, when thou believest not, that thou art able to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart? 2. Love will suffer nothing to intervene, or separate us from the party we love, that may hinder our union. Love knits, unites, and makes one, , that which is continued, is one. Our love unto God unites us, and makes us one with him, accord∣ing to our Saviours prayer, John 17.21. and that of the Apostle, he who is joyned unto the Lord, is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. Such love of our God, will not endure any mixture of what is contrary to our God. And therefore S. Paul having exhorted to sincerity of love, which is required even in the lowest degree of it, as hath been shewen; Let love be without dissimulation, Rom. 12.9. he pre∣sently adds, Abhor that which is evil. Sincerity of love unto our God, will not endure any corrival, any thing or person, to share with our God in our love of him. How then canst thou say, thou lovest the Lord thy God with all thy heart and all thy soul, and keepest all that Commandement, when yet thou knowest, that thou lovest thy pleasures more then thou lovest thy God? when thou knowest, thou lovest the world and the things of this world? Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses! Know ye not, that the friendship of the world is the enmity of God? Jam. 4.4. So the Greek text hath it; . Who∣soever therefore will be a friend of the world, is made an enemy of God. Wouldst thou believe thy wife, should she say, she loved thee, whilest she prostitutes her self unto another man? And wilt thou pretend to be the loving Spouse of thy Maker, yet love his enemy? 3. The love of God puts us upon such works as he loves. Whence the Apostle, This, saith he, is the love of God, that we keep his Commandements. It puts us upon the love of our neighbour; Love works no evil to his neighbour, Rom. 13.10. Ad populum Phaleras—Away with all trappings and false pretences of love, without the reality of it! Good discourse and holy conference proceeding from a life wor∣thy of God, and a heart and soul which loves God, is an edge which pierceth to the assimilating of others unto it self. Such a soul edi∣fies, and conveighs grace to the hearers: For charity edifies, not knowledge, not holy talk without it. The Pharisees of old knew ve∣ry much of God and his Word, and wayes, and spake very much of God. And they of all others, most reasoned with our Lord, concerning God and his truth. But our Lord tells them, I know, that ye have not the love of God in you, John 5.42. And we may say the like of the Pharisees of our time; They are great talkers of God, and of Religion; and indeed would seem to be the onely people of God, and to know all things knowable. They are indeed
the true Amorites; great Talkers and most bitter men in their inve∣ctives against all, who are not of their opinion, (as no wise man is;) And therefore we may know, that they have not the love of God in them. They have a knowing knowledge, or such as reflects upon it self, as the Apostle saith, we know, that we all have know∣ledge. This knowledge puffs men up and makes them proud; but charity edifies, 1 Cor. 8.1.2. That knowing knowledge is the dust, the food of the Serpentine generation, according to their doom, Gen. 3.14. which the Prophet Esay 65.25. tells us, must be fulfilled in these last dayes; a food, wherewithal they so glut themselves, that there is no place left for the love of God in them. Therefore Jehu cuts off and destroyes the knowing knowledge; so the Chald. Paraphrast renders 2 Kings 9.8. Every one that pisseth against the wall, all the knowing knowledge; which excludes the love of God. For so the true Jehu,Hebr. 1. v. 12. who is , Qui est, a type of Christ, Hebr. 1.12. Thou art He; for so  Notat aliquid divinitatis, saith Galatinus; it imports somewhat of the Divinity. And there∣fore Scaliger, having reckoned up many names of God, concludes them all with Ipse, He. This spiritual Jehu destroyes all the false, the knowing disobedient knowledge, which is the true spiritual, in∣ward Antichrist, and consumes him with the spirit of his mouth, and destroyes him with the brightness of his coming, or presence, 2 Thes. 2.8.Psal. 90. v. 12. And therefore Moses the man of God prayes, Psal. 90.12. that the Lord would teach him to number his dayes, that he might bring unto him a wise heart (so the words signifie) not a wise, not a subtil, crafty head, not a strong head-piece, as they call it. Let us name some means and helps to advance this great duty. 1. The fear of God, is the beginning of his love, Ecclus. 1.14. And that fear drives out the evil. And when the love of God is brought into the soul, it makes a compleat separation from the sin. O ye that love the Lord, see that ye hate the thing that is evil, Psal. 97.10. 2. Whatsoever thou seest amiable and lovely in the creature, love it wholly for God, and in order unto God the Creator of it. How shall that be done? When thou seest ravishing Beauty in the Creature, reason thus; O how much more beautiful is my God, who created this Beauty! When thou seest great strength; think, how much more strong is He, who is, the Power! Mark 14.62. Thou lovest wealth: consider, how much better is it, to be rich towards God! Or thou art desirous of Honour: Reason thus; How much more excellent is the honour that comes of God only! Thou lo∣vest Pleasures: but think how much more satisfying and durable are the pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore! 3. Pray we unto the Lord that he will be pleased to circumcise our hearts, that we may love him with all our heart, and with all our soul, that we may live, Deut. 30.6.
For the advancement of this divine and eternal life and kingdom of God, there are who point us unto faith only. But beside it, ma∣ny other graces are necessary, 2 Pet. 1. and above all, charity. But they will say, that it is not the saving faith, which S. Peter there speaks of. I answer, It is . It is equally pretious faith with that which the Apostles themselves had. And yet, saith he, Adde in that your faith, vertue; but in that vertue, knowledge; but in that knowledge, temperance; but in that temperance,2 Pet. 1. v. 5, 6, 7. patience; but in that patience, godliness; but in that godliness, bro∣therly kindness; but in that brotherly kindness, charity or common love to God and men, 2 Pet. 1.1.—7. There is a kinde of Acidia or spi∣ritual slothfulness, which would cause us lazily to sit down in faith alone without this train of graces following it; as many do at this day; and, which is worse, dangerously misunderstand the very foundation, the true Christian faith. Which S. Peter foreseeing, adde, saith he, in your pretious faith, vertue (or prowess and cou∣rage) therein the lazy soul would rest; but, saith the Apostle, adde in that your vertue, knowledge, that is, experimental knowledge, that what we believed, through vertue & prowess, is found possi∣ble. And this is the reason of , the note of diversity repeated of∣ten, both precedent and following; all which our Translators, contrary to the express text, have rendred by the copulative, And. The Apostle goes on. For these things being and abounding, make you neither barren nor unfruitful towards the knowledge or acknowledgement () of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. And v. 10. So an entrance shall be administred unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God and the pati∣ence (or expectation) of Christ! 2 Thess. 3.5.
Thou shalt not see thy brothers Asse or his Ox fall down by the way,Deut. 22. v. 4. and hide thy self from them. Thou shalt surely help him to lift them up again.] By this translation, some elegancy of the holy tongue, is lost; and somewhat of the mystery contained in these words, obscured. The Hebrew words of the later part, are , Raising, thou shalt raise them up with him. Wherein the Hebrew elegancy imports and supposes a cooperation in the brother, or neighbour, the owner of the Asse and Ox; and the like reason there is of his Sheep, Horse, mule, or other beast. Which the Sa∣maritan version expresseth. Thou shalt not see thy brothers Asse or any other of his cattle, &c. What the Hebrew text hath, , cum illo, with him, is not neglected by the LXX, where we read, , with him; nor by the Samaritan, Syriac, or Arabic versions; nor by the Chald. Par. Vulg. Lat. the Spanish, French, nor Italian Translations. Castellio hath, Ʋnà cum eo sublevabis, thou shalt lift him or it up together with him. So the Tigurin Translation, and Piscator, Luther, and the Low Dutch which followes him. This curiosity, as some will call it, is not nodum in scirpo quaere∣re, to seek a knot in a Bulrush; to search for a fault where there is none. For to help him to lift them up, and to raise them up with him, are not the same. The later is more emphatical and full. The words thus turnd have a sense very important, whether we consider the literal or spiritual meaning of them. As for the literal sense, the words imply thus much. 1. That they, whom, our God would, that we should help, they should be helpful unto themselves. 2. What is here called thy brothers Asse, is Exod. 23.5. called the Asse of him that is hating thee, who is in actual enmity against thee. For the book of Deuteronomy is, much of it, Evangelical, and holds forth unto believers early, what is that good, accepta∣ble, and perfect will of God; which our Lord, that Prophet like to Moses, more clearly reveals; when he teacheth us to love our enemies,Mat. 5. v. 44. to bless those who are cursing us, to do good to those who are hating us, and to pray for those who are using us despight∣fully, and persecuting us, Matth. 5.44. 3. These and such like actions tend much to the melting of enmity and hatred into love and favour. For there is no greater incen∣tive unto love, then preventing love. 4. Especially if these or like actions be agitated and used fre∣quently so often as occasion calls for them. So much is implyed by the repetition of the verb, Raising thou shalt raise them up. 5. But no doubt if this we ought to do to the Ox or Asse, we ought much more to do it unto the owner himself or brother, Matth. 18.22.
But hath God care of Asses or Oxen? 1 Cor. 9.9. Or saith he it altogether for our sakes? The words no doubt have their mysti∣cal sense. The Lord Jesus Christ deals so with his brethren, (He is not ashamed to call us so, Hebr. 2.11.) He could not, he cannot see the humanity fallen to the ground, and cleaving to the earth, and minding earthly things, embracing Dunghils, Lam. 4.5. (to such the solemn Feasts are compared, Mal. 2.3. and all ceremonial services; yea, all things, if opposite unto Christ, Phil. 3.8.) He could not, he cannot hide himself from his own flesh, Esay 58.7. Hebr. 2.14. but he stoops to take and raise up the fallen man from mind∣ing earthly things, to a conversation in the heavens, Phil. 3.19, 20. Yet would he not, that the fallen man should be like the Lunt, heavie and lazy beast.Psal. 32. v. 8.9. Job 35. v. 11. & 36. v. 22. I will make thee understand (saith he) and I will teach thee in the way wherein thou shalt walk; I will give counsel with mine eye unto thee. Be not as the Horse, as the Mule without understanding, &c. For why? He teacheth us rather then the cattle of the earth. Indeed who is teaching like him? who gives man reason and understanding, which other teachers can∣not give, but suppose in those, they teach. Yea, in the fallen Ox and Asse there is a principle of life and power toward the raising of it self. And how much better prin∣ciple is there in the fallen believing man toward the raising of him∣self to a more eminent life? For otherwise all exhortations, dehor∣tations, reproofs, in a word, all Gods dealings with fallen men, would be in vain and to no purpose. Our brother would raise them with them; but they have no power in them to comply with him. Wherefore thus saith the Apostle, out of the Prophet Esay, 1.9. Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a seed,Rom. 9. v. 23. we should have been as Sodom, and should have been made like unto Gomorrha, Rom. 9.29. This divine seed lives, when all, what is temporal and earthly, is dead; and that recovers and restores all what shall live, unto life. Of which our Lord saith, Except a corn of Wheat fall into the ground, and die, it abides alone; but if it die, it brings forth much fruit. There is remaining in the grain of Wheat now dead, an active principle of life, the Balsamum naturale, the natural and radical bal∣sum, which recals and raiseth up the plant to life, and multiplyes it, John 12.24. But, that this may be done, the Lord calls upon us to plough up our fallow grounds, to mortifie our earthly members. To die daily unto sin; for that's implyed in the next words, he that loves his life, shall lose it, &c. Also, that we believe in the mighty power of God who raiseth the dead. And by this faith, we are raised unto life; as the Apostle
testifies of the Colossians,Col. 2. v. 12. wherein also ye are raised by faith in the operative power of God having raised him from the dead, Col. 2.12. How justly therefore are many of this present generation to be blamed? who being fallen into sins of intemperancy, incontinen∣cy, injustice, oppression, violence, impiety and profaneness, lie still like arrant Beasts, and continue in them; and expect a time, when they shall receive such an irresistable power of grace, as shall enforce them to arise out of the slow of their sins, unto righteousness; whether they will or not. But surely the grace of God does not work with violence; but gently and sweetly, according to the fabrick of mans heart, which God the maker of it, best knowes; and accordingly drawes men with the cords of a man, even with loving kindness, Hos. 11.4. And therefore when this grace is withstood and resisted, the Lord complains, as Matth. 23.27. O Jerusalem, how often would I, and ye would not? &c. And Acts 7. O ye stiff-necked and uncir∣cumcised of heart, ye do alwayes resist the Holy Ghost, &c. And Esay 65.2, 3. I have stretched out my hands all the day to a rebel∣lious people, &c. Ezech. 18.31. Cast away from you all your trans∣gressions, &c. Why will ye die, &c? John 5.34. These things I say unto you, that ye may be saved, &c. ye will not come unto me, that ye may have life. Esay 5.4. What could I have done more for my vineyard then I have done? These, and many like Scriptures there are, wherein the Spirit of God complains, that men resist the grace of God, & yield not obe∣dience thereunto. But we never read of any compulsion or force used to compel men to obedience. For that should be contrary to Gods cre∣ation in the framing of mans heart; so that it is not to be wrought upon otherwise then by perswasions. Contrary to the nature of obedience, which is never forced, but is purely voluntary, as appears in the example of Pauls conversion; which, if ever any should seem to be forced; yet he saith expresly, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision, Acts 26.19. Otherwise, if the grace of God should force men to break off their sin, to deny ungodliness, &c. this then would follow, and I beseech you mark it: That the grace of God should enforce men to be obedient; and then reward them for being so; which how absurd, and against Gods dealing, it would be, ye, that are wise men judge. Besides, this is contrary to the nature of a command, that it should be directed by a wise King unto his Subjects to be perfor∣med, and that upon pain of death; which yet his Subject cannot choose but he must do, being compelled by an irresistible power. What else do they affirm, who live in their sins, and say, That they wait for such grace from God, as shall make them even a∣gainst their wills, to deny their ungodliness and worldly lusts, &c.
and after this compulsion, the only wise God shall reward them with everlasting bliss and salvation. But does not the Apostle bid us to hope perfectly for the grace that shall come unto us at the reve∣lation of Jesus Christ? Tis true; but what are the words imme∣diately before? Gird up the loyns of your minde, be sober, and hope to the end, &c. 1 Pet. 1.13. But Abraham hoped against hope. Its true; he hoped against the impotency and weakness of his own flesh, in the mighty power of God, who had promised, and was able to perform, Rom. 4. But Abraham, when he thus hoped, was obedient unto God, and kept his charge, his Commandements, his Statutes, and his Lawes, Gen. 26.5. But what promise, what word of God hast thou to hope in, who livest in thy disobedience, and contrary to the Com∣mandement of God? he who hopes for the grace that shall be re∣vealed, &c. he purifies himself as God is pure, 1 John 3.3. The grace of God to the fallen man, supposeth a power in him to receive it, and so to comply with it, that he receive it not in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1. Our brother raiseth us up with us. Otherwise, should we lie still in our fall, and expect, that he should raise us up with∣out us, it would be great folly and vain presumption, and would prove us as much without understanding, as the Asse or Ox, or Horse or Mule, Psal. 32.9. Which was intended by that in the Fable, of the Carter, whose Wain was laid fast in a Bog; he cryed out, Hercules help me: But he was well answered; Fool, set thy shoul∣der to the wheel, and put on thy Horse, and then God will help thee. Wherefore brethren, if any man be prevented or surprized in a fall, or fault, ye who are spiritual and strong, restore such an one with the Spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. We are commanded to raise up our brothers beast with him; how much more our brother himself? So let us bear one anothers burdens. Let us stir up the gift of God that is in us; Let us not receive the grace of God in vain. Arise thou who art sleeping, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall enlighten thee, Ephes. 5.14.Ephes. 5. v. 14. Be∣lieve not that seducing spirit of unbelief, which would perswade us, that we have no power to arise from our fall. To this seducing spi∣rit, the wicked man gives heed, and believeth not to return out of darkness, and is waited for by the sword, Job 15.22.Job 15. v. 22. Rom. 5. v. 6. Such a spi∣rit were they acted by, who render , when we were yet without strength, Rom. 5.6. which is only, we being weak. To be without strength, is a total deprivation, and takes away all a∣bility toward the raising of our selves, when our brother would raise us with us, we helping and working together with him, though we be yet but weak. Which yet implyes some strength: As the good Samaritan found, and had compassion on the wounded man, who was not quite dead, but , half dead, Luke 10.30. That good Samaritan drawes us with the cords of a man, even with
loving kindness. Its heavie drawing at a dead weight. Let us be coming, yielding, complying, stirring up the graces of God in us, and our God will be present with us. Habenti Deum nihil desuu∣rum, si ipse non desit Deo, saith S. Cyprian, nothing shall be want∣ing to him who hath God with him, if he be not wanting unto God. For Facienti quod in se est, Deus non deest, God is not want∣ing to him, who is doing what lieth in him, who is not wanting to himself. Arise, be doing; and the Lord will be with you, 2 Cor. 13.11. Phil. 4.8, 9.
When a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to pass,Deut. 24. v. 1. that she finde no favour in his eyes, because he hath found some unclean∣ness in her, then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house: 2. And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be another mans wife. 3. And if the later husband hate her, and write her a bill of di∣vorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his house, or if the later husband die, which took her to be his wife, 4. Her former husband that sent her away, may not take her again to be his wife, after that she is defiled: For that is abomination before the Lord; and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.] The mis-translation in these words could not so well be dis∣covered, without the expression, and setting down of the whole Paragraph. Which howsoever it be broken into four verses, yet is it, in the whole, no more then one connex Axiom, or condi∣tional proposition, as will appear, if we shall first understand, that, it is not generally true, though many conceive it to be so, that our Lord, in his most divine Sermon on the Mount, intended only the confutation of the Pharisees false glosses, and mis-interpretations of Gods Law: For it is evident, that both the first and second instan∣ces, Mat. 5. v. 21.—30. are no other then the very Law of God, in the sixth and seventh Commandements. And our Lords exposi∣tions of them, have no way confuted them; but only added their inward and spiritual meanings thereunto. That, whereas the Lawes against murder and adultery, in the letter, were understood onely to restrain the outward act; our Lord shewes, that these Lawes reach even to the heart also. Wherefore it could not be his general scope: Howbeit in that Sermon, I deny not, but he meets with false glosses and mis-under∣standing of Gods Law. And such was this custome and practice of the Jewes divorcement, which we have now before us; which they grounded upon these four verses so rendred, as our Transla∣tors have turnd them. And indeed that Translation confirmes their practice. Notwithstanding, the words of Moses will hardly afford any such sense, as they gather from them, to warrant them to put away their wives. Those words ver. 1. so turnd, [Then let him write her a bill of divorcement, (or, cutting off) and send her away out of his house.] These words do not necessarily bear any such construction: yet hence they collected, that, for many causes, a man might put a∣way his wife. But if these four first verses be well lookt into, and the Law∣givers
scope considered, we shall finde, that these verses make up one intire sentence; and that the three first of those verses, are but only the Antecedent of a Connex Axiom; and the fourth verse the Consequent, and that which makes the sentence full. For whereas ver. 1. the Translators render the words Impera∣tively, by way of precept, Then let him write her a bill of divorce∣ment, , the very same words meet us again ver. 3. which yet they turn not Imperatively, as before; nor indeed are they so to be rendred; and therefore neither the former: since they are both in the very same tense; and all those three verses are but Sententia pendula, as it is called, an imperfect sentence depend∣ing upon somewhat following, and which is compleated and perfe∣cted by the fourth verse, thus. If (or, when) a man hath taken a wife and married her; and it come to pass, that she finde no favour in his eyes, because, &c. and (if) he write her a bill of divorcement, &c. and (if) she go, and be another mans: and if the later husband hate her, &c. or, if the later husband die, &c. (all which are parts of the Antece∣dent; then) her former husband, who sent her away, may not take her again to be his wife, &c. So that all the three first ver∣ses are but a condition of the Antecedent in order to the consequent; a supposition of somewhat which possibly might be; and if it so come to pass, then the consequent will take place. For Suppositio nihil ponit in esse; A supposition makes nothing to be. And thus the Greek Interpreters express the sense of these four verses. And the vulg. Latin, yea, and the Chald. Paraph. may be so understood: And so Tremellius renders the words; and so Vatablus explains them: Scripserit{que} ei libellum repudii, & dederit ei in manu ejeceritque, &c. non est hîosententia absoluta: sed debet hic versus jungi verbis sequentibus, non poterit prior, &c. And if he shall write her a bill of divorce, and give it to her in her hand, and shall cast her out, &c. This is not an absolute sentence, saith he; but this verse ought to be joyned to the words following; the for∣mer husband, &c. ver. 4. And that this is the main scope of this Law, That the former husband may not take his wife again, which hath been the wife of another man, its clear by the Prophet Jeremies reference unto this very text, Jer. 3.1. They say, (or saying) if a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another mans, shall he re∣turn unto her again? shall not the land be greatly polluted? where we read no command, that a man should put away his wife. But only that a man having put away his wife, and she become ano∣ther mans, he must not receive her again. Only from supposition, that a man having put away his wife, and given her a bill of divorce∣ment, hence they collected, that a man might put away his wife. How witty men are in misconstruing the Law of God, to make it suit with their own corrupt wills?
Our Lord discovers this fallacious collection of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matth. 5.31. It hath been said, If a man put away his wife, let him give her a bill of divorce. But by whom was it so said, or to whom? In the former instances, which our Lord gives, we have : where the word is left doubtful whether to them of old time, or, by them of old time; that is, the Antients. But that word we read not there added by our Lord. Why? This speech was not said to them, nor by them of old time. Our Lord tells us as much, Matth. 19.8. That because of the hardness of their hearts, Moses had suffered them to put awuy their wives; but, from the beginning, it was not so: Therefore he saith not, , as formerly, it was said to them of old time, or, the Antients, Thou shalt not commit adultery, &c. but it was not said to, or, by the Antients, if a man put away his wife, let him give her a bill of divorcement. That this is the true reason, why , to, or by the Ancients, is not there added by our Lord, to the matter of divorcement, will appear, beside what hath been said, if we compare herewith Jer. 3.1. which was named before. Where the Prophet speaking of the very same argument, he puts first , which our Translators turn, They say, or, in the mar∣gent, saying; whereby is implyed that this was not said from the beginning, but since the hearts of men have been hardned by unbelief and disobedience. But so far is the Lord from warranting divorce and separation of a wife from her husband, that it may well be questioned, whe∣ther divorce, in any case, be necessary, yea, or not; yea, whether a man be bound even in the case of adultery, to put away his wife. Our Lord, Matth. 5.32. rather permits divorcement, in that case, then commands it. So that 1. We do not read any Law of God enjoyning the wronged man so to do. 2. Besides, God is a witness of mutual faith plighted one to other. It is the Lords own reason, Mal. 2.14. The Lord hath been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth. She is thy companion and the wife of thy co∣venant. It is thy covenant, and the Lotd is witness to it. 3. The Lord hates putting away, Mal. 2.16. and we ought not to do the thing that he hates, Jer. 14.4. 4. Though it be true, that adultery is a capital crime, and to be punished by the Judges, Job 31.11. that is, If the business be brought before them and proved. Yet we read not, that the husband was any where bound to prosecute his wife; especially if he saw her penitent, or thought good ei∣ther to retain her; (for what knowest thou, O man, whether thou mayest gain thy wife? 1 Cor. 7.16.) or put her away, without noyse, without publick shame, more privately, by bill of divorce. We finde not, that Jacob put away his wife, or handmaid (which was a secondary wife) whom Reuben had abused. And Joseph in his ignorance, suspecting his espoused wife to have been an adulte∣ress,
being ,Matth. 1. v. 19. that is, a merciful man, he would not make her a publick example, but thought privately to put her away by bill of divorce, Matth. 1.19. Hence take an estimate, how merciful the good God is towards the fallen man. He took the Jewes, he takes us Gentiles, to be his Spouse. Thy Maker is thine husband, Esay 54.5. What Adulterers, what Adulteresses have we been, yea, yet are we! how unchaste, how unfaithful to our husband? The Lord aggravates this great sin, Ezech. 16. Jer. 3.2. Lift up thine eyes to the High-places, and see where thou hast not been lien with, &c. See Chap. 5.7. and 13.26, 27. Notwithstanding all this, mark what the Lord saith, Esay 50.1. Where is the bill of your mothers divorcement? And though a man having put away his wife, he must not receive her, yet return to me, saith the Lord, Jer. 3. How justly therefore are they to be blamed, who cause di∣vorcement and separation between man and wife? Such I mean, who make unequal mariages either between themselves, or their children, or other relations? These, while they intend to lay a lasting foundation of love, friendship and union between persons and families, even these unwittingly are the cause of greatest breach, dissention, and disagreement. What else shall we judge of those who make mariages only out of wordly respects, as wealth, honour, or high place? without any consideration of that, which ought first of all to be lookt into, the fear and love of God, and Chri∣stian education adorning it. As also that due sympathy and harmony of nature mutually inclining, disposing, and uniting the mindes and hearts, and making them in a sort, one. For where these bonds are wanting, though nothing else be wanting of wordly interest, as honour, wealth, places of dignity, and what ever else can be wished, yet contracts and unions made between some parties so unequally yoked together, ordinarily incense and kindle dissensious and differences between themselves, and all in relation unto them. The tying together of Sampsons Foxes set all on fire. This must needs be the very worst divorcement of all other, when their mindes and hearts are opposite and contrary one to other, yet, by bonds of matrimony, they are obliged and bound to maintain a bodily presence one with other. Let covetous, proud, and ambitious parents think seriously of this, who ingage their children in perpetual bonds of unequal maria∣ges, to begin a kinde of hell upon earth; which, without Gods great mercy, will never have an end. Surely such mariages were never made in heaven. They say, that mariage is a civil ordinance; and therefore the power of contracting it, hath been devolved from the minister to the civil Magistrate; though S. Paul calls it , a
great mystery, Ephes. 5..32. But such mariages as these are, can scarce be termed civil; and therefore indeed they are more fit to be published among the rable in the market-place, then among the Saints in that which (according to the new reformation of words) is called the meeting place. Mystice. There is a lawful and necessary divorcement to be made between us and our sinful thoughts; which spiritually are signified by a wife. Thus Eve and the Thoughts are compared, 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. These are the femal part of the man, as the life is the male. And these are adjoyned to the male, even to the life, as a meet help unto it. Howbeit, if she prove unquiet, if she be a Skold, (such are the false-accusing thoughts;) if she be vain and idle, of such the Apo∣stle speaks, 1 Tim. 5.13. , not only idle, but tatlers also and busiebodies; if she be a Slut, (unclean thoughts,) its the Wisemans advise, Cut her off from thy flesh, and let her go, Ecclus. 25.26. The Lord, though he hate put∣ting away, Malac. 2.16. yet he reproves us, that we admit such idle Huzzies into our bosoms;Jer. 4. v. 14. How long  wilt thou cause thy vain thoughts to lodge in thee? Jer. 4.14. Of this Moses may be under∣stood in the place before us, Deut. 24.1. If the husband finde , Nuditatem verbi, the nakedness or uncleanness of the word. What is the uncleanness of the word? There is a pure and holy word; The Commandement of the Lord is pure, Psalm 19.8. There is a word also of Belial, saith the Wiseman, even the word of Antichrist, which opposeth and exalts it self against God and whatsoever is of God and Christ in us; A word clothed about with death; God grant it be not found in the heritage of Jacob! Ecclus. 23.12. Our Lord speaks of , a word of fornicati∣on, Matth. 5.32. which is in and comes out of the heart, Mat. 15.19. This is the Harlot which is to be divorced: O let it not be found lodging in us. Let us be chaste and faithful to our God, O Israel! We are his Spouse, Hos. 2. He is our husband, Esay 54. Such there∣fore we ought to be unto him, as becomes such a Consort, holy and without blame before him in love, Ephes. 1.4. Let there be no word of fornication, no uncleanness in us; So will he own us for his Spouse and say, Thou art my people; and we shall say, Thou art my God, Hos. 2.23.
Then shall his brothers wife come unto him in the presence of the El∣ders, and loose his shooe from off his foot,Deut. 25. v. 9. and spit in his face; and shall answer and say, So it shall be done unto that man that will not build up his brothers house. And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him that hath his shooe loosed.] From verse 5. to the tenth inclusively, is contained the Law concerning a Widow whose husband died without issue male. In which Paragraph we have the Law and the sanction of it. 1. The Law is, that, in that case, the deceased husbands brother (or next kinsman) shall raise up seed unto his brother; and the reason of that Law, from the end of it. 2. The sanction and ratifying of that Law by pu∣nishment of him who should refuse to raise up seed unto his brother; Disgrace, 1. To his person; 2. To his family. The disgrace to his person, 1. Loosing his shooe from off his foot; 2. Spitting, whe∣ther in his face, as our Translators render it, or otherwhere, it may well be questioned. For there is not, nor hath been any nation under Heaven, so prevented and informed with precepts of civil conversation and good manners, nor more abounding with examples of well nurtured and behaved persons of both Sexes, then Gods Israel, whether his anti∣ent people so called, or his surrogate and substituted Israel, his Christi∣an people, Gal. 6.16. And therefore it may be much doubted, whether such a behaviour were not unseemly and unbecoming this Israelitish woman; and unsuitable to other holy Lawes; and un∣worthy of the God of Israel, the Author and giver of those Lawes, and the God of that people. Beside, whereas Spittle is an excrement of the first concoction, to be bespattered with it, its a great disparagement and indignity to the man, as Esay 50.6. our Lord saith, I hid not my face from shame and spitting. And in the woman, an argument of extream vilifying and contempt. Both which are contrary to that due esteem where∣in we ought to have one another. Its prescribed in the same Chapter, Deut. 25.3. that stripes, although well deserved, yet should not exceed a certain number; and the reason is given, lest thy brother should seem vile unto thee, or  should be vile in thine eyes. Wherefore it seems not probable, that the most holy God would prescribe such an act, as whereby the man should be vile in the womans eyes. Yea, this disgrace and despight is so much the greater, in that it should proceed from the Woman, and from her who desired to be the consort unto this man; and to submit her self unto him as her Lord, as Sarah called Abraham, 1 Pet. 3.6. Besides, as in salutation with an holy kiss, as of old, Rom. 16.16. a signe of love and reverence is expressed, when the breath, soul, and spirit seems to be communicated; so on the contraty, by such
rude and unseemly greeting, as spitting in the face, the excrementi∣tious filth is cast out as a signe of greatest scorn, hatred, loathing, and contempt. All which being laid together, we may adde hereunto this con∣sideration; that since a disgrace was intended unto the person of him who refused to perform this office of love unto his deceased brother or kinsman, the dishonour should not seem to be placed, so much in loosing of his shooe from off his foot, as spitting in his face: since the face and head are the most honourable parts of the body; and the foot the most dishonourable, as the Apostle opposeth them, 1 Cor. 12.21. So that the brand of infamy on him and his family, should then seem to be this or the like; The house of him, whose face was spit on. The result of these reasons, may be a strong inference and per∣swasion, that these words , though in rigore sermonis, they may signifie, She shall spit in his face; and so the same phrase is rendred, Numb. 12.14. Yet, because  may as well be turn'd before him, in his sight, or, in his presence, as our Translators also turn it, Deut. 4.37. He brought thee  in his sight, with his mighty power, out of Egypt: and Chap. 11.25.Deut. 11. v. 25. There shall no man stand  before you. The same phrase may, and for the avoiding of so great inconveniencies, ought to be so turn'd; She shall spit before him, or, in his sight or presence. I confess, the , the indecorum, uncomeliness and ugli∣ness of the fact, caused me to suspect, that all was not right; though herein the Translators follow all the old English that I have seen, their predecessors and precedents. Howbeit I finde some other learned men to have been of an other judgement; as Tremellius, who renders the words, Spuet ante faciem ejus, she shall spit before his face. And the Tigurin Bible, hath, Spuat coram eo, let her spit before him. And the learned Jewes so understood the phrase; as Rabbi Salomon, she shall spit before him on the ground, and set a brand of infamy upon him and his whole family. Now howsoever the superiour, as a father might by way of just reprehension, so deal with his disobedient childe; as our hea∣venly father gives instance, Numb. 12.14. If her father had spit in her face, that is, as the Chald. Par. there hath it, had sharply rebuked her; yet there is not the like reason of the inferiour; nor is it likely, that the Lord would allow the woman so unde∣cently, so contrary to her due modesty, so unbecoming her sex, to exercise authority over the man. Meantime we cannot but hence take notice, how basely the wisdom, righteousness, and holiness, the Son, the Christ of God, hath bin reputed and dealt withal in the ungodly world; as he speaks concerning himself in the time past, Esay 50.6.Esay 50. v. 6. I have not hid my face,  ab ignominiis, from shames and spitting; which
was accomplished in his , fore-sufferings; as the E∣vangelist records it, Matth. 26.67. and 27.30. Men look for some nasty hole, some sluttish corner or other, to spit in; whence an unmannerly fellow spit in a Philosophers face; & excused it, saying, it was the foulest place about the house. Yet our Lord the very wisdom and righteousness of God it self hath been ac∣counted by the evil world , from , that is, , Conspuendus, one worthy to be spit upon; as Job typically represented him, where he saith of his enemies, they abhor me, they spare not to spit in my face, Job 30.10. Have many even of those who profess the Christian religion, a more honourable esteem of the true Christ of God? when they oppose the truth of God, and deny it in their sinful lives, do they not spit in the face of Christ? He is the Truth, John 14.6. This Law, as all agree, was ceremonial; and therefore as to the  & the letter of it, it was to cease, when the seed was rai∣sed up, to whom the promises were made. Howbeit out of the letter we may. Note here the kindness and love of God unto men, how gratiously he condescends to comply with man in his natural affections. Men naturally love their children; the continuance of their names among men; the propagation of their family, &c. And the Philosopher could say, if the separated soules take care for any thing, it is for the good and welfare of their posterity. Thus 2 Sam. 7.11, 12, 16. see how kindly David accepted this at the Lords hand, v. 18.19. which care for posterity, children, house, and name, David calls  the law of Adam; that which is implanted in man, to love, and take care of his children, his name, and his posterity. And with this love, the Lord himself vouchsafes gratiously to com∣ply in this Law. Mysticè. As for the mystical understanding of this Law; we finde an  and graphical exemplification of it, in the history of Ruth, Chap. 1.5. where Mahlon the husband of Ruth is said to be dead in Moab. Who is this brother that is dead? who else but Christ, who is not ashamed to call us brethren, Hebr. 2.11. He is dead; Mahlon died in Moab, Moab is a patre Diabolo, as the Antients give the ety∣mon. Sinful men are of their father the Devil, John 8. And while we are sinners, Christ dies, Rom. 5.8. For he is wounded of our transgressions,Efay 53. v. 5. and bruised of our iniquities, Esay 53.5. And there∣fore he is said to be crucified in Sodom and Egypt, Rev. 11.8. while we are weak, and cannot withstand the temptations unto sin, and while Christ is weak in us, he is crucified in weakness, 2 Cor. 13.4. that's Mahlon, which signifies infirmity and weakness. Thus the ho∣ly seed is sowen in weakness, 1 Cor. 15.43. The Lord hath his inheritance given him by his Father, Psa. 2.8.
A large one; nay yet a larger, Hebr. 1.2. The Father hath ap∣pointed him heir of all things. The Lords Name is to be be raised up, upon his inheritance: His people are to be called after his Name; they are his inheritance. They are his Spouse. But she is barren, and brings him no children in the dayes of his flesh. But his Apostles (whom he calls his brethren, John 20.17.) these raise up seed unto their brother by the uncorrup∣tible seed the Word of God, 1 Cor. 4.15. Gal. 1.19. And these raise up their brothers name upon his inheritance, his Church which is called, not after their names, but after the name of their brother, Acts 11.26. they are called Christians, Psal. 72.17. His Name shall be con∣tinued. The Hebrew word is . His Name, Filiabitur, if we might so speak, according to the Hebrew, which is of  a son; as the margent expresses it well; His name shalbe as a son to continue his fathers name for ever. Thus no doubt the Ministers of the Word ought to raise up the name of Christ upon his inheritance, his Church. They ought not to raise up their own names. Whence I cannot see how that practice can be justified out of the Word of God, that Christians should call themselves after the names of men, and say, they are of such or such a ones Church. I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, 1 Cor. 1.12. But the Apostle interprets this the peoples weakness, Chap. 3.3, 4. Are ye not carnal, and walk ,1 Cor. 3. v. 3. according to man, the earthly, the carnal man? But if any of their Leaders gather Disciples to themselves to raise up their own names upon the Lords inheritance, its unjustifiable and abominable, and unwarrantable out of the Word of God. What saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5. was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized into the name of Paul? &c. No, no: Paul and Barnabas gathered not Churches to themselves, but themselves were ga∣thered to the Church, Acts 11.26. they assembled themselves with the Church. They made no Proselytes to themselves. Be we all exhorted to raise up seed unto our brother, to endea∣vour every one of us to gather our selves and others unto him; unto him all the people must be gathered, Gen. 49.10. And the Church must be called after his name, as the wife by the name of her husband, Esay 4.1. His name shall endure for ever: his name Filiabitur,Psal. 72. v. 17. shall be continued by succession of many sons, (the children which God hath given him, Hebr. 2.3.) before the Sun. And men  shall bless themselves in him; and all Nations shall call him Blessed. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel doing wondrous things alone! And blessed be the Name of his glory for ever. And the whole Earth shall be filled with his glory. Amen! and Amen! Psal 72.17, 18, 19.
A Syrian ready to perish was my father,Deut. 26. v. 1. and he went down into Egypt, &c.] This the Israelite, who brought his Basket of first-fruits, must say before the Lord. But must he say that before the Lord which is untrue? And does Moses teach him to say that which is untrue, before the Lord? Surely Jacob, who is here meant, was not a Syrian, but born in the holy land, Gen. 25.11.24, &c. Un∣less a man should be that countryman whither he came as a stranger, as Jacob did to Laban, Gen. 29. The Syrian therefore here meant is Laban. And he really did persecute Jacob, Gen. 3.1. whom the Israelite here calls his father. Thus the Vulg. Latin Syrus persequebatur patrem meum, A Syrian persecuted my Father. And so Castellio, and Martin Luther turns the words: and the like we finde in the Low Dutch Bibles. And although the French hath the same with our last English Translation, yet, they have the other Translation in the margent. Coverdale, and all the old English that I have seen, render the words thus; A Syrian perse∣cuted my father. And the Hebrew text will bear this Translation . For Hierom no doubt read  in Piel, wch signi∣fies to persecute, destroy, kill, &c. The Chald. Paraphrast is most express and full, and comes home to our purpose. , Laban the Syrian sought to destroy my father, &c. From this Lesson which the Lawgiver taught the people, we may learn some profitable instruction for our selves. Moses here prescribing to the people, a form of acknowledge∣ment and thankfulness, in offering their first-fruits unto God, when they had entred into the Holy Land, and had taken possession of it, he teaches them to lay their Foundation low in the depth of Humility, confessing not only their own, but their fathers abase∣ment and misery, as their fore-fathers had done, from whence God had raised them. Abraham was a leading example of this kinde; whom God Himself styles The Father of many Nations, Gen. 12.15.17, 18, 22. Ecclus. 44.19. So great a father, that the Jews took it in disdeign, that our Lord should intimate, he was greater then Abraham, John 8.53. Yet if we hear Abrahams own acknowledgement, I am, saith he, but dust and ashes, Gen. 18.27. so low he layes his founda∣tion. And Jacob, however by the Lord surnamed Israel, and great in the estimation of others, Joh. 4.12. yet he acknowledgeth himself small,Gen. 32. v. 10. Gen. 32.10. I am little in regard of all thy mercies, and all that truth, which thou hast performed unto thy servant. How great was David in Gods account? yet in his own, he scarce knew himself, he was so little: and therefore he asks God, Who am I, O Lord, and what is mine house, that thou hast brought me hitherto? And he acknowledgeth, from what obscure imployment, he had his
rise, unto the Kingdom, even from keeping Sheep; which yet was a kinde of introduction unto a like Shepherdie, that he might be the more expert , a Shepherd of the peoples. He chose David his servant, and took him from the sheepfolds,Psal. 78. v. 30. from after the Ewes great with yong. He brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance, Psalm 78.70, 71. And thus must the Israelite say, in his plenty and abundance; A Syrian was persecuting my father. He was in the eyes of Laban, and in his own eyes a lost man; lost in Syria, oppressed by Laban; lost in his return homeward; persecuted by Laban and his brethren; lost in Egypt under the tyranny of Pharaoh; lost, in his own appre∣hensions, in his passage out of Egypt. But when we cryed unto the Lord, he had compassion on us, and brought us out of Egypt, with a mighty hand, & outstretched arm; and he hath brought us into this place, and hath given us this land that floweth with Milk and Ho∣ney. And now behold, I have brought the first-fruits of the land, which thou, O Lord, hast given me. Such first-fruits arising and growing from that deep root of humility, are most acceptable unto our God. For hereby men are made and kept lowly, even in the height whether of temporal, or spiritual estate, when they can say, with him, , from how lit∣tle, to how great! This consideration made and kept the great Apo∣stle humble, so that he could say, , I am the least of the Apostles, and not worthy to be called an Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.9. Yea, if the glorious company of the Apostles were too great and glorious for him to be accounted though but the least of them, he shrowds himself among the Saints. And lest peradventure the very least of the Saints should be too great for him to be compared withal, he makes a word of his own (for I read it no where else, nor is it, I believe, elsewhere to be found) to signifie his least littleness; To me, saith he,  less then the least of all Saints, this grace was given, &c. Ephes. 3.8. And if thus he seem not little enough, he calls himself just nothing, 2 Cor. 12.11. He well remembred, that he was, not persecuted, but which was infinitely worse, that he persecuted the Church of God, 1 Cor. 15.9. that he was a blasphemer and a persecutor, and injurious, 1 Tim. 1.13. A second Lesson we may learn from hence; that the Israelite must say, A Syrian persecuted my father. He must not say, that his father persecuted the Syrian. O no: One Dog, or one Wolf may per∣secute a thousand Sheep; but ten thousand sheep will not persecute one Wolf, or one Dog. O that the hungry Dogs, and ravening Wolves of these dayes, who go in Sheeps clothing, would consider, whom, and what manner of persons the Apostle calls grievous Wolves, Acts 20.29. and what
manner of men they are, whom he means, when he warns the Philippians to beware of Dogs, Phil. 3.2. Mystice. But this persecution may be neerer haply then we are aware of. Surely as any man becomes more like unto Jacob (who was  a perfect man,Gen. 25. v. 27. Luke 16. v. 15. Gen. 25.27.) he shall have experience of Syrians or Aramites pursuing and persecuting him. For what is  but sublimity, or height of pride? somewhat that is , high in men? Pride is a Worm that often breeds even in the trees of Righteousness. And by how much it is the more inward, its the more dangerous persecutor. Pride is deceitful, Obad. v. 3. And therefore Aram also signifies deceit; and deceit is accompanied with cursing, Ps. 10.7. and Aram signifies also cursing. And all these are covered with a Mantle of Hypocrisie, a white vail of pretended piety. Laban (the Syrian) signifies White. A form of godliness covers all ungodliness, 2 Tim. 3.5. That White Devil hides the Black one. Laban was either a White Devil, or the Devils familiar friend; a great Cacomagus, a notorious Sorcerer, and the most famous of all the East.Esay 41. v. 14. But fear not thou Worm Jacob, ye mortal men of Israel; I will help thee, saith the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. Go on in thine humility, and thy simplicity, O thou Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile, John 1. The Lord hath not beheld iniquity in (such a) Jacob; neither hath he seen perverseness in (such an) Israel. He can rebuke and re∣strain the persecuter, as he checkt and restrained Laban the Syrian persecuting Jacob thy father, Gen. 31.29. What though Laban be a Wizard? it was confessed by Balaam, Labans countreyman the Syri∣an, That there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel, Numb. 23.23. Remember what Balak King of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the son of Beeor answe∣red him, Mich. 6.5. (Balak is the destroyer, and Balaam the false Pro∣phet which devours the people,Mic. 6. v. 5. as the false Prophets do, 2 Cor. 11.20. the son of Beor the Beast,) Remember how the Lord thy God turn'd the Curse to a Blessing, Deut. 23.5. that ye may know  Justitias, the righteousnesses or mercies of the Lord. What though the Aramites, the Syrians curse, yet bless thou, Psal. 109.28. and thou shalt obtain a blessing:Psal. 21. v. 6. yea, a double bles∣sing. For there is a double blessing pronounced by the Lord Jesus, (who is , Blessings, Psal. 21.6.) upon his persecuted ones, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. For as we are called unto suffering, so likewise are we called unto a blessing, to a double blessing for our sufferings, 1 Pet. 2.20, 21. that we render not evil for evil, or rayling for rayling, but contrariwise blessing, knowing that we are hereunto called that we should inherit a blessing, 1 Pet. 3.9. which the Lord vouchsafe to all his persecuted ones, through him who is the Blessings, and Son of the Blessed, Jesus Christ our Lord!
But if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear,Deut. 30. v. 17. but shalt be drawen away, and worship other gods and serve them; I denounce unto you this day that ye shall surely perish.] Ver. 15. Moses sets life and good, and death and evil before us. 1. Life and good; if we love the Lord our God to walk in his wayes, and keep his Commandements, and his Statutes, and his Judgements, &c. 2. Death and evil, if our heart turn away and we shall be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve them, &c. I read the words, according to the Hebrew text, thus. If thine heart turn itself away, and thou wilt not obey, and thou be driven away, and worship other gods and serve them, I denounce unto you this day, that perishing ye shall perish, that is, by little and little, or by degrees ye shall perish. This text may be considered in it self absolutely, or with refe∣rence to the words before injoyning the love of God and walk∣ing in his wayes: But if, &c. The words are a serious commination, denuntiation, or threat∣ning of judgement upon condition and supposition of sin. 1. In aversione, turning away, not hearing, not obeying. 2. In conversione, turning-to, being driven away to worship other gods, and serve them. Now because in every serious conditional threatning, a possibility of offending is supposed, the Antecedent of this con∣nex or conditional Axiom, will afford us these divine Truths. 1. That its possible, the heart may turn it self away from God. 2. That the people of God may not hear or obey God. 3. That they may be driven away from the true God. 4. That they may worship and serve other gods. 5. That they may be so driven from the true God, that they may worship other gods and serve them. 6. If the heart turn it self away, if the people of God obey him not, if they be driven away, and worship other gods and serve them, the Lord denounceth unto them, that perishing they shall perish. 1. The heart may turn it self away from God. So, or to the same effect, all Translations that I have seen, render the word . The heart is sometime taken more specially for the affective part of the soul; and so it is distinguished from the minde and from the will, Matth. 22.37. Sometime its taken more generally for all the parts of the soul, and the whole inward man, all that is within us, Mark 7.21, 22. compar'd with Matth. 15.19, 20. We may understand the heart here largely, as the affective part following the dictate and determination of the understanding. The reason of this is evident, 1. From the precedent words, where life, and good, and death, and evil are set before us, where∣unto the heart may indifferently turn it self. And 2. the Lord
having made man after his own image,Ecclus. 15.17. left him in the hand of his own counsel. Ecclus. 15.14.—17. Before men () is life and death and whether him liketh shall be given unto him. 1. Hence it appears, that the heart is Vertibile principium, a mutable, a changeable principle. 2. The heart may decline, may turn it self away even from the Summum Bonum, even the chief good, while it is Non clarè cognitum, not yet clearly understood. Hence we may note a decision and determination of that great question controverted by Philosophers and Divines, concerning the , the Principale; or, as Tully calls it, Principalus, that supream and principal part of the soul. I shall not name the manifold opinions of the Antients. Many with Plato have thought it to be in the Head, which therefore is called Arx totius corporis, regia & capitolium. Others, with the Stoicks, rather place it in the heart: and therefore . So Laertius. Which Plutarch renders and ex∣plains thus: The Stoicks say, That the , or principal part of the soul, is that which makes the imaginations, assents, sen∣ses, and appetites; whence proceeds and ascends the rational; which, saith he, is in the Heart. 2. Tis possible, the people of God may not hear or obey. The word here used signifies both; but being applyed to the heart, the hearing of that is obeying; as it should here have been ren∣dred, and elsewhere, though our Translators turn it to hear; as Eccles. 5.1.Eccles. 5. v. 1. Be more ready to hear, that is, to obey, then to give the sacrifice of Fools; which is parallel to 1 Sam, 15.22. To obey is better then sacrifice, Hos. 6.6. and in many other Scriptures. That this is possible, its evident by the complaints of all the Prophets; and needs no proof. Come we rather to the next Ax∣iom, which hath somewhat more difficulty. 3. The people of God may be driven away from him. So  signifies, not to be drawn away, as it is here turn'd, but to be driven away.Deut. 22. v. 1. And so our Translators themselves turn the word, Deut. 4.19. and 22.1. Thou shalt not see thy brothers Ox or his Sheep go astray; the word is the same we have in question, , Impul∣sos, so Arias Montanus, driven away. So Vatablus turns the word here, Impulsus, driven: so Tremellius; so Pagnin. Munster hath, Expelleris, if thou be driven away. How comes this to pass? Doubtless by misapprehensions of God, whence men conceive false and erroneous opinions of him; So the Disciples were affraid when they saw Jesus walking on the Sea, and said, He was a Spirit; or rather indeed a fansie, ,Mat. 14. v. 26. Matth. 14.26. Thus the Devil deceived and drove a∣way our first parents from their God when he perswaded them
that he envied them their happiness. But more of this anon. 4. Its possible that the people of God may worship and serve other gods. Wherein let us inquire, 1. What these other gods are; and what it is to worship and serve these other gods. The other gods are . The word  signifies other, and also after; implying, that the other god is after Him who is  the one and only true God. So that the other gods are whatso∣ever the heart of man turns unto, obeyes, and is driven unto, when it turns from and obeyes not, but is driven from the only true God. 2. The word, To worship, hath diverse words answering to it in the Hebrew; as 1.  To bow down the head especially, with some other part of the body. 2. , To bow the knee. 3. , To prostrate and cast down the whole body; which comprehends the other two; and this last is here used. The Scripture is full of the expressions of honour and reverence, which of old were, and yet are usual in the East parts of the World. But as there are other inward Idols and false gods, whereof the outward were types and figures: So are there also inward and spi∣ritual false worships of these inward false deities represented by those outward. The Lord our God will be known, trusted, remembred, loved, feared, obeyed, and honoured alone. The Lord being now about to send his people to Chaldea, whi∣ther he had already sent some of them, furnishes them with an answer to those who should tempt them to worship other gods, Jer. 10.11. The gods who have not made the Heavens and the Earth, they shall perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens. This is written in the Chaldee, and this only, of all the Prophesie of Jeremiah: Which therefore the Chald. Paraph. saith, was a Copy of the Epistle which Jeremiah wrote into Baby∣lon, that the Jews if tempted to worship their gods, might speak to them in their own language: The gods that neither can give rain from Heaven, nor cause the fruit to grow out of the Earth, they and their worshippers shall perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens. Note hence the vast dominion & sole soveraignty of the true God. He is Lord Paramount; he loveth not; he will not have any Cor∣rival. Faith, & Fear, & Love, & Honour, & Hope, these things are the inward worship of God, and are to be given unto him. What is the true separation which the Lord our God requires of us, 2 Cor. 6. What else but the cleansing our selves and putting away all our strange gods? Gen. 39. 2 Cor. 6. See a vast difference between the worshippers of the one and only God, and the servants of other gods. The Rich mans Wealth, his Mammon, is taken away, &c.
he despairs and dies; as Aristotle saith, Despair is the cause of , self-murder, and worldly sorrow causeth death. The Honourable man hath lost his Honour: God staines the pride of all glory, and brings into contempt all the honoura∣ble of the Earth, Esay 23.9. The dishonoured man sinks in despa∣ration, and is lost. The fulness of bread is taken from the Glutton; and his god and he are both lost. The Wine is taken from the Drunkard, Joel 1.5. Awake ye Drunkards and weep and houl all ye drinkers of wine; because of the Wine: for it is cut off from your mouth. The Amaretto, the lascivious Letcher; the poor forsaken Whore she mourns and weeps. Alas, there's no more hire. So ye finde the women, Ezech. 8.14. There sate at the North-gate Women weeping for Tammuz, that is, for Adonis, as the Latin Fathers commonly understand it; or, as others, Osiris; for their , their pleasure and voluptuousness, their belly which is their god, they have not, wherewith to worship it. And there is great reason for it. That which all these had for their god, is now taken away. The heart cannot be removed from what it extreamly loved, without grief, yea, great grief. Ye have taken away my gods; and what have I more? Judges 18.24. Micha had a house of gods, which the Tribe of Dan took away. When the judgements of the jea∣lous God are in the land, and upon all our gods, (as he executed judgement upon the gods of the land of Egypt;) when the Danites (the judgements of God) plunder us of all our gods, is it not time, high time to have a God, that cannot be taken away from us? Such an only God have the true worshippers, Esay 5.13.17. When the false gods, and their worshippers are removed, then shall the Lambs, the innocent, blameless ones, feed  according to the Word. Nebuzaradan left of the poor of the land to be Vine-dressers and Husbandmen, 2 Kings 25.12. Zeph. 3.11. Mal. 3.18. with 4.1, 2. Those who have more gods then the one and only God, are hence justly reproved of this great sin, whereof were and are guilty both Romani and Romanenses the older and later Rome. 1. This lost the old Romans the knowledge and faith of Jesus Christ the true God: They would have acknowledged him such; but they understood, he would be worshipped alone: and they were loth to part with all their false gods for one; and so they lost him. Their case was much to be lamented; but is not thine the same? Alas! (beloved!) this is Malum epidemicum.  is a common evil to the Gentiles, to the Papists, to the Prote∣stants, any thoughts, wills, affections, actions, works, due to God, and aliened from God unto the Creature, makes a man a wor∣shipper of another God. Give me children, or else I die, saith Rachel to Jacob; where∣upon Jacobs anger was kindled. Am I, saith he, in Gods stead, who
who hath withheld from thee the fruit of thy womb? Gen. 30.12. Am I a God to kill and make alive, that I should cure Naaman of his leprosie? so Joram said, having rent his clothes, 2 Kings 5.7. So Paul and Barnabas rent their clothes when the Lystrians would have done sacrifice unto them, Acts 14.14. The Apostle tells us, that all things befell the antient people, in types and figures, and were written for our example. And therefore it is more then probable, that we may finde the same false gods among us. We condemn Salomon for worshipping Ashteroth and Baalim. Even to this day we worship Ashteroth the goddess of the Zidonians, 1 Kings 11. and that with as much solemnity as ever, that is, wealth and riches, we worship Mammon: And though our Lord hath told us, that we cannot, yet we will serve God and Mammon together. We worship many Baalims, that is, Lordliness and Domineering, , we will be many Masters. This was the pride of the Clergie heretofore. Truly pride or any other sin, in the Minister, is most abominable. They had many Titles of Honour; but we Clergie and Lay, Priests and People can be as proud as they, without any titles of honour, and like the Cynik, tread down Plato's pride, with greater pride of our own. We have our Baal Perazim, the god of Divisions; and therefore the Lord threatens to deal with us, in this time of the overflowing scourge, as he dealt in Mount Perazim, Esay 28. We have our Baal Berith, Judges 9.4. the god of the Covenant; making indeed a god of some part of it, and neglecting that principal part of it, That God should be one, and his Name one, Zach. 14. We have our Belial, that is disobedience , Abs{que} jugo, without yoke: and though the Apostle tells us, there is no agreement between Christ and Belial; yet we are re∣solved to make them agree, 2 Cor. 6.15. We worship Chemosh the god of the Moabites, and serve him together with the true and on∣ly God: Chemosh is Quasi palpans, Flattery; which is judged to be the same with , Rom. 13.13. which the Scholiast on Aristo∣phanes tells us was a Tavern-deity, and wont to be worshipped with drinking after Supper; Night-meetings; I may call them the Clubbing; when men supple one another with Wine, & flatter one another into good bargains. This is a compendious way of worship∣ping Mammon, Ashteroth, Bacchus, and Chemosh all at once. We wor∣ship Dagon, the god of Gluttony, and fulness of bread and abundance of idleness, the Philistines god, Potu cadentes, tipling till they reel, as S. Hierom interprets the Philistins. For Bacchus and Ceres will be worshipped together; Whose god is their belly, Phil. 3. we will have the Ark of the only God and Dagon stand together. We worship Mauzzim, which we render the god of the Forces, Dan. 11.38. And least any order of men should be exempt from this , we worship Mercury, and have gotten many Mercuries; gods of words, 1 Cor. 2.4. We have Nebo, when the Prophets
set themselves up for gods, , the Poet calls it. I say nothing to those ugly deities, Baal-Phegor, Beelzebul, Priapus, which yet are worshipped among us. These are not conjectures and allusions but reality and truth. For do we think, our God is more offended with the title of those false gods, or the worship of them in spirit and truth? with the names, or the things themselves? He himself suffers the names of these and many more false gods in holy Scripture, but he abhors & abominates the service of them, the having of those other gods. We have them for our gods and Corrivals with the only true God; and yet think our selves guilt∣less, because we abhor the names only. While we fall short of the end of our creation, the glory of God, it is by reason of some false god or other whom we have in our heart; so much the Apostle implyes, Rom. 3.23. All have sin∣ned, , (the word answers to ) they come short or after the glory of God. So that there is, beside that gross outward idolatry, one more subtil, spiritual, and inward. Such are those Idols or Images ima∣gined and conceived in opinion; such as the Leaders and Image-makers of every several Sect, have graven, set up, and chosen to hold, and propound to their followers to be worshipped. There are many of this kinde. They have found out many inventions, Eccles. 7. ult. For whereas the outward idolatry seemed to be too gross and palpable to deceive the world any longer, Satan obtru∣ded upon men an inward kinde of idolatry more subtil and refi∣ned. For after the Synagoga magna had quite discountenanced out∣ward Idols, calling Baal Bosheth, Bethel Bethaven, Beelzebub Beel∣zebul, &c. Instead of these, the Elders of the Jews chose other Images, Mark 7.1.—7. And such as these are many Idols of later time; which men of several opinions, imagine and engrave, and set up above all the rest to be adored. As among the Philoso∣phers, Aliquid magni est in unaquaque Secta, saith Mirandula, some great thing there is in every Sect; so among Christians; to sin∣gle out some tenent or other and cry up that; and if that can but be in credit, it matters not what becomes of all the rest. And so zealous men are for the worship, every man of his own Idol, that every one drawes another to the worship of it; and if that cannot be obtained, then the bond of charity must be broken. Yea, if such Idol-makers get power into their hands, they force others to the worship of their Idols, even with fear of death; like Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.6. Whoso falls not down and worships, shall be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. Of this the Prophet, Esay 66.5. Your brethren that hate you, that cast you out, for my names sake, say, Let the Lord be glorified, and think in so doing, they do God good service, Ier. 50.7. We offend not, because they have sinned against the Lord. Our Lord forewarns his Disciples
of this, and many of them have experienced the truth of it, John 16.2. The time cometh, that whosoever killeth you, he shall think, that he offereth a gift unto God. The Syriac Interpreter hath , a gift, instead of , divine service. But proceed we to the following Axiom. 5. It is possible, that Gods people may be so driven away, that they may worship and serve other gods. The truth of this appears in the words before us; as also Deut. 4.19. lest thou lift up thine eyes to the heavens, and, when thou seest the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, the whole host of the hea∣vens,Deut. 4. v. 19. and thou be driven (so our Translators turn the word there) to worship them and serve them, &c. The reason why tis possible, that the people of God, may be driven to worship and serve other gods, may appear from the danger of the other gods; To have them, endangers the worship of them. So the Lord having prohibited other gods, Exod. 20.3. and making Idols, adds, thou shalt not bow down thy self to them nor serve them. Ducit enim & affectu quodam infirmo rapit infirma corda mortalium formae similitudo, &c. For the likeness of form wins upon the affe∣ctions, and takes the weak hearts of men. 2. Beside, there is a proneness, by corrupt nature to Idolatry and Superstition; as appears by the frequent prohibitions of it, and by that care and providence of God towards man, in that he hath revealed no bodily image of himself, Deut. 4. But how can it be true, that the people of God should be dri∣ven away from him, and so worship other gods? 1. God will not. 2. The Devil cannot. 1. God will not. It suits neither with his Wisdom, nor with his Justice, that he should drive men to that, from which, by so many Motives and Arguments, in his Word, he withdrawes them. 2. The Devil cannot drive a believer to worship other gods: but on the contrary, a believer may resist and drive away the Devil. Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you. Whence then is it, that the people of God, are driven to wor∣ship and serve other gods? Whence, but from the drift and impetu∣ousness of their own perverse will? So Luther, and Piscator, If thou lettest thy self be driven, &c. Accordingly the Apostles phrase is; , ye know, that when ye were Gentiles, ye were carried away, or, driven away () to the dumb idols,1 Cor. 12. v. 2. according as ye were lead, 1 Cor. 12.2. Who carried them, or drove them? There is no doubt, but they had their Drivers of Reli∣gion as well as we have; as they who use all arguments to per∣swade men to the worship of their gods. But no Counsel in the world can enforce or drive any man to embrace or follow it, but it leaves him free to obey, or not to obey it.
Hence it appears, that the man is  and , his own self-actor and mover, his own self-driver to Idolatry. They who affirm this or the like Positions, they are accounted Free-willers, as if this were the name of some old Sect or Heresie. Whereas indeed to will or nill the same thing, or, to will or nill the contrary, is as natural to a man as any other property he has. Yea, take these from a man, and ye will utterly unman him. What is more supposed in the holy Scripture then this? If ye be willing, if ye be obedient, &c. How often would I, and ye would not? So that I may undoubtedly affirm, that they, who call men Free-willers, do not know, what Free-will is. Its a new term that hath its original from the ignorance and madness of the people. A man is driven like a beast from the one and only God, to other false gods; from the worship and serving of God, to the ser∣vice and worship of Idols. And because the heart is so moveable even from the chief good, let us pray to the Lord to fix our hearts, and knit them unto himself, that we may fear his Name. And when we are so strengthened, let us strengthen our brethren. When our heart is strengthened and confirmed in the good, we may then every one sing with holy David, My heart is fixed, O Lord, my heart is fixed, I will sing, and I will chaunt or praise, Psal. 57.7.
The Regenerate become Degenerate. SERMON XVII. Deuteronomie 32. ver. 5. They have corrupted themselves; their spot is not the spot of his children. They are a perverse and crooked generation.] AS this Book of Deuteronomy is called by the learned Jews, A Book of Rebukes, in regard of Israels sins now past; so the Lord foreseeing their sins to come, ordered this Swan∣song of Moses as a testimony against Israel, Deut. 31.28, 29. Wherein, when he has summoned his Auditors and witnesses, he reproves them of their sin by discovering the disparity and un∣likeness of the people unto that patern, according to which they were made, and that's the image of God, his perfect work, v. 4. Our Translators turn the words thus; He is the Rock,Deut. 32. v. 4. his work is perfect.] The words in the Hebrew are capable of divers Tran∣slations: Howbeit there is no Verb among these words; which, to make sense, must necessarily be supplyed; Because there is nei∣ther sense nor sentence, neither truth nor falsehood without a Verb. Yet are not Verbs to be multiplyed beyond necessity. There are two in the sentence, as it is rendred by our Translators; and its made a copulate, which may be only a simple Axiom. The words are , which I would turn, His perfect work is that Rock; or That Rock is his perfect work. The word here turnd a Rock, is  which hath  Emphatical, and  extraordinary great, and exceeding the quantity of the o∣ther letters.
The Rabbins understand by  God,SER. 17. (as the LXX render it  both here, and v. 30.) but with reference unto his venge∣ance for sin upon those who transgress his Law. Howbeit he doth not hastily wreak vengeance; but with judgement, because his work is perfect. So R. Salomon. He is called a Rock, to let us know, that all that evil which be∣fel Israel, was for their evil works. And that he is called a Rock, because he stands firm. So Aben Ezra. But the Apostle tells us, that the Rock is Christ, 1 Cor. 10. And therefore its expressed with an Emphasis more then ordinary, as hath been shewen. The Lord Jesus Christ may be understood to be the perfect work of the Father, both 1. By eternal generation,  the off-shining of his glory; the light of the Fa∣thers light, by eternal emanation, and 2. By Temporal incarnation. And that Rock being, as I may so say, the Master-piece of the great Artisun, he made him the patern of all his works. He made all things by Jesus Christ, Ephes. 1.9. whether visible or invisible, &c. Col. 1.16, 17. And consequently, according to this perfect patern, was man made, and after he was marr'd, was re-made and made a-new;Psal. 139. v. 5. as Israel and the whole Church of God. So the Psalmist,  Formasti me, thou hast fashioned or formed me behinde and before, Psal. 139.5. All his wayes are judgement. And in those wayes the man ought to have walked; and Christ himself is , that way, John 14.6. A God of Truth, or God Truth, that is, Christ is that Truth, John 14.6.Esay 65. v. 16. And it is prophesied of him, Esay 65.16. that he who bles∣seth himself in the Earth, shall bless himself  in the God Amen as Christ is called, Revel. 3.14. And according to this Image was the man made. But further; God is just and righteous; and in righteousness was the man made according to Gods image, even in righteousness & holiness of Truth, Ephes. 4.24. God is right or upright. And God made the man right or upright, , Eccles. 7.29. Thus Wisdom built the house wherein God would dwell; but Folly pull'd it down with her hands, saith the Wiseman. And thus one sinner destroyes much good, Eccles. 9.18. For where now shall we finde the sons of God who bear this Image? When the Foster-fathers, Mothers, or Nurses, had lost their children, they sought them, and discovered them by certain marks, which they call'd . By such marks the true Mother knew her son, 1 Kings 3. And Moses who had been to Israel as a Foster-father, a Mother, or Nurse, Numb. 11.12. When Israel had now departed from his fathers house, Moses seeks him out. And whereas these sons of God had their fathers characters and lineaments upon them, these were now worn out, and they be∣come
quite another people, and not the sons of God. Moses lookes for the form and fashion wherein they were made. He looks for them in that way, wherein they should walk; but they were all gon out of the way, they are corrupt, and have done abominable things, Psal. 14. He looked for  judgement,Esay 5. v. 7. and behold , a Scab, a Spot of Leprosie; and for , righteousness, and behold  a cry; the Spirit of God abhors not such elegant Paranomasia's and Allusions, Esay 5.7. Moses looked for an upright people, as God is  upright, ver. 4. but behold they are become a crooked and perverse generation. All the , all the marks and characters which are to∣kens of Gods sons, they were worn quite out, depraved and lost; the true image of God corrupted and marred instead of the righteous∣ness of God, he findes spots, blemishes, & defilements; in lieu of Gods rectitude & uprightness he finds obliquity crockedness & perverseness. So that in the Text we have these Axioms. 1. The people corrupted themselves. 2. Their spot is not of his Sons. 3. They are a perverse and a crooked generation. 1. As to the first of these. They have corrupted themselves. The words are in the Singular number, , He hath cor∣rupted himself. Howbeit, since the people of Israel, are here un∣derstood as a collective of many, the Scripture speaks both wayes, and the sense will amount to the same. Let us therefore inquire into the object of this corruption, and the corruption it self. There is a difference concerning the object of this corruption; For whereas the words are, , whether we should un∣derstand  directly, and so understand God, as Hierom turns the words, Peccaverunt illi, they have sinned unto or against him, that is, God, as by corrupting his Covenant. Or, whether we should understand  reflexly and reciprocally, as our Translators render it, They have corrupted themselves; or, as the word more proper∣ly signifies, to themselves, meaning the corrupt people themselves. They have all a good sense; and we may make use of them all. As for the corruption it self. The word here used signifies all manner of destruction, and is rendred by , utterly to corrupt, , to destroy, and by many other words they express what is in the Text, to corrupt. But more especially, the word signifies to sin and commit ini∣quity; and therefore the LXX turn it by  to do unjustly, as Moses speaking of this corrupt people, Deut. 31.29. I know that ye will utterly corrupt your selves, the LXX turn it, , ye will do very unjustly. And the LXX render the word in the Text by , which Hierom turns Peccaverunt, they have sinned. And yet more particularly by this corruption, a more particu∣lar
sin is to be understood, and that's Idolatry; as Exod. 32.7. Thy people have corrupted themselves; what corruption that was, ye finde in the next words, They have made them a molten Calf, verse 8. and so the Chald. Paraphrast explains this Text. This corruption spreads far, and extends it self to the mindes and thoughts of men; for so we read of men of corrupt mindes, 2 Tim. 3.8. and thence to their words, Eph. 4.29. and to their doings, Ezek. 16.47. The Philosophers define corruption a substantial mutation, a change of the nature, which is opposite and contrary to generation, the other substantial mutation. And if we apply it unto our present business, it's a change of the man from his true manlike nature, Eccles. 12.13. viz. from the fear of God, and keeping His Commandments, from the truth, righ∣teousness, holyness, and uprightness of God. This corruption, we see,2 Cor. 11. v. 3. is a substantial mutation: But how came this people to be cor∣rupted? surely corruption begins with the thoughts: And there∣fore the Woman was tempted, and first corrupted; And I fear, saith the Apostle, lest as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his sub∣tilty; so your thoughts () should be corrupted from the sim∣plicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3. The thoughts corrupt the life, the will, and affections; and so we read that the old man is corrupt by deceitful lusts, Ephes. 4.22. 1. Take notice by what foul names the holy Scripture represents our sins unto us, as here under the name of corruption; so 2 Pet. 2.19. and in the fore-named Chapter by mire and vomit; after∣wards in the Text, by spots and blemishes, crookedness and perverse∣ness, elsewhere by the menstruous cloth of an unclean Woman, putrefaction of sores, the excremont of a man, Prov. 30.12. And scarce shall we meet with any thing odious to our fansie, from which sin borrows not a name, to shew how the Lord hates it, and would also, that we should hate it. 2. Corruption supposeth integrity: For whatsoever is corrupted, was at first sound and whole; whatsoever is fallen, it sometime stood: If man therefore be corrupted, he was sometime whole and sound. Consider we therefore the man under both these conditions, before and after his corruption. 1. Before it: And then, behold, O man, the purity and integrity of thy primitive estate. The generati∣ons of the World were healthful, and there is no poyson of cor∣ruption or destruction in them, Wisd. 1.14. This was no doubt, an honorable estate wherewithal the Man was invested, even with Christ, the honor that cometh of God onely, Iohn 5.44. 1 Pet. 2.7. But man being in this Honor, understood not, but became like the Beasts that perish, Psalm 49.12, 20.
Whence wicked men are called Wolves, Dogs, Foxes, Bears, Lions, &c. as acting according to the bestial principle of life. 3. A wicked man is the very worst of all living creatures; and the reason is, because being yet intire and uncorrupt, he is the best; and therefore being corrupted he is the very worst; Corruptio optimi est pessima, the corruption of that which is the best, is the worst of all. What a dangerous companion is a wicked man to himself? He loves not himself, but corrupts and destroyes himself. How dangerous a companion is a wicked man unto another? Can he love another who hates himself? can he preserve another, who destroyes himself? Yet its strange, how carefully men shun one who hath the Poul disease, or the Plague, or some other infe∣ctious malady; yet fear not intimate conversation with men of corrupt mindes, yea, life, and manners. Yea we are wont to warn our children, lest they have society with such as may infect their bodies, or early corrupt their thoughts: yet meantime we consider not, that both they and our selves have the poyson of corruption in us, as vain thoughts which are destructive, Jer. 4.14. Justly are they hence to be reproved, who are self-corrupters. How much more are they to blame who corrupt and destroy o∣thers, whether in body or soul. The Spirit of God is so tender of the natural life that it allowes not a will or affection toward the ta∣king it away from another. He that hates his brother, is a murderer. Much lesse ought any man to actuate such a wicked affection, no not for any price. The Lord denounceth a curse against such an one. Cursed be he that taketh reward to slay an innocent person.] This Translation doth not fully express the Hebrew text;Deut. 27. v. 25. for what is rendred an innocent person, is ; where  is not expressed at all in the Translation. I wish it were thus rendred. Cursed be he that taketh (or is taking in the Participle) a reward to smite or slay the soul, the innocent blood, or, blood of the innocent; so that the soul and innocent blood, or blood of the innocent should be joyn'd by Apposition. So we read them put together, Gen. 9.4. But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof ye shall not eat. The words are better un∣derstood by apposition without the supplement; but flesh in or with () the life or soul thereof, the blood thereof, ye shall not eat. Where life or soul and blood are to be understood as the same thing. For the blood is such a vehicle of the soul, that its often said to be the same with it. If the natural life be so pretious, how much more pretious is the spiritual life? The word is , which signifies the soul. And how little is it regarded by most men how they corrupt others by their lewd examples, by corrupt doings, Ezech. 20.44. by corrupt
communication, by wicked counsels? What a brand is that upon the name and memory of Jeroboam, that he made Israel to sin. How neerly does this concern those, who, by their office and place, are to give ghostly counsel unto others? How dreadful will their account be, who take reward to slay the souls that should not dye? and save the souls alive, that should not live, by their lying to Gods people who hear their lyes, Ezech. 13.19. How careful and watchful are men, especially over any one in relation unto them, if by deep melancholy, or Vi morbi, by force of a disease, he attempt to lay violent hands upon himself: but how many wilfully corrupt and destroy themselves, how many are , self-murderers, soul-murderers, their own and others? Yet such a Cainish generation we live in, that al∣most every man thinks it strange, that he should be his brothers keeper, Gen. 4.9. when yet in the creation God gave every man com∣mandement concerning his neighbour, Ecclus. 17.14. These are the corrupting sons, Esay 1.24. who plunge themselves and others in the pit of corruption. Let us endeavour to get out of this pit. There is a dispute hotly pursued at this day, touching our fall, whether it came to pass through one person; or, whether every one falls in his own person: wch controversie concerning our fall, I believe not so necessary, as our endeavour to arise from our fall. A company of people fell into a pit, and when many reasoned and disputed, how they came there; one wiser then the rest, ad∣vised them for the present to leave off that question, and rather to finde means how they might get out Surely all have sinned, and are come short of the glory of God. But how shall corruption inherit incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.50. We cannot otherwise receive incorruption and immortality, unless we be united (by Faith, Hope, and Love,) unto incorruption and im∣mortality, saith Irenaeus. Faith in the operative power of God, rai∣seth us up from the dead, Col. 2.12. Without this Faith, corrupt men abide in the pit of corruption, who will not believe to return out of darkness, Job 15.22. But as the Son of God could not be held by the pains, (or, as it is in the Syriac, the bands) of death, but according to what was prophesied of Him, Thou wilt not suffer thine Holy One to see corruption: The like may be said of those who believe in the operative power of God, who raised up Christ from the dead; The Lord will not suffer his holy, or rather, mer∣ciful ones to see corruption. The word there rendred Holy one, is , which signifies not properly holy but merciful; and so Pagnin and others render it, Psal. 16.10. And although the Apostle applyes the words in the singular number, unto Christ, Acts 2.27. yet the word in the Psalm is in the plural number; Thou wilt not suffer  thy merciful ones to see corruption, as being understood also of those who are
Christs, and raised with him, Per motum antityprae, by confor∣mity unto their Head, from death to life, from corruption unto incorruption, without spot and blameless; whereby they are de∣clared to be the sons of God; as they, who corrupt themselves, are not: For 2. Their spot is not of his sons. This is the depravation of the second divine character and image of God, his righteousness; which is stained by the spot of iniquity. The word Spot is but once in the Hebrew text: which is, : which, word for word, sounds thus, Non filiorum ejus macula illorum, that is, Their spot is not of his sons. I doubt not but herein, as elsewhere, our Translators did , and were much biassed by their private opinion; That there must some spot remain in the sons of God. For by this Translation, they strongly intimate, That there are different spots, some of Gods Sons, others of the Heathen. As expresly some have explained these words, by distinguishing two kindes of spots, the one of infirmity, the other of malignity. So prone men are to retain any blemish, and to get authority for it, out of the word of God. As some out of these words, , which we turn, abominable idolatries,1 Pet. 4.3. they have hence distinguished idolatries into two sorts, some abo∣minable, others not abominable; whereas indeed  is a com∣mon adjunct unto all idolatry. This fraudulent collection some have observed, who yet will not see the like done by themselves and others of their party, when, without ground, they so distin∣guish spots, nor have they authority from any Translation either French, Italian, or Spanish, High or Low Dutch, or any of the Latin or old English Translations. The reason why this Spot cannot be of his Sons, may appear from consideration of the most holy God whose sons they are. As also in regard of their patern, the Son of God, unto whose image they are predestinated to be conformed, Rom. 8.29. As also in re∣spect of the inheritance undefiled whereunto the Father hath be∣gotten them, 1 Pet. 1.3.4. and which they cannot enter into who are defiled, Revel. 21.27. Observe hence, what an excellent people are the true and ge∣nuine sons of God. They are without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3. These sons do Patrizare, they are like their Father, holy as he is holy; pure as he is pure; merciful as their heavenly Father is merciful. For so the Lord is , which the LXX turn  of great mercy. And the sons of God are  merciful ones; which yet our Translators often turn Saints. O love the Lord,Psal. 31. v. 23. all ye his Saints. Here and elsewhere our Translation hath Saints, whereas the word  properly signifies mercifull men; and the word Saints hath a more proper Hebrew word  which answers to it. The like mis-translation we meet with 2 Chro. 6.41.
Let thy Saints rejoyce in goodness, the word is , merci∣ful. So Psal. 16.10. and 37.28. and 43.1. So the same word is rendred godly, Psalm 4.3. and 12.1. and 30.4. and 32.6. beside other places. What should be the reason of this? I fear we may without breach of charity suspect that herein our Translators did side with a party not so zealous as they ought to be for mercy and good works; but have imagined a godliness and holiness without either. Whereas we are commanded by the Lord not only to be holy as he is holy, but also to be merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful. Yea, the same men will not scruple the naming of some men Saints and holy ones, (especially of their own party,) even while they are yet only in agone, fighting the good fight of faith; yet will they not allow the most eminent sons of God, the same title, no not after they have fought the good fight, and finished their course; but think it superstition at least, to call the Evangelists and Apo∣stles, S. Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke, S. John, S. Peter, S. Paul, &c. What an injury is this to the spirits of righteous men, when they have attained unto the most eminent degree of Sanctity, even to per∣fection, Hebr. 12.23. not then to afford them the name of Saints; but dishonourably to degrade them? Hereby they may justly be reproved, who plead for their spots and staines, and alleage for themselves, that they must be defiled with them, while they live here: but when then shall they be clean∣sed from them? cleansed they must be; For nothing that defileth must enter the holy City, Revel. 21.17. They say they shall be purified at the end of this life: yea, when they can sin no more, then they shall be cleansed from their spots. What Scripture can they alleage for this? Sure I am, there's none in the whole Word of God. Besides, they attribute more to their own natural death, then they do to the death of Christ and our conformity thereunto. For the Scripture saith, Rom. 8.13. If ye, by the Spirit, shall mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live. But where read we of any purging by the natural death at the end of this life? If therefore the spots cannot be washed out in this life, nor at the end of this life, it must then follow, that there must be a time, after this life, & before we enter into the holy City, when these spots shall be washed out. And when and where must that be, but in Purgatory? Mark now, beloved, whither this unclean doctrine, of necessity, leads the Authors of it. They who are great enemies to Popery, are, by this their tenent, the greatest Patrons of Purgatory. But the reliques of sin, they say, must remain; yea, and God will have them to remain in us, to abase us and humble us, lest we should be proud. Where, I wonder, have these men learned this secret will of God. For sure I am, it is not revealed in the whole
written Word of God. Nor indeed is it reasonable so to speak. As if God would have us to be disobedient, lest we should be disobe∣dient. As if he would not that we should be without spot, lest we should be spotted. Doubtless these men fear most where no fear is; and they are altogether fearless, where the most fear is. They fear to be without spot, lest they should be proud; whereas, if they be without spot, how can they be proud? They fear not the reliques of sin which the Scripture saith, are most to be feared. For a little leaven, leavens the whole lump, Gal. 5.9. And he who keeps the whole Law, and offends in one point, is guilty of all, Jam. 2.10. O take heed and look diligently, lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled, Heb. 12.15. He that neglects small things shall fall by little and little, Ecclus. 19.1. And for whom do these men plead? for the Lord, or for Baal, their own ruling lusts? for the most holy God, or for the unclean Devil? for Christ or Belial? Let Baal plead for himself. But they implead others (who would willingly wash out their spots with the water of the Word, Ephes. 5.) as Hereticks, men of corrupt and er∣roneous judgements, dangerous men. Dangerous indeed, but to whom? to the Devil and his kingdom, which they uphold. And he stirs these men up, out of hatred to the pure & spotless Bride of Christ, whom, he pursues into the Wilderness, and casts a flood of re∣proaches after her, Rev. 12. They tell a story of an Ethiopian woman which brought forth a white childe; whom therefore the most condemned to death before her cause was heard. But the Phy∣sitians knowing the womans piety and chastity, began to enquire; and making search in her bed-chamber, they found the picture of Andromeda, a fair white woman. Whereupon they judged, that, since Phantasia habet opera realia, the phansie hath real effects, this woman in her conception looked upon that picture, which thereby might form and bring forth a white childe. The Spouse of Christ black but comely, Cant. 1.5. is accused as an Harlot she labours and is in travaill, bringing forth a pure and spot∣less birth. And rash judges of evill thoughts, like Judah, pronounce sentence against her; and say, let her be burned for an Harlot for an Heritick. But judge now righteous judgment, ye Physitians of souls, whether it be possible, yea or no, that the chast and holy Spouse of Christ may bring forth a white child, a pure and holy life: St. Paul hath determined this controversy long a go, 2 Cor. 3. He speakes of himself together with the holy Church; we all be∣holding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord , with his, that is, Christs open face (in opposition to Moses,2 Cor. 3. v. 18. with his face covered, ver. 13.) we are transformed, into the same image from glory unto glory. Yea, Christ himself gives approbation to the beauty and purity
of his Spouse, thou art fair my love, thou art fair, Cant. 4.1. Yea ver. 7. Thou art all fair my love; no spot in thee. And are not they Gods sons who have their spots? Alas! what then shall become of me? Hath not Christ so loved his Church, that he hath given him∣self for it, that he might sanctifie and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word, that he might present it unto himself a glorious Church not having spot (of deformity) or wrinkle (of the old man) or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish, Ephes. 5.25, 26, 27. But I have contracted long customary sins, and am even woded in them. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi; No long time can prescribe unto the King Christ, but that he may cleanse his Spouse. But alas! Long custome is another nature; mine habitual spots are as indelible and fixt in me, as blackness in the Ethiopian and spots in the Leo∣pard. And can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Jer. 13. Thou complainest very much of thy sin; but deal faithfully between God and thine own soul; would'st thou indeed be clean∣sed from it? We read that a blinde man cryed after our Lord, Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy upon me; and again, Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy upon me; nor could the people make him hold his peace, Mark 10.50, 51. He is brought unto Jesus. And he ask'd the blind man, what would'st thou that I should do unto thee? A strange question. For what else, what greater boon could the blind man desire then that he might re∣ceive his sight? Our Lord well knew, that many love darkness more then light. He knew that some men love the lusts of their eyes, better then their eyes. And for like reason, when a certain man lay at the pool of Bethesda, thirty and eight years, Jesus saw him, and knew that he had been now a long time in that case; yea, though he knew all this, yet he saith unto him, wilt thou be made whole? Certainly our Lord Jesus knew right well, and foreknew, that many then were, and would be in aftertime, yea, and are at this day, who have had their infirmities as long, yea longer then that man; So they call their habitual sins, their infirmities, which they love so well that they desire not to be made whole. Therefore our Lord in∣quires into the mans will. For without the mans will, Christ may will, and no cure be wrought: I would, but ye would not, Matth. 23.37. But with the mans will the greatest cure may be wrought, even of habitual and customary sins: Jer. 13.23. The peoples sins were as fixt as blackness to the Ethiopian, and spots to the Leopard. And these spots the foulest, adulteries, neighings, leaud∣ness of whoredom and abominations on the hills in the fields, &c.
Those spots were of the deepest die; yet the Lord required of Je∣rusalem onely her will toward the cure of them, Wilt thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? Be we exhorted to keep our selves unspotted from the world. Its a part of the pure religion and undefiled, James 1.27. So shall we be the sons of God, and have his characters, his , his marks upon us; even his mark of love even unto enemies, Mat. 5.44. His mark of mercy and pity, Ecclus. 4.10. Blameless and harmless (or, sincere or simple) the sons of God , Immacula∣ti, without spot, (so  answers to  a spot) in a crooked and perverse nation, or rather generation, (,Phil. 2. v. 15. as they render the word in the text,) Phil. 2.15. That's the third and last Axiom. They are a perverse and crooked generation. This is the result of their corruption and depravation, their spot and their stain; This corrupt and spotted people are a perverse and crooked generation. Let us inquire into the meaning of these words.  properly signifies an age or time while men live successively in the world, (whence is Durare to continue in the Latin). By the same word also the men of an age are understood, by Synecdoche, as in this place. So the Lord saith to Noah, I have seen thee righteous  in this generation, that is, in this age and among these men, Gen. 7.1. And that was a very crooked and perverse generation; and so was that of which Moses here speaks. These words  in their metaphorical sense as here used have like sig∣nification one to other: and both import subtilty, oblique, crook∣ed, and perverse dealing among men: Howbeit they have their difference; for the former signifies oblique and crooked, which the LXX turn , a crooked generation. The later im∣ports the same crooked generation, to be perverted and depraved, and accordingly tis rendred by the Greek Interpreters,  a perverse generation. But although the words have like sig∣nification of wresting, writhing, depraving, yet should not the Translators have inverted and perverted the genuine order of the words, as they have done, (unless thereby they intended an ele∣gancy) turning them perverse and crooked, instead of crooked and perverse generation; which errour they corrected, Phil. 2.15. Where we have, the same words in the Greek, , which our Translators render in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, or rather generation. The two former characters of this wicked people, do not neces∣sarily imply a spreading beyond themselves; He corrupted him∣self, not another: so the Chald. Paraphrast; and their spot, its not said that it infects another. But when this people are called a crooked and perverse generation, the Hebrew words import craft and subtilty to circumvent and deceive others; so Mich. 3.9. They
make crooked what is straight, which elegant opposition is lost in our Translation. In the later word, the metaphore is taken from Wrestlers, who by turning and winding their bodies endea∣vouring to supplant and overthrow others; the Wiseman de∣scribes such a perverse generation, Prov. 4.16. They sleep not, ex∣cept they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away, un∣less they cause some to fall. But since both these words signify crooked, and are accordingly rendred by the LXX, the former, in the text and elsewhere, the later, Prov. 8.8. its needfull that we inquire what's here meant by crooked. Privations are known by their habits, and deprivations by their integrity and soundness. That therefore we may know, what's meant by crooked, we must know what is straight, because, Rectum est judex sui & obliqui; what is straight, discovers it self, and what is crooked. That's straight and right which inclines to neither part; as a straight line lies even between two termes: as a straight way inclines neither to the right hand nor to the left; as we read it described by Moses, Num. 20.17. Deut. 2.27. The rule of this Rectitude is the word of God, which is Right, Psal. 19.8. and 33.4. And his word is conformable to himself who is right, Deut. 32.4. In this rectitude and uprightness the up∣right God made and set man at the first, Eceles. 7.29. Hence we may understand what is obliquety and crookedness, namely, an aversion and deflexion, from that original straightness rectitude and uprightness in our God. And this crookedness is framed by a rule, which is iniquity, law∣lesness and irregularity. For as rectitude and uprightness is compared to a straight way; so is iniquity, to by-wayes, crooked and erroneous wayes: So  to sin signifies properly to miss the right way or Mark, Judg. 20.16. And of like sense is  and Pecco, to sin. And as rectitude, and the rule of it, is conformity unto the upright God himself, so crookedness and irregularity the rule of it, is conformity to the Devill himself, the crooked Serpent, Esay, 27.1. And as the upright God made the man upright in his generation, and according to his will; So the Divill the crooked Serpent de∣leuded man and brought him to the bent of his will, in the degene∣ration. God made man upright; but they have found out many inventions, Eccles. 7.29. Whence appears the reason why this generation became crooked and perverse. For although the heart it self perverts it self, (as hath been shewen on Deut. 30.17.) yet this comes not to pass without a Tempter declining and bending the man to his will. Nor is he in vain called , the Tempter, Matth. 4.3. It is his business, and he is fitted for it, being a subtil Serpent full of windings and turnings, and insinuations; full of mischief, or readi∣ness
and easiness to do mischief () whence Elymas is cal∣led the Devils childe, Acts 13.10. He hath also his instruments and ministers, 2 Cor. 11.14, 15. not only such as are in his ordinary service, as Sorcerers and Wizzards, whereof one ye read of in the place now named; but his great designe is to gain to his party and service, some of Gods Ministers. And because Levi was in reputation for holiness, the Law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips, he walked with God in peace and equity, and he turned many from iniquity, Mal. 2.6. If Satan can perswade a Levite to corrupt the covenant of Levi, and so gain a Levite unto his side, to do his work, to turn men and decline them from righteousness to iniquity, then what mischief may not the De∣vil and the Priest do? And too often he gets this advantage; whence he has gotten himself a name, and is called Leviathan, the piercing Serpent, and again, Leviathan the crooked Serpent, Esay 27.1. that is, of  and , Levi the Priest, and the Dragon. These two joynd are abundantly sufficient to make a crooked and per∣verse generation, Incurvas interam animas et coelestium inanes; Souls bow'd to th'earth and void of heavenly things. 1. Whence we may learn, by the rule of contraries, what maner of people are the sons of God. As the Devills children are the crooked generation, as Elymas the Sorcerer is called the son of the Devill, because he went about to turn the deputy from the faith, Act. 13, 8.9.10. So Gods sons are generatio rectorum, the generation of the upright, Psal. 112.2. being such as turn sinners from the errour of their way, Jam. 5.20. and turn many unto righteousness, Dan. 12.3. These are Gods Jeshurun, his upright ones. 2. Hence we gather, what is the Heathenish life, where-with this people were corrupted and spotted; and so pronounced not to be the sons of God, but a crooked and perverse generation. That life consists in craft and cunning, to circumvent and deceive: si possis, rectè, si non, quocunque modo rem; to be getting, quo jurè quâve inju∣riâ, by right or wrong, any way to lurch, cousin, cheat, go beyond another. And being growen rich, to spend prodigally and wast∣fully, upon their lusts, what they got injuiously. The former part of this description, is in the text: the later yea read, 1 Thess. 4.5. 1 Pet. 4.3. That the will of the Gentiles consists in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, &c. Both parts of this Heathenish life, too many of this City live, yet think themselves, and would be ac∣counted by others very good Christians, although their spot de∣clares evidently that they are not Gods sons, but Gentiles or Hea∣thens, a crooked and perverse generation. 3. Hence we learn, that it is no good reason, wherewithal yet many sooth and flatter themselves, into a good opinion of that way of religion wherein they walk, that it is Orthodox and sound, pure, undefiled, and upright; when yet its corrupt, spotted and
impure,Pro. 30. v. 12. crooked and perverse. That such there are, the Wiseman assures us, Prov. 30.12. There is a generation, that is pure in their own eyes; and yet is not washed, , from their dung. They reason thus; They of the Church of Rome, worship Idols; teach the doctrine of merit by workes, &c. therefore they are a crooked generation. Now as for us; though we commit that which the world calls Sacriledge, yet we abhor Idols, Rom. 2.22. And as for merit by good works, we conscientiously abstain from them; for fear, lest we should hope to be saved by them. I doubt not but I speak the inward thoughts and reasonings of many Pro∣fessors. Its possible, that men of contrary minds and opposite wayes in Re∣ligion, may neither of them walk in Gods way, which is the right way; yea, they may both be crooked and perverse generations. Ye read, that Ephraim was against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim; and both together against Judah, which alone was in the Right, Esay 9.21. and therefore both the other must be in the wrong. The Pharisees were against the Saducies, and the Saducies against the Pharisees, Matth. 22.23.—40. Acts 23.6, 7, 8.9. and both against Christ who is That way, John 14.6. that one straight way to life. There are , many Antichrists: but Christ is One. And the reason is: A right line is but one between two terms: But crooked lines may be infinite between the same two termes. And the like we may say of the true religion and undefiled; that it is but one,Psal. 119. v. 1. but one upright way: And blessed are the perfect in the way who are walking in the Law of the Lord. But erroneous and by-wayes are as so many crooked lines, innumerable, and infinite. So that, although the present Christians accuse, judge and con∣demn one another, yet that sentence of the Psalmist is true of too many of them; They are all gone out of the way; they are cor∣rupt and become abominable; their feet are swift to shed blood; destru∣ction and unhappiness are in their wayes; and the way of peace (that's Gods right way) they have not known. 4. The Lord owns not his own people and nation corrupted, spot∣ted, crooked, and perverted; but reputes them as Gentiles and Hea∣then; their spot is not of his sons; they are a crooked and perverse generation. For why? It is the Gentiles and Heathenish life, that makes Gentiles and Heathen, be they otherwise of what nation or people soever they may be. The unconverted Macedonians were a crooked and perverse nation or generation, Phil. 2.15. And well might they be so termed, when S. Peter cals the Jews a crooked generation, Acts 2.40. Yea, the perverted people are called after the names of those nations, whose lives and manners they imitated. So Esay 1.10. the Princes of the Jewes are called Rulers of Sodom, and the nation, the people of Gomorrha. And Ezech. 16.3. The birth
and the nativity of Jerusalem is said to be of the land of Canaan; their Father an Amorite, their Mother an Hittite. Yea, the Israelites, who usually are called , the people, and people of God, when they lost their rectitude, uprightness, and conformity to the one and only God, and brake the bond of unity among themselves, by reason of their rents and divisions, from one another, and from their God, the Lord calls them , Nations, Ezech. 2.2. as it is acknowledged in the margent. Nay, when the people have depraved the divine characters and image of their God, they are judged unworthy the name of a peo∣ple, so saith the Lord; They have provoked me to jealousie with that which is not God, and I will provoke them to jealousie with those who are not a people, Deut. 32.21. And the divine Image being renewed, it restores the name of a people unto them. Ye, saith S. Peter, are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye should shew forth the vertues or praises of him, who hath called us out of darkness to his mervai∣lous light. 1. And why may we not exhort the crooked and perverse gene∣ration to repentance? why may not they hope to return to their Primitive rectitude and uprightness? There is a promise left, that the crooked shall become straight, Esay 40.4. alwayes provided, that they admit the doctrine of Repentance and amendment of life: For to such penitent ones John Baptist brings that promise,Luke 3. v. 5. that , that the crooked things shall become a straight and plain way. Provided also, that they yield unto Gods wrestling and striving with them. For, as with the merciful, the Lord will be merciful, and with the perfect man, he will be perfect, and with the pure,Psal. 18. v. 25, 26. Gen. 30. v. 8. he will be pure; so with the perverse, he will be cross, wrestle and strive to overcome him; so  properly signifies: And such are the wrestlings of God, with the perverse man, Gen. 30.8. This is the method of the divine wisdom in converting the man, observed by the Son of Syrac, Ecclus. 4.17. &c. At the first she will walk with him (not by crooked wayes,Ecclus. 4. v. 17, 18, 19. as our Translators turn , but) perversly or crosly; (as thwarting his perverse will) and bring fear and dread upon him, and torment him with her discipline, until she may trust his soul, and try him  Justificationibus suis, with her justifications, or Laws which make righteous. Then will she return by the straight way unto him, and comfort him, or, make him glad, () and shew him her secrets. But if he go wrong, she will utterly forsake him, () and deliver him ( into the hands) into the power of his own fall or ruin, . O that the crooked and perverse generation would consider this, and take to heart this advise of the Wiseman and other counsel
of his, in that excellent Book: So shall they experimentally know that what is crooked,Eccles. 1. v. 15. & 7. v. 13. may be made straight; yea, that he, whom, the just God leaves in his wilful hardness and impenitency, his crookedness and perverseness, and so may be said to make him crooked, even him now become penitent and relenting, the merciful God can again make straight and upright, according to the promise, Esay 40.4. Luke 3.5. 2.Acts 2. v. 40.46. Meantime, let the new converts be exhorted to save them∣selves, o, be saved (, Salvamini) from the crooked generati∣on, according to S. Peters counsel, Acts 2.40. So will the Lord adde unto the Church , such as are saved from the crooked generation. 3. And ye, who have attained unto a greater measure of light and strength,Phil. 2. v. 15. continue ye blameless and harmless the sons of God, with∣out spot, in a crooked and perverse generation; among whom , shine ye as lights in the world. Direct and strengthen and turn many unto righteousness. So shall ye shine as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he shall know them experimentally? (so the LXX turn  by ) For the wayes of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them;Hos. 14. v. 9. but the transgressors shall fall therein, Hos. 14.9.
AN APPENDIX of Three Sermons on Three Texts of Scripture, out of that course which hath hitherto been observed; which of themselves, speak not that sense which the Translators have imposed upon them; but, by mis-translation and mis-interpretation, have long time mislead the credulous and ignorant mul∣titude: But being rightly rendred and explained, may undeceive them; and, through the goodness of God, reduce them into the way of Truth.
There is no necessity for a Wise and Just man to sin.SER. 18. SERMON XVIII. Eccles. 7. ver. 19, 20. Wisdom strengtheneth the wise, more then ten mighty men which are in the City; for there is not a just man upon earth that doth good and sin∣neth not. THE Wiseman, ver. 15. discovers unto us a , an hid∣den and unknown kinde of divine providence, which ig∣norant men account little less then an irregularity; That sometimes it goes ill with good men, and things succeed well with evil men. All things have I seen in the dayes of my vanity: There is a just man that perisheth in his righteousness, &c. Whereupon he gives advise to avoid extreams of both kindes. 1. That , that Summum jus, that rigour and too much severity of Justice, ver. 16. which while we go about to decline, we must not run into the other extream, ver. 17. Be not overmuch wicked, &c. 2. But alas, if the case be so, that a man may perish in well doing, and prosper in evil doing; what shall we do? which way shall we turn our selves? Tis true, these are great inconveniencies; but be sure thou heed this well, and forget it not; Fear God, and thou shalt easily escape all these extreams, all these inconveniencies. This Clue, This Wisdom, viz. The fear of God, whereby thou mayest dis-intangle thy self, and winde thy self out of this Labyrinth of evils, it strengthens the wiseman more then ten mighty men that are in the City; although there be not a man so just upon earth, that so doth good, but that he may sin. Ye have a brief Analyse and Paraphrase of the neighbour words, that lead to my Text. Come we now to the divine truths contained in it; and they are these.
1. Wisdom strengthens the wise. 2. Wisdom strengthens the wise, more then ten mighty men in the City. 3. There is not a just man upon earth that doth good and may not sin. 4. Although the wisdom so strengthen, yet there is not a just man upon earrh, &c. 1. When Wisdom is said to strengthen the wise, we must in∣quire, what wisdom this is; and how it is true, that wisdom strength∣ens the wise. 1. The word here turn'd Wisdom, is ; which is extreamly ambiguous; and therefore we must timely distin∣guish it according to the significations of it. And so Wisdom is either Divine, and from above, or either Humane, and of this world, or either Devilish, and from beneath. The wisdom here meant is divine, which is defined Absoluti di∣vinique boni scientia. Rerum divinarum humanarum{que} scientia; the knowledge of the absolute and divine good: the knowledge of things divine and humane: So Lactantius and others. The Wise∣man, who, on purpose, speaks of wisdom, defines it the breath or emanation of the power of God, and a pure stream flowing from the glory of the Almighty, the brightness of the everlasting light, &c. Wisd. 7.25, 26. Which description declares, that the true wisdom is not such as the Philosophers have delivered it unto the world; who make it one of the intilectual habits, as they call them, whereof they make five. . And they will have it consist in knowledge. But it is evident by that description of the Wiseman, that wisdom is no acquisite habit, nor consists it on∣ly in knowledge, though of the highest things. For we must take notice, that the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. And the Scripture places Wisdom not in the Brain, but in the Heart, 1 King. 3.12. Psal. 90.12. By Wisdom then we must here understand the Spirit of wisdom which is Christ; and thus, Deut. 34.9. Joshuah is said to be full of the Spirit of wisdom. Esay 11.2. There shall rest upon him the Spirit of wisdom. For this, S. Paul prayes, Ephes. 1.17. And Wisd. 1.4. what the Wiseman calls wisdom, v. 5. he calls the holy Spirit of Discipline. 2. The word we turn to strengthen, is , to make firm, solid, and strong: Which is transferred from outward and visible, to invisible and inward things: So that as the thickning of bodily things, makes them stronger, as a threefold cord is not easily bro∣ken; so likewise the addition of spiritual things, makes them more firm, and those who have them, as light and heat, &c. may be encreased. Whence we say, Vis unita fortior. Psalm 68.29. Strengthen O Lord, the things thou hast wrought in us: unto which the
Apostle may seem to have had respect, when he saith, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. I have planted, and Apoll watereth, but God gave the in∣crease. They go from strength to strength, Psal. 84.7. Stablish, strengthen, settle you, 1 Pet. 5.10. The reason is evident from that , self-sufficiency & , that operative power of the divine-wisdom in those who have it in them. It is given them for this end, to work in them; as Solomon prayed, 1 Kings 3.9. Wisd. 9.10. O send her out of thy holy heavens, and from the throne of thy glory, that being pre∣sent she may labour with me, &c. Wisd. 6. Obs. 1. Note here that a man who is wise, by the wisdom of God, hath that wisdom in him. For nothing can render another like it self, but it must be in him in whom it works. Since therefore Christ is the true wisdom, he must be in those whom he makes wise and strengthens by his wisdom, and will be found of all that seek him, Prov. 8.17. Obs. 2. A great diversity, and a broad difference between hu∣mane fear, and the fear of God, which the Wiseman here calls wis∣dom. Humane fear abates mens courage; Timor minuit; Fear be∣trayes those succours which reason would afford, Wisd. 17.12. But the fear of God, which, is the wisdom here meant, encourages and strengthens the wise. Obs. 3. Hence it followes, that a wise man is a valiant man. The Wiseman tells us so much expresly, Prov. 24.5. A wise man is strong, yea, a man of knowledge encreaseth strength. Solomon knew this from his father Davids example, Psal. 27.1. Such a valiant man was S. Paul, Rom. 8.35. &c. who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation or distress, &c. In all these things we are more then Conquerours. Obs. 4. That as there are diverse sorts of wisdom, divine, hu∣mane, and diabolical, as hath been shewen; so the divine wisdom it self, hath diverse degrees. And the wisdom here spoken of, is the lowest: For Solomon having spoken of the fear of God, which is the beginning of wisdom, he presently saith, , This wisdom, namely, the fear of God, strengtheneth the wise. He implyes, that there is another, and higher degree of wisdom then this is: of which S. Paul speaks experimentally, Col. 1.26, 27, 28, 29. the my∣stery which hath been hid from ages, and from generations, which is Christ in you, &c. whereunto I also labour, striving ac∣cording to his working which worketh in me mightily. Obs. 5. This resolves a great doubt, which might be made, by comparing the speech of the Wiseman, Ecclus. 24.21. where the Wisdom saith, They that eat me, shall yet be hungry, and they that drink me, shall yet be thirsty: Whereas John 4.14. Whosoever, saith the wisdom of God, drinketh of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst, &c. And 6.35. He that cometh to me,
shall never hunger, &c. Whence its evident, the former words are to be understood of the former and lower degree of wisdom; and the later of the consummate and perfect wisdom, called  wisdoms, able to make us wise unto salvation, 2 Tim. 3.15. The wisdom of the just, Luke 1.17. Which justly reproves our great unthankfulness unto the Lord Jesus our Saviour and Deliverer, who saves and delivers us out of the hands of our enemies; who redeems us from iniquity, from the curse of the Law, from the wrath of God, 1 Thess. 1.10. from eternal death, from him who hath the power of death, Hebr. 2. Yet who returns thanks? Solomon tels us a Story, Eccles. 9.14. of a little City delivered by a poor wise man. And what is this lit∣tle City but the Church professing godliness? S. Matth. 5.14. Such indeed are but few in regard of the whole world. Against this little City comes a great King, the Prince of this World. He besieges it, he goes about seeking whom he may devour. This is the true Nebuchadnezzar, he who straightneth and besiegeth judgement; the wicked compassing about the righteous, &c. Habac. 1. v. 2, 3, 4. wch causeth Jerusalem to mourn & make lamentation. He is wont, saith one of the pious Antients, to be a type of the Devil. This King of all the children of pride, Job 41.34. This Prince of this World, sets all the World against this little City. All that is in this World, the lusts of the flesh, &c. all temptations unto sin; all occasions of sin, &c. He summons his Servants, all Tyrants, He∣reticks, the Wisemen, and wisdom of the world, and the wisdom of the flesh. Ye read of such a straight siege, Revel. 20.8. when the City is so little and so few to defend it, it seems it might easily be ta∣ken. How much more when the Prince of this World comes and begirts it with all the power of this World? This City, the poor Wiseman, who for our sakes became poor, delivers, yet who remembers this poor Wiseman? Axiom 2. Wisdom strengthens the wise, more then ten mighty men who are in the City. These words of the Wiseman present us with the pirase of Wisdom compared with Strength and Authority. For so  here used signifies one that's strong and powerful; whence the Arabians and Turks call their Governours Soldans or Sultans, that is, men of power and authority, mighty men. Whereas the wis∣dom of the Wiseman is compared with ten such Princes or mighty men, and preferred before them. The number of Ten is not here exactly and precisely of necessity to be understood, but as we of∣ten in common speech, use a definite number for an indefinite; as Castellio here, Decies tantum, ten times as much, that is, many times. And the reason is, because, the number Ten is the boundary, be∣yond which we number not, but by repeating. Hence it is that , that signifies Ten, is from  to contain; because it comprehends all numbers. The Scripture speaks thus, Job 19.3.
These ten times have ye reproached me; that is, oftentimes. And so Jacob complains that Laban had changed his wages ten times, Gen. 31.7. And the Lord, saith he, was tempted so often by his people, Numb. 14.22. Thus Matth. 25.1. ye read of Ten instead of the whole number of the Church: and diverse the like. The truth of this is evident, both by testimony of natural expe∣rience, and Scripture. 1. Experience; as the Heathen found it true, who said, Cedant arma togae,—Arms must yield to the Gown. And Archimedes the Mathematitian was more feared by the Romans then all the power of Syracuse: Insomuch, as if the Souldiers besieging the City, saw but a Line, or a small piece of wood hanging down the wall, they presently suspected some Engine, and would cry out, Archimedes, Archimedes, and turn their backs and flye; which they disdained to do, at all the strength of the Souldiery. But the Scripture proves this expresly, Prov. 21.22. Eccles. 7.17. and 9.14. And the weaker Sex arm'd with wisdom prevail'd against the strong; witness Debora, Jahel, and the wise Woman of Abel, 2 Sam. 20. The reason why this wisdom so strengthens the wise, even more then many mighty men, so that one wise man more preserves the City then many strong men; it seems to be, because, Wisdom both originally and formally, is concrete with power and might: and there∣fore whatsoever strength can do alone, that also can Wisdom do & more. Therefore Wisdom is described the breath of the power of God, and a pure efflux from the glory of the Almighty, Wisd. 7.25.Wis. 7. v. 25. And formally the same Christ is the wisdom of God, and the power of God, 1 Cor. 1. which is the second necessary for our spiritual war. 3. Besides, there is a priority in nature: For Vis consilii expers mole ruit suâ; Force without Counsel, perisheth by his own weight. And therefore if strength be successful and prosperous in the actions of it, it must presuppose Wisdom as the guide and di∣rector of it. Yea, Wisdom is the Teacher of Valour; yea, of Prudence, Temperance, and Justice, according to Wisd. 8.7. If a man love Wisdom, her labours are vertues; For she teacheth Temperance, Prudence, Justice, and Fortitude, which are such things that men can have nothing more profitable in their life, which are the four Cardinall Vertues known and famous among the wise Heathen. Obs. 1. If that wisdom which is the fear of God, and but the be∣ginning of wisdom, as its often called, be yet stronger then many mighty men, how much more strong is the progress and increase of divine wisdom in faith which overcomes the world? 1 John 5.4. Yea, how much more strong is that mighty power of love which is God himself? 1 John 4.8.16. The last enemy that shall be de∣stroyed
is Death, 1 Cor. 15. And love is strong as death it self, Cant. 8.6. Obs. 2. How should this inflame our soules with the love of Christ, which is not only power but wisdom also; yea, and righte∣ousness and holiness, Job 36. He is mighty in strength and wisdom; Yea, he is all things, Col. 3.11. and in whom are hid all the treasures of this wisdom and plenipotence of power. Obs. 3. The divine wisdom is of more power and force then all humane wisdom and strength. This appears by the examples of holy men, not trained up in Trades, Arts, and Sciences, yet able to judge of them even better then they who professed them. As Joseph no States-man, Paul no Mariner, yet able to out-vie them, to out-shoot them in their own Bow. The like we may truly say of the divine wisdom in regard of all humane power and might. What is the most glorious pretence of using might and power? Is it not the cause of Religion? the building up and defence of pure religion? Does not the Wiseman tell us here, that wisdom strengthens the wise more then ten mighty men that are in the City? And there∣fore what ye read, Zach. 4.6. spoken of the material Temple, the building of it, not by might nor by power; and the same is most true if understood of the spiritual Temple the Church of God. All the Zelots in all Ages they have found that by their tyranny, all that could be effected, was but to make many Hypocrites like themselves: But to build up the Church of God of living stones, it is the work of divine wisdom which reaches from end to end strongly, and disposes all things sweetly, Wisd. 8.8. And therefore when the Lord appeared to Eliah, now zealous of Gods glory, who might seem to pray for fire from Heaven, to destroy Jezabel, 1 Kings 19.11. The Lord was neither in the strong winde, nor earthquake, nor fire, but in a still voice. And let them take notice of this, who like James and John, even out of zeal for God and Christ, wish for fire from Heaven to consume their supposed enemies, the wisdom of God tells them, They know not of what spirit they are, Luke 9.55. Mysticè. The wisdom of God, which is Christ, is more power∣ful and more helpful to us then ten, then many Princes, then all the power of men and Angels. When all the guardian Angels say, We have healed Babylon, and she was not healed, &c. Jer. 52.9. then descends the great Physitian of souls into the Church which is in Babylon, saith S. Peter, and he undertakes the cure of this issue of blood, wherewith the Church hath so long been wasted; when the Woman the Church, hath spent all she hath upon Physitians of no value, when so many Formulae concordiae, so many Books of Ar∣ticles, so many Confessions of Faith, so many Catechisms, so many Liturgies and Directories, so many Forms of godliness, so many Coun∣sels, so many Assemblies, when such infinite varieties of Medicines
have been applyed, yet the Woman becomes rather worse, then better; then the vertue of the divine wisdom drawn out of him by an operative faith, that works the cure, that scales the City of the mighty, Prov. 21.22. This is that one poor Wiseman who saves the City, Eccles. 9. Ye read, 2 Sam. 23.8. that the chief of all the Captains about David, was Tachmoni; he sat upon the Seat or Throne, a Princi∣pal man no doubt, who is called Jashobeam, 1 Chron. 11.11. A man ye hardly read of any where else. And who is Tachmoni but the wise man? so Tachmoni signifies: And where is he? where is his dwelling? even in the midst of us? John 1.26. And therefore he is called Jashobeam, who dwells in the people, 1 Chron. 11.11. He dwels in us except we be castawayes. And there he subdues all the power of the enemy. Would we then obtaine this wisdom? It is neer us in our mouth and in our heart. It is in us: for nothing can render us like unto it self but it must be in us; as was shewen before. This speakes strong consolation to the simple soul, wise and yet but weak, and ambitious of an higher and more eminent de∣gree of divine wisdom: In which case, David speakes, Psal. 42.1. As the Hinde panteth after the rivers of waters; so panteth my soul after thee O God! my soul hath been a thirst for God, &c. Such are much dejected: surely Ab extremo ad extremum, non pervenitur nisi permedium. The divine wisdom is not attained unto all at once, but by degrees; and as we cannot hasten our natural age, but childhood must have it's time, and youth it's time, &c. So must the spirituall ages have their times and successions also: For as the visible Sun by few or many and often revolutions makes a like number of dayes in the outward world: So doth the Sun of righteousnes by few or many reuolutions on the souls of those who feare God, make some children of a few dayes, some youngmen of more, some oldmen and full of dayes; and so wis∣dom enters into the holy souls according to the ages, Wisd. 7.27. Meantime while we are yet in our nonage let us hunger and thirst after a greater degree of wisdom, as Prav. 30.1. The words of Agur, and in the Vul. Lat. Verba congregantis & vomentis, first the wisman he gathers, then powrs out, as Ecclis. 39.1.—6. Get we therefore wisdom, and with all our getting, get we un∣derstanding. By prayer to the Lord, Salomon obtained wisdom, 1 Kings 3. Jam. 1. This prayer is the prayer onely of the righte∣ous man, Eccles. 2.26. Thus Daniel and his companions obtained wisdom, and the understanding of secrets, Dan. 2.17.—23. And unto such, the wisdom is given, Matth. 13.11. Ax. 3. For there is not a just man upon earth that doth good, &c. These words beside their absolute consideration, look  forward and backward, and have their due connexion with both, as we shall see when we have considered the words in their absolute and simple meaning. And so they deny that there
is any just man upon earth so exactly obedient, that he so doth good, that he doth not sin. I read the words thus. There is no just man upon earth, who may do good, or, who doth good and may not sin. The reason of this translation is to be understood from the Tens in the Hebrew, which is here the second future; For, because that tongue hath no Potential or Subjunctive mood, yet the sense of them is necessarily to be expressed in it; therefore the Spirit of God makes use of this Tens, when the sense of either Mood is to be expressed. Thus much all men learned in that tongue, acknowledge; and our own Translators also elsewhere, as Gen. 3.2. , which ours render, we may eat of the fruit of the Trees of the Garden, Esay 49.15. , Can a woman for∣get her childe, &c? they , may forget. According to this Hebrism,Mat. 24. v. 35. our Lord speaks, Matth. 24.35. Heaven and Earth  shall pass away, that is, they may rather pass away then my word may pass away. And many the like. Thus there is not a just man upon earth that doth good and  and may not sin. That thus the words are to be rendred of a Just man in statu inconsistente, in an inconsistent and changeable estate; it is clear from Solomons main scope, he aims at in this book; and from the context of the 20 verse with v. 19. 1. That Solomon speaks of such a Just man as is under the first dispensation, that of the Father, which is the fear of God; a mutable and imperfect estate, will appear to you, if ye shall be pleased to consider, that, whereas the Wisemans intent in this book, is, to discover the bliss and happiness of man, answerable to that dispensation under which, he himself and that generation lived, he proceeds first negatively by removing the vain opinion of many, who place their true hap∣piness some in Knowledge, others in Pleasure, others in Honour, o∣thers in Wealth. All these rejected; 2. He proceeds positively, affirming, that the chief good, bliss, and happiness consists in the fear of God, Chap. 12.13. with which assertion he concludes this book. Thus Job 28.28. Now although this be true, yet this is to be re∣strained unto the first dispensation, which is inchoative wisdom and righteousness, as it appeareth by the description of it, where its said to be the beginning of wisdom. For there is no doubt but the righteousness of faith far transcends that of fear, as we shall shew anon. 2. This appears also from the context of this Verse with the former: This Wisdom which is that fear of God, strengthens the wise, &c. Though there be not a Just man upon earth that doth good and may not sin. The words being thus translated, let us inquire, what it is, 1. To do good. 2. To sin. 3. What Justice is, and a Just man. 1. To do good is largely taken, as I have shewed on Gen. 4.7. To sin, is
Errare à via & scopo; all have sinned and fallen short of the glory. 3. , Righteousness or justice is conformity unto a Law. They therefore who are conformable unto Gods Law, are just, as Noah, Gen. 7.1. Zachariah and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6. Lot, 2 Pet. 2.8. But, its said, Psal. 143.2. In thy sight shall no man living be justified; the like, Rom. 3.20. Gal. 2.10. Resp. There is a Legal and Evangelical justice or righteousness. Which yet are not so distinguished, that the Legal righteousness is performed by the mans own strength; which the Pharisees endeavouring to esta∣blish, fell short of the righteousness of God, Rom. 10.3. But the E∣vangelical and Gospel-righteousness is wrought by the power of Christ in us, Rom. 8.3, 4. what the Law could not do, &c. Now because there are three degrees of those who are in Christ, Chil∣dren, Young men, and Old men, 1 John 2. there is a justice proporti∣onable unto these. 1. That of the Childe which is here under∣stood. 2. That of the Yong man, and 3. That of the Old man. 1. Whether is not a just man in that state that doth good and may not sin. The reason is from consideration of the God of our righteousness, he is the God of order; and therefore as he works his works in the outward world not all at once, but gradually and successively, from weak beginnings, as we say, Natura non facit sal∣tum: so he works his works in the inward world, not  not altogether, he makes his entrance into his greatest works with small and weak beginnings, Mark 4.26.—32. 2. Reason also may appear in regard of the just man himself; He is made at first of an earthly mold; and his mind and heart at first relish the principle of which he is made; and therefore he is said to be upon earth, There is not a just man upon earth, &c. And this is the earthly which is of Gods making whose image we bear before we bear the image of the heavenly, 1. Cor. 15. And there∣fore our Lord who spake to Nicodemus concerning baptism of water and the Spirit, saith, he told him of of earthly things, Joh. 3.12. and ver. 31. John Baptist saith he speakes of the earth. 1. Hence then we learn how untrue and in consequent col∣lections and inferences are made from this and such like places as this is misunderstood, viz. That the most righteous man hat is, sin's in every good work he doth. This is untrue: This Scripture speakes not of a just man in the highest degree of justice, but of a just man in an in ferior dispensation. Besides, that is a fallacious and Sophisticall collection: For whereas the Text saith, that there is not a just man of the lowest dispensation under the fear of God, but he may Sin; these Sophisters infer, that the just man doth sin in every good work he doth. Lastly, this is untrue; For Job was a just man and one who had not attained unto the highest degree of perfection; yet the Scripture testifies of him, that upon so great provocation, as the loss of all his goods, and all his children, he
yet sinned not, Job. 1.22. Yea, upon Satans inflicting exquisite cruelty upon him, we have the like testimony recorded of Job, Job. 2.10. This Scripture rather speakes of a possibility of sinning, then any actuall, much lesse of an habituall, sinning. 2. Another would have us note from hence, the imperfection of the Saints in this life. This is no good inference from hence, that the Saints are allwayes imperfect in this life, but onely while they are under the first dispensation. For we read 1. Cor. 2.8. That there were some perfect men among whom the Apostles spake wisdom. He had taught the Corinthians Christ and him cru∣cified; not that he had no doctrin more eminent than that is: but because they were capable of no greater mysteries; and there∣fore he fed them with Milk, 1 Cor. 3. those greater mysteries, which he calls wisdom, he spake among those which were perfect. If any except and say, that by perfect men, he means no other then such Christian men as the Corinthians were, to whom he wrote; surely he would not call those perfect men, whom in the next Chap∣ter he calls babes and carnal, that is, rude and imperfect. Besides if Christians at large, as the Corinthians here, were called perfect, then they who are not Christians should be called imperfect: But that's absurd; for no man can be said to be imperfect in any Art, Sci∣ence, or Profession, in whom nothing of it is begun; but they who are no Christians, in them Christianity is not yet begun; there∣fore they are not imperfect. 3. Another gathers from hence, that these words are a full testi∣mony of the imperfection of our inherent righteousness in this life. And that even justified persons come very short of that exact and perfect o∣bedience which the Law requireth. This likewise is a fallacious infe∣rence A dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter; because Solo∣mon writes thus of a just man as yet in the lowest dispensation; hence they gather, that this is true of all just men in this life. To this pur∣pose they bring Rom. 7.14. inferring thence, that even justified per∣sons come short of that exact and perfect obedience which the Law re∣quireth: whereas that Scripture is to be understood of the childe∣hood only of Christianity: whereas, if men look either to the Chap∣ter before, or that next following, Rom. 8. they may perceive, that a just man in his riper age at fuller growth hath the righteousness of the Law fulfilled in him, Rom. 8.2, 3, 4. that the Law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus our Lord hath made him free from the law of sin and death, &c. Unto all which, we may adde, that by the Earth, and upon the Earth, we are to understand the earthly condi∣tion of sin, &c. the unregenerate estate, Jer. 17.13. they that depart from thee shall be written in the earth. Col. 3. Mortifie your mem∣bers on the earth. And it is most true of these, that there is not one to be found among them that doth good and sinneth not. Obs. 1. The initial and inchoative Iustice and righteousness or
righteousnes under the first dispensation, is an inconsistent, an unsta∣ble unsetled righteousness. This was the common state of the Jewes in the time of the law, of which also Salomon speakes, 1. King. 8.46. 2. Chron. 6.36. and St. James, 3.2. and St. John, 1. Joh. 1.8. This imitable state was figured by Kadeshbarnea, the unsetled and unstable holynes of the childhood; wherein so many sinned, Num. 32.7.—11. Such a righteous man falls seaven times, saith Salomon, Prov. 24.16. viz. into afflictions, but he comes out of them again; as it is clear by the context, that Scripture is to be understood; so that it can be no ground for that which is com∣monly said, that the righteous man sinns seaven times a day. Whence the author of that song called the complaint of a sinner, took his groundless authority, as I have shewen elsewhere. Obs. 2. Take notice hence, that there are diverse degrees of righteousness, proportionable to the different dispensations of the Father, Son, and Spirit. There is a righteousness which we may call initial or that whereunto the new converts are turned, Dan. 12.3. John the Baptist came in this way of righteousness, Matth. 21.32. He that feareth God and worketh this righteousness is accepted of God, Acts 10.35. Thus Cornelius was a righteous man, Acts 10.22. 2. There is a justice or righteousness of faith in Jesus Christ, Rom. 5.1. 3. There is a fulfilling of all righteousness, when that which is per∣fect, cometh, according to 1 Cor. 13.10. Obs. 3. Hence then observe, how causelesly and without any ground, the pious endeavours of good men, are damped and blun∣ted by misunderstanding this and such like places of Scripture as this is; which speak not of righteous men at large, as if there were none upon the earth that so do good, that they do no evil. For that's not true; because the Scripture witnesses that some there are who do no iniquity, Psal. 119.1, 2, 3. Blessed are the undefiled,Psal. 119. v. 1, 2, 3. or rather the perfect, , &c. They also who do no iniquity, they walk in his wayes: and 106.3. Blessed are they that keep judgement, and do righteousness at all times. Such an one was Abra∣ham, Gen. 26.25. Isaac and Jacob. Such was Josiah, 2 Kings 23. Zachariah and Elizabeth, Luke 1. For if such there were not, were there no such righteous men upon earth, these and such like speeches were gratis dicta, spoken in vain. And such blessedness were affir∣med in vain, because none there are who are capable of it. How∣beit, this is not to be understood De toto vitae curriculo, of the whole course of life; for so, there is not a man, but he hath sinned, Christ alone excepted, Rom. 3. all have sinned, 1 John 1. ult. the last by which he explains ver. 8. But this is to be taken of the spiritual old age, wherein the Saints are flourishing and bring forth fruit, & shew that the Lord is righteous, Psal. 92.14, 15. For Abraham not conscious of sin, humbles himself from consideration of his earth∣ly mold, saith Chrysostom in Gen. 18.
Obs. 4. Hence then we may understand the facility, proneness, and easiness of our nature to commit sin: since even a just man under the fear of God, may possibly sometime turn out of the path of Gods Commandements, and fall short of his glory. Obs. 5. Hence we learn a broad difference between a just man, who, through weakness and ignorance, may sin; and such wicked men who do Wichen turn away voluntarily from the holy Comman∣dements, and wilfully commit sin. These are  workers of iniquity who are not known or acknowledged of God: The o∣ther who fall, through ignorance and weakness, and repent of it, ob∣tain mercy; and the strong and spiritual have a command to re∣store such as these are, Gal. 6.1. Obs. 6. Hence we have a ground and object of clemency and mercy towards the greatest part of men, who commonly proceed no further in the way of righteousness then the first dispensation of it under the fear of God, or at the furthest to a weak faith in Christ, and that mistaken. And therefore we ought, upon this con∣sideration, to be prone and ready to pardon and forgive injuries. To be easily reconciled unto our enimies. It's the very argument upon which we beg remission of our sinns. And upon which termes, the Lord forgives us our trespasses. Alas! Humanum est erra∣re, labi, decipi. A good man through weaknes and ignorance may sin, and may offend God and man. And let us take heed, least we, who conceive our selves more wise, more able, and under an higher dis∣pensation, least we also sin, Gal. 6.1. Considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Observe a difference between a just man in the first age, and a just man in the second, and much more a just man in the third, who is a perfect man. For in the second the young man is strong and over∣comes the evill one. And how much more doth he in the third? 1 Joh. 2. 1. This justly reproves those who, because the Scripture here saith, that a just man under the lowest dispensation possibly may sin; therefore they will sin; and say they must sin. Beloved! all those words which signify sinning, import such actions as a man would not willingly do; as errare, labi, decipi peccare, to erre, to slip, to fall, to miss the mark &c. 2. Those who with great rigor and severity, in correcting the errors and faults of men, rip up all their sin to the life and aggrevate all to the utmost; especially if he be not one of our opinion, and not Orthodox, as we think our selves to be. In such a case, men are apt to thunder out an Anathemata, denounce hell and damnation against such. But if he be of our side, O how indulgent we are, how patient towards him! then ala's we have all our failings. If a Land fowl, as a Hen fall into the water, O how long shall it be before it is dry? But if a Water fowl, as a Goose fall into the water,
she does but shake her tail, and she is presently dry again. And such difference we commonly put between the fals of others and those of our own party. If he differ from us in judgement, that's crime enough, to aggravate his least fault. But if he be one of our Geese, (all our Geese are Swans,) then we can easily impute righteous∣ness enough to him to save him, though he be Profundatus in peccato, drown'd in destruction and perdition. 3. This justly reproves the censoriousness of men against the yong Saints: They are wont to rayl at them in time of their ig∣norance and weakness, and set brands of infamy upon them; but can excuse their own gross and habitual crimes. Dat veniam corvis, vexat censura Columbus; Jam quoque Censorem vexat censura Catonem. The Crowes are pardon'd, and the Doves are blam'd. And now the Censor Cato's censured. But alas! what is this to me, that there are many degrees of Just men, many dispensations of justice or righteousness. I finde the Text my measure, that I can do no good but I must sin. Let not thy heart be troubled, saith the Lord Jesus, John 14.1. There is a degree of faith which may consist with doubting; such was that of Peter, Matth. 14.30. The boysterous wind endanger us, that we well nigh sink by despair. But thou believest in God the Father; be∣lieve also in Christ the Son. Faith in God without faith in Christ, cannot hinder the soul from sinking into despair. Therefore Jesus Christ is called our hope, 1 Tim. 1.1. And therefore till Christ comes, the children are, all their life time, subject to bondage and fear, Hebr. 2.15. Till that faith comes, we are under a School∣master, Gal. 3.24. Meantime he who is just, let him be just still. There are degrees of Justice and righteousness, as hath been shewen. And let us know, that it becomes us to fulfil all righte∣ousness, Matth. 3.15. And let us pray for that Just and Perfect One, who works all our works in us, Esay 26. that as he hath begun a good work in us, so that he will throughly perfect it () until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. Even so come Lord Jesus! Revel. 22.20.
Contrary Principles Mutual impediments.SER. 19. SERMON XIX. Gal. 5. ver. 17. The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit lusteth against the flesh, and these are contrary one to the other: so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. THere are in the holy Scriptures many , such as S. Peter said, were in his Brother Pauls Epistles, things bard to be understood. Which difficulty may arise, as from other causes, so more especially from 1. Either somewhat in the Scripture it self; 2. Or, from some defect in us. As for the Scripture it self, it is , 2 Tim. 3.16. of divine inspiration, and dictated unto the Pen-men of it, by the holy Ghost; and therefore while yet we are in the fall, there must be a great dis∣proportion between it and us. This obscurity is much encreased by mistakes and oversights in translation; as also by imposing upon the Scriptures, false glosses and mis-interpretations, as the Philistines stopt the Wells, Gen. 26. so that men cannot, as otherwise they might, with joy, draw wa∣ter of life, out of the Wells of Salvation. 2. The difficulty may proceed from some defect in us, as be∣ing yet unconverted and averse from God, and his wayes, according to that of Dan. 9.13. We have not turned from our iniquities, that we might understand the truth. And therefore S. Paul was sent to open mens eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, &c. Acts 26.18. And for this purpose, it is a good old prayer; I know no new one bet∣ter; and it may be ours, for advance of our present business; Lighten our darkness, we beseech thee O Lord! The Text in the Greek
speaks thus, ; which our Translators render, as I have showen; how truly, we shall then understand, when we finde, how unsuitable this Translation is to the will of God revealed in his Word. Obedience is that Mother-grace, Genetrix omnium virtutum, as Hierom calls it, that which brings forth all other vertues, that which sets the eye to see, the ear to hear, the heart to think, the memory to record, the mouth to speak, the foot to walk, the hand to work, the whole man to do that, and only that which is confor∣mable to the will of God. When such holy desires arise in the heart from the Spirit of God; then a contrary desire ariseth also from the flesh; according to what the Apostle saith, Rom. 7.21. When I will doe good, evill is present with me. And my Text among diverse other perverted Scriptures, is wont to be alleadged against obedience unto the will of God, so that this Mother-grace cannot bring forth the fruites of the spirit; because the children are come to the birth and there is no strength to bring forth. Before we come to the particular handling of these words, let us analyse them, or as much of them as will make up a com∣pleate sense; and thereby we shall see, what the words so read in our last Translation, will amount unto. The Apostle having propounded the law of neighbourly love, ver 14. which they transgressed, ver. 15. The Apostle ver. 16. propounds an expe∣dient for removal of it, an exhortation to walk in the spirit, which exhortation he enforces by this motive; If ye walk in the spirit, ye shall not fullfill the lusts of the flesh. This consequence he proves from the nature of Adverse contraries, which naturally expell one the other. For ver. 17. the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit lusts against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other. The effect of these contraries fighting one with the other, is here concluded, according to this translation, a downright contradiction to what the Apostle before had exhorted unto. He exhorted them to walk in the spirit, and told them, that so doing, they should not fullfill the lusts of the flesh. Which spirit and flesh, so contending, it comes to pass, that ye cannot do the things which ye would; that is, ye would walk in the spirit, that ye might not fullfill the lusts of the flesh; but this ye cannot do. Which yet he had exhorted them unto in the words before. Nor will the marginal reading [fulfill not] help this: For whether , be part of the exhortation, fulfill not; or a motive thereunto, ye shall not fulfill, the conclusion will be the same. The absurdity of this reasoning, will appear, if ye shall conceive a Commander in the war; to lead up his men, and exhort them to be valiant, and take a Fort; and promise them a great reward,
if they take it; as Caleb promised, that he, who should subdue Kiriath-Sepher, and take it, to him he would give Achsah his daughter to wife, Josh. 15.16. Yea suppose, that this Commander should adde threatnings, even death it self, in case this Fort were not taken by them; according to that, if ye walk after the flesh, ye shall die, Rom. 8.13. Yet now suppose that this Commander after all this exhortation and motives, should in the winding up of his speach, say expreslly; This Fort is impregnable, it's impossible to win it, ye cannot take it; Truly a man would think such a Comman∣der little other then a Fool, and his Soldiers no wiser, if they should storm the Fort, and hope to carry it upon no better rea∣sons than these are. Yet indeed the case is the same, if not worse. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; for the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts against the flesh, that ye cannot do the things that ye would. Wherefore, since it is most unreasonable to think, that the Apostle being taught by the Spirit of God, would reason so absurdly, let us en∣quire into the true meaning of the words; which cannot be done unless we render them otherwise; as thus: Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh: For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit: But the Spirit lusteth against the flesh (but these are contrary one to other) that ye may not do the things that ye would. According to the judgment of the best Critick, that I know, these words, (These are contrary the one to the other,) are to be put in a parenthesis, and then, from the lusting of the Spirit, will follow, that ye may not do the things of the flesh which ye would do. But what difference is there between this Translation and the other? 1. In our last Translation we have  a knowne note of diversity rendred, and, as known a Conjunction copulative: and these two render different kinds of Axioms, as all Logicians, yea, all who have common reason, may understand. The flesh lusts a∣gainst the Spirit; and the Spirit lusts against the flesh, that's a copu∣late. The flesh lusts against the Spirit; but the Spirit lusts against the flesh, that's a discret Axiom. 2. But there's a far greater difference between [cannot] as they render the words, and [may not,] as they ought to be turned. [Ye cannot] denies power and strength; ye [may not] leaves a possibility of doing what they would. For the Spirit so, and for this end lusteth against the flesh, , that ye may not do the things that ye would, according to the lusting of the flesh. And thus the Greek words ought to be rendred, and generally are so rendred by Pagnin, Castellio, Vulg. Lat. Vatablus, Beza, High and Low Duth, French, Italian, and Spanish Translations; yea, and by an antient English Manuscript; whereas all our printed English Translations turn it [cannot.] If any man think this a small diffe∣rence,
let him suspend his judgement till I speak of it in its due place. The Apostle ver. 16. propounds a Precept. In the Text we have 1. The difficulty of that precept; the flesh lusteth. 2. The possibility notwithstanding that difficulty. Ye may. Wherein we have these Axioms. 1. The flesh lusteth against the Spirit. 2. The Spirit lusteth against the flesh. 3. Tt is true, that the flesh lusteth against the Spirit; but the Spirit lusteth against the flesh. 4. (The flesh and the Spirit are contrary one to the other:) This is to be put in a Parenthesis. 5. The Spirit lusteth against the flesh, that we may not do the things of the flesh which we would do. 1. The flesh lusteth against the Spirit: Herein we must en∣quire; 1. What is meant by the flesh; and 2. The lusts of the flesh; and 3. What is meant by the Spirit. I will not trouble you with the manifold meaning of this word flesh. Only by the flesh, we are here to understand the old corrupt Adam; so what Rom. 6.6. our Apostle calls crucifying the old man, that in the same Apostles phrase, Gal. 5.24. is called crucifying the flesh with the af∣fections and lusts. 2. And what is lust, and what is it to lust? Con∣cupiscence or lust is the desire of sensitive delight; vain, foolish, and immoderate desires of the superiour appetite, the will; as am∣bitious desires of honours, curiosity, desire of knowledge falsely so called; so flesh is understood, Col. 2.18.23. and elsewhere. The word here used is ; which is from , from a power which comes upon the minde, whereby the soul is carryed out to what is desired. The lusting of the flesh therefore is not only that of the lower appetite which we call the concupiscible; but that also of the irascible is here to be under∣stood, as appears by comparing v. 15. If ye bite and devour one another, &c. Yea, the immoderate lusts of the superiour appetite are here also to be understood. Hence it is that Sects and Heresies are reckoned by the Apostle, Gal. 5.20. amongst the works of the flesh. Hence also it is that we read of carnal wisdom & wisdom of the flesh. The lusting of the flesh against the Spirit, what is it, but desiring what is contrary to the desires and lustings of the Spirit. The flesh desires things fleshly, which are contrary to the desires of the Spi∣rit, which are of things spiritual and heavenly. As by the flesh the old Adam is to be understood; so by the Spirit and its lusts, the lusts and wils of the new Adam the heavenly man, are here meant. The reason of this is from the mistake and seducing of the fan∣sie: For the fansie being part of the first Adam, flesh and blood, and informed with a living soul, and being sensual, earthly, and car∣nal, Rom. 8. and knowing no better thing then earthly objects,
things neer of kin unto it, and delightful unto sense, it easily draws the coucupiscence unto them; which howsoever according to origi∣nal rectitude, it propends to good, and that Bnum bonestum, the honest good, and is subject to the rational appetite, and so to right reason, as the Philosopehr teacheth, and right reason to the Law of God; yet having declined from that first integrity, unto the sensible, present, and delightful good, which most-what is disjoyn'd from the true and honest good, becomes more and more prone to evil; and drawes to it, the rational appetite, the will, yea the reason it self, the , the Rudder of the soul; as he that's sinking, will lay hold, though on his best friends, and draw them into the same pit of destruction. And so the fleshly minde resists and reasons against the Spirit; as Ahitophel fallen off to Absalom, they both rebel against their Lord David. Obs. 1. Here is an evident argument and proof of mans fall. Here is opposition made against the Spirit of God. Surely Gods work was perfect: and all that he made, was very good, Gen. 1. And therefore that excellent work, man cannot be said to come thus imperfect out of Gods hand. No, he was made upright, but he had a fall, as ye read, 2 Sam. 4.4. that Mephibosheth fell out of his Nurses armes, and be came lame, (poor man;) of both his feet. What is the Nurse but providence, which supported the man and bare him in hir armes of mercy and judgment, comands and prohebitions, Gen. 2. But out of her armes the man fell, and is lame on both his feet, his  his concupiscible and irascible affections, which are the feet which carry the soul whithersoever it goes. So that to the fallen man belongs shame and confusion of face, that is, word for word, Mephibosheth. Yea, even the Philosopher himself could take notice of this, from the irregular motions in man, that man was become otherwise then formerly he had been. Obs. 2. Hence it appeares, that even in those who have the Spirit of God in some measure, there are motions contrary to the Spirit. I say, in some measure; Wisdom 7.27. Thus the Galathians had received the Spirit, Gal. 3.2. Proportionably to their age, which was the childhood, Gal. 4.19. In whom yet the flesh lusted against the Spirit. And the Corinthians had received the Spirit, by which they were sanctified, 1 Cor. 1.2. Yet was their age and growth no more then that of the childhood, they were babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1. And these are said to be carnall, and to walk , according to the first Adam or the old man, ver. 3. Obs. 3 The lusts of the flesh are first; and they first appeare in the man, Primum animale, dein spirituale. First that which is anima∣lish; then that which is spiritual. 1 Cor. 15. 4 Observe the reason of that impetuousnes and violence of passions wherewithall the carnall man is lead or driven; the flesh
lusteth against the Spirit; Esau thinks he shall die, if he have not his Mess of Pottage, Gen. 25. 5. Observe how poor and beggerly the carnall man is, how he wants all temporall things. For although he has many things, yet he cannot be said to be rich: for he is not rich who possesseth many things, but he who wanteth not. But the earthly carnal man is allwayes needy, alwayes of an having disposition, alwayes lust∣ing. 6 Hence note the deplorable condition of all those who have not the Spirit of God, to give check, and curb to their exorbitant and unruly affections and lusts. Axiom 2. The Spirit lusts against the flesh. What Spirit is here to be understood? Surely according to the difference of men, answer is here to be made. For that Spirit of the natural man that is in him, lusts against the flesh and the lusts of it; whence it is, that, by nature he does the things of the law, Rom. 2. But the Apo∣stle wrote here unto the Galathians, who had received the Spirit of God in some measure as appeares, Gal. 3.2. The reason is, that it may give check to the natural motions. This we may under∣stand by the story, that Jacob took Esau by the heel. Jacob is a figure of the heavenly man; Esau or Edom, of the earthly man: Now such is the goodness of the heavenly man; He suffers not the earthly to break forth, and to have his whole liberty to do what he lists; or, to have his full swinge; He struggles with him before, and though he break out, yet he apprehends him and layes hold on him, and stayes him in his carreer; he limits his proceedings; he binds him with cords of the law, Psal. 2. And when he breakes them, and casts them from him, he so hedges him in with one impediment or other, that he cannot freely pursue his lusts. Hos. 2.5.6.7. When notwithstanding he breaks the hedg, and committes a trespass, and builds up himself with strong reasonings, 2 Cor. 10. Edom shall build, saith the Lord, but I will destroy, Malach. 1.4. So that he who sins freely and without remorse or cheek, hath bro∣ken through manifold lets and hindrances, hath broken the hedg of providence about him and is a great trespasser. 3. The flesh indeed lusteth against the Spirit; but the Spirit lusteth against the flesh; Such is the goodness of God unto men; He hath not left us to be governed by our carnal appetites. Wherefore take heed that we be not deceived with the error of the wicked, who, contrary to the lusting of the Spirit, follow the lusts of their flesh, and for a short and momentary seeming present good, part with the incorruptible and eternal good. 4. These are contrary the one to the other. Here is than a cruel and long-lasting inward war. The parties contending Satan the father of lies, the son of perdition, and the Spirit of error, against
the God and father of Jesus Christ, the true God, the Son the Saviour, and the Spirit of truth. Here are flesh and it's lusts con∣tending against the Spirit and the will of God. Here is engaged darkness against light, death against life. Reason against reason, will against will. It is , a war wherein the parties can never be reconciled: one must be subdued and overcome. But what do they quarrel for? , not for a toy or trifle; no, the Harlot Iniquity hunts for the pretious soul; the business concerns life, thy life, yea, the eternal life, the life of God. This discovers a most dangerous mistake, and that in a busi∣ness of the greatest moment in the World; and yet (which is most of all to be lamented) daily, and almost universally pra∣ctised. The lucts of the flesh are our deadly enemies; yet most men account them their dearest friends. The wills and lustings of the Spi∣rit are indeed our nearest friends; yet are these accounted by most men, their greatest enemies. The man carries his most mali∣tious enemies and his best friends about him; his sinful flesh with the lusts of it, the Evil one, the Boutefeu and Incendiary who blows the fire of concupiscence to kindle his lusts and appetites in the sinful flesh. He has also Christ and his Spirit revealing and requi∣ring and enabling to do the will of God. These adverse contraries so diametrically opposite one to other, cannot but act one against the other. Exod. 2. Moses grown great smote the Egyptian; the next day Moses reproved the Hebrew that did his brother wrong. But do we look for these things without us? These things are or may be daily acted in us. There is an old tradition, that one of the Thieves crucified with our Lord, was an Egyptian, a black Thief; this was the Evil Thief; the other an Edomite, a red Thief, whom they call the good Thief. The former, the black Thief, the Egyptian, the sin, perished; the Edomite, the first man of the Earth, was saved. These things works the mortifying spirit of the Lord Jesus, Rom. 8.13. This justly reproves those who follow their own carnal lusts, a∣gainst the dictates of their own reason which perswades the con∣trary; like her who said, Video meliora proboque deteriora sequor—Reuben, the son of vision, saw the Holy Land, and approved it that it was good; yet he chose to live on this side Jordan; he was taken with Id bruti, that was good for cattle, Numb. 32. What can companions of Fools hope, or such as follow their foolish lusts, but destruction? Prov. 13.20. Not only the Fools, but also the compa∣nion of Fools shall be destroyed. 5. The Spirit lusteth against the flesh, that we may not do the things of the flesh which otherwise we would do. In these words lies the principal difference between the two Translations. And
that especially in two things: 1. Whether [cannot] or [may not] be the better translation. 2. What's here meant by the things that we would do. As to the first, we must know, that there is no Verb in the Greek Text here, that answers to cannot or may not; but that is only a signe of a Mood in our English tongue, as all learned in the Greek tongue easily understand; . Secondly, what are the things that we would do? where the Text saith, The Spirit lusteth against the flesh, that ye cannot or may not do the things that ye would. Surely either both the things which both flesh and Spirit lust for; or, some one of them. If both the things which the flesh and Spirit lust for, then, by rea∣son of the contrarietys of flesh and Spirit, a man comes off hardly in the performing the lusts either of the flesh or of the Spirit. He cannot or may not freely do the things that he would, which the flesh lusts for, because the Spirit lusts against the flesh. And he cannot freely do the things that he would, which the Spirit lusts for; be∣cause the flesh lusts against the Spirit. And so Erasmus reasons in his Paraphrase. Others, as the Translators of the French Bible, in their Marginal Gloss, understand here spiritual things, which the Spirit lusteth for: And so a man cannot or may not do the things that he would, which the Spirit lusts for; because the flesh lusts a∣gainst the Spirit. The former of these is the more probable; but that neither of these can be here meant, will appear by two rea∣sons. 1. Both these interpretations overthrow the Apostles ex∣hortation; which is this; Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh. Now, if neither of the lusts of the flesh, nor of the Spirit can be done; the Apostle contradicteth his own exhor∣tation, to walk in the Spirit; this false gloss saith, it cannot be done. 2. A second reason may be taken from the scope, intention, and purpose of the Apostle, who having exhorted us to walk in the Spirit, and promised that thereby we should not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; he moves a doubt; The flesh lusts against the Spirit, which doubt he presently removes saying, but the Spirit lusts against the flesh, that ye may not do the things that ye would. But that the French Glossaries (and all who follow them, who are not a few,) are here quite out, may appear, if ye shall consider, what the things that ye would, are, according to that Gloss, and read the text cannot, as Ours do. The things that ye would, according to that Gloss, are spiritual things. Mark then what a sense these, laid together, will produce. The flesh lusts against the Spirit; but the Spirit lusts against the flesh, that ye cannot do the things (spiritual things, say they) which ye would do. What a derogation is this from the Spirit of God, that the same Spirit lusting against the flesh, should make us that we can∣not do the spiritual things that we would? Which is the very
meaning of the words if so understood; how absurd, let the god∣ly learned judg. 2. By the things that ye would, must here be understood, the things which the flesh lusts after, as may hence appear to the judicious reader, because this clause, [That ye may not do the things that ye would,] is joyned to the lusting of the Spirit: which therefore lusts, , that ye may not do the things that ye would, viz, which the flesh lusts to do. So that hence its clear, what are here the things that we would. What else but the lusts of the flesh? Which if we understand here, the words will suit exceeding well with the Apostles exhortation; walk in the Spirit and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh: For the flesh, tis true, lusts against the Spirit; But the Spirit lusts against the flesh, that ye may not do the things of the flesh which ye would do. Piscator in his Analyse of the Text is inforced by the Apostles reasoning, upon this sense; Care & spiritus inter se è regiane adversantur; quo fit, ut qui secundum spiri∣tum vivit, is non possit vivere secundum carnem. The flesh and Spirit are contrary one against the other, whence it comes to passe that he who lives according to the Spirit, he cannot live according to the flesh. Though he make no good use of this his observati∣on. Obj. But some man will say, are not, may not, and cannot, one and the same thing? Even children can tell us, that they are both signes of the potentiall mood. I answer they are so. Yet do they not signify one and the same thing. For [Cannot] denyes Potentia, strength and abillity to do any thing. [May not,] denyes Potestas, authoritie to do it. If any shall question this distinction, he may easely be satisfied out of the German tongue, whence we have both these words, as from the principal Mother of our language; for with them Ich kan, is Possum, habeo potentiam, I can; Ich mag, is licet mihi, habeo potestatem; I have power or authority. Now who knowes not, that these are two disparate principles of action, which may be separated one from other? As in the Greek,  and . David, because a king, had the later; but the sons of Zerviah had the former; as David saith, the sonns of Serviah are too strong for me. There is in us a proneness & a strong inclination to do the lusts of the flesh. They are things that we would do. But though there be a proness and strong inclination to do the lusts of the flesh, yet there is no necessity of doing them; why? The Spirit lusts a∣gainst the flesh. Yea, there is in man a power untill, by customary consent unto his lusts, he have enfeebled it. Even the spirituall children such as the Galatians were, Gal. 4.19. They may not do the works of the flesh which they would do; they may begin to overcome and subdue the lusts of the flesh by the Spirit, Judg. 13.25. But such abstinence, and such conquest is yet with much difficulty; They
are yet but children; and the flesh yet lusts against the Spirit. Walk in the Spirit. This is the Apostles exhortation, ver. 16. To walke in the Spirit, is to live in the Spirit; walking is a pro∣gressive motion a proceeding from vertue to vertue. If thus we do, we shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. He saith not, ye shall not have them for they will be troublesom. But if ye walk in the Spirit, ye shall not fulfill the lusts, by consenting to them. For if we meet them with dissent, we fulfill them not; they are none of ours. If we consent unto them, do we consider, whose work we do? Not the work of our God, not our own work. To do the lusts of the flesh, is to do the devills work, Joh. 8. And they who do his work, he will be sure to pay them their wages. The very best issue and event, that the fulfilling of our lusts, possibly can have, is repentance; and that's Gods gift whom we offend, 2 Tim. 2. How easely might a man disswade any from having to do with such or such a man, if he should assure him, that whomsoever he deals withall he deceaues him; Every man would be so wary so shy of him, as to take heed of such a one. And does not the wisdom of God give us warning of that spiritual harlot, how treacherous, how subtill, how false she is? Prov. 7. Does not the same wisdom tell us that the lusts of the old man are deceitfull and seducing? Ephes. 4. How can we walk in the Spirit, unless we have the Spirit, wherein we should walk? How can we walk in the Spirit, unless the Spirit of the Lord be in us, to teach us the way wherei we should walk? Many signes may discover this unto us, whether the Spirit of God be in us, or not. I shall name one or too, where the Spirit of the Lord is, its fruitfull; it is an active Spirit; it brings forth the fruit of the Spirit, love, joy, peace, &c. Gal. 5.22. Now what fruits are brought forth in thee, where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is libertie, 2 Cor. 3.17. That's it we long for; that's it we boast of. But here is the question; what liberty it is, we have; whether it be liberty from thraldom and captivitie under sin and Satan, and compulsion of the law; and a power, with∣out hindrance, freely to do the Lords will: or whether it be a licence to do what we list; a liberty to act and do the lusts of the flesh. We read of two towns built by Sheerah the daughter of Ephraim, Beth-horon the nether and the upper. These towns she built, when it went ill with hir fathers house, 1 Chron. 23.24. Then it goes evill with Ephraim, when we are fruitfull (so Ephraim signifies) in evill workes. Then Ephraim calls his son Beriah that is in evill. His daughter Sheerah signifies flesh; And she builds Beth-horon the neither; First; the house of liberty according to the flesh. Then Sheerah buildes Beth-horon the upper, that is, she promiseth the glorious liberty of the sons of God, while yet the flesh is a servant
to corruption, 2 Pet. 2.19. And these, I fear, are the false free∣doms whereof we boast; which Sheerah the flesh with hir evill a∣ffections and lusts buildeth. But Solomon, 2 Cron. 8.5. Is recorded to have built Beth-horon the upper and Beth-horon the neither. First the upper and then the nether. This is the work of the true Salomon even Christ our peace, Ephes. 2.14. And that's Saelomon and the Prince of peace. He gives the true liberty, John 8.36. both to the upper and the nether Beth-horon; For if the Son make you free, then are ye free indeed. He builds the upper Beth-horon, even the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, in the right injoyment of spirituall and heavenly things; and the nether Beth-horen, a liberty for the right use of things below. These are said to be fenced Cities, with walls, gates, and bars. This is the work of the true Solomon who fenceth the true liberty with the fortress and safeguard of his Commandements, Psal. 119.45. The upper Beth-horon must be fenced lest it prove false and vain, without a foundation, like a Castle in the air; the nether, lest it prove exorbitant,Gal. 5. v. 13. and vanish into lasciviousness and looseness of life. Brethren! ye are called to liberty, only not to liberty for an occa∣sion to the flesh; but let us pray to the Lord for his holy Spirit, that Spirit of liberty, which may lust again the flesh, and give check thereunto; which may teach us the way of the Lord, that we may walk, not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; which may renew us in the spirit of our minde; which may mortifie in us the deeds of the body; which may lead us into all truth, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Some Saints not without Sin for a season.SER. 19. SERMON XX. 1 John 1. ver. 8. If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. THe Mountain of the Lords house, in these last dayes, is scituate in the top of the Mountains, Esay 2.2. even that blessed state; whereunto S. John, together with his fellow Apostles, having attained, he doth not, as it is said of another, Ridet anhelantes alta ad fastigia — he derides not those who labour up the hill: O no; but he declares, whither he and they had as∣cended, and invites us all to the participation and communicati∣on of the same bliss and happiness with them, v. 1.—4. For the eminent Saints of God are in an , a state above the envie of others; and wherein they do not envie others that good which they enjoy, but call them to share with them in it, as the first voice which S. John heard out of heaven, was, come up hither, Rev. 4.1. and the Spirit and the Bride say, come. But the Apostle forewarns us, that if we hope for fellowship with the Lord, we should be such, as he is: now He is light, and in him is no darkness at all. And therefore he who hath hope of communion with him, purifies himself, as God is pure; 1 John 3.3. This Declaration premised, the Apostle foresaw, that three Objections would be made against his invitation. 1. That it was possible they might have communion with God, yet want holiness. To this he answers, v. 5, 6, 7. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all; if we say we have fellowship with him, &c.
2.SER. 20. A second Objection is; They had no sin; and therefore they had communion with God already. This Objection he answers, v. 8, 9, 10. If we say we have no sin, &c. 3. The third and last Objection is; That they cannot choose but they must sin. That the Apostle answers in the second Chap∣ter, v. 1, 2, 3. These things I write unto you, that ye sin not. If any man sins, &c. where the Apostle declares, of what spiritual age, growth, and statute, they were, and are to whom he wrote, , little children. The result of all this, is; That, would we hear the living Word, which was from the beginning; would we see it with our eyes; would we look upon it; would we handle it with our hands; would we have such experimental knowledge of it; then must we not walk in darkness. So that ye perceive, my Text is part of our Apostles answer to the second Objection. They had no sin, and therefore they had communion with God already. Nay, saith S. John, If we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Wherein we have 1. A supposition of a false Position that some said, they had no sin. 2. A reason of that false Position, which is, self-deceipt; want of truth. These parts we may resolve into these Axioms. 1. That some little children say they have no sin. 2. They who so say, deceive themselves. 3. They who so say, have not the truth in them. 1. In the first of these, we must enquire, 1. What sin is, and what here meant. 2. What it is to have, or not to have sin. 3. Who are meant by [we] in the Text. If we say, we have no sin, &c. 1. Sin is described by our Apostle, Chap. 3.4. , the transgression of the Law. More fully, Dictum, factum, Concupitum contra legem Dei, what ever is spoken, done, or desired against the Law of God. But what special sin this is which is here to be understood, expositors agree not among themselves. For some understand 1. Original sin only; so Cajetan. 2. Others under∣stand actual sin; but neither herein do they agree: for some will have here to be meant, mortal sin; so Lyra; others venial only; so Hugo Card. But if it be sin in its own nature, its mortal, Rom. 6, 23. The wages of sin, is death. Others will have not only the sin, but the guilt also and punishment of sin, here to be understood. So A∣quinas. Lastly, others will have concupiscence to be meant here, which is called according to the Apostle Peccatum peccans, Rom. 7.13.17. so S. Augustine. Where ever there is such difference in opinion, its very likely the truth is hid, and not certainly known. And truly they have much ado to make any of these agree with the business in hand. 2. What is it to have no sin? what else but either to deny that they have committed sin, as our Apostle varies the phrase, ver. 10.
If we say, we have not sinned. Or to deny that they are the cause of the sin committed; but either God himself, that he made them so, or that he is the Author of sin; a vain imagination, Psal. 21.11. or they lay the blame upon nature: but falso de natura sua conque∣ritur humanum genus, mankinde falsely complains of their nature, saith one of the Antients. Or, upon the Devil; but he can make no man to sin, unless he be willing of himself. Or, upon the Heavens; but they act not upon the soul or will, which is the ori∣ginal of sin. But almost all make Adam the Archplagiary, who hath brought us all into bondage. If this were true, how could the Apostle charge the Romans, that they had yielded their members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity? Rom. 6.19. It remains there∣fore that the man hath none to accuse of his sin, but himself. 3. But the main doubt is yet behinde, who are here to be un∣derstood by [we] in the Text: Or first rather, who are not here to be understood? surely not the Apostle S. John, nor his fellow Apostles. Why? They saw God and Christ, v. 1.3. which without holiness cannot be, Hebr. 12.14. Yea, which cannot be without purity of heart, Matth. 5.8. For sin and darkness blindes the eyes of sinners, and disobedient men. Therefore had S. John and his fellow Apostles been of this number, who are here comprehen∣ded under [we] in the text, they had not seen God, as he saith expresly, they had. 2. S. John and his fellow Apostles, had fel∣lowship with God and Christ; which they who sin, cannot have; For what communion hath light with darkness? 2 Cor. 6.14. Yea, this he himself disclaims, v. 6. If we say, we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lye, and do not the truth. 3. As he is, so are we in this world, saith S. John of himself and fellow Apostles, 1 John 4.17. But assuredly God is  without all sinne; and therefore they by, and through him. 4. But can it be more plain, you'l say? S. John saith, If we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, &c. Take the words in their latitude; yet they take not away the possibility of not sinning. But come we to enquire, who are here meant by [we] when the Apo∣stle saith, if we say, we have no sin, &c. The speech is directed expresly , to the little children, 1 John 2.1. But if we say so, saith S. John, who had communion with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. It is true; But [we] is taken sometimes Colle∣ctivè, as including all and every one; sometime Hortativè, with exception of some, according to that figure, which the Rhetorici∣ans call : As when he who teacheth, reproves, exhorts, &c. puts himself into the number of those whom he teaches, reproves, exhorts, &c. And so it is taken here. Is it not ordinary for Ma∣sters of families, Tutours, or other Governours, to speak thus to those under their charge, we must leave off this drunkenness, this gluttony, this idleness, &c. though the Governours them∣selves be not guilty of any of these sins?
It is true, you'l say; But does the Scripture speak so? you shall judge; What think you of S. James? Chap. 3.9. With the tongue, saith he, we bless God; and therewithal curse we men. What think you? Did S. James an Apostle of singular and emi∣nent piety, did he curse men? If ye doubt of S. James, what think you of Nehemiah? His example, I doubt not, will satisfie any reasonable man, Nehem. 5.10. I pray you, saith he, let us leave off this usury. Did Nehemiah think you, burden the poor people with usury? Will you hear him speak for himself, v. 7.8. I was very angry when I heard the peoples cry and their words,Nehem. 5. v. 7. and I thought in my minde, (or, my heart took counsel in me) and I rebuked the Princes, &c. And I said, we according to our ability, have redeemed our brethren the Jewes, which were sold unto the Heathen; & will you sell them again? I pray you, saith he, let us leave off this usury, or remit this burden. Nehemiah useth the same figure, Chap. 13.23.—27. But cannot this speech be true of S. John and his fellow Apostles, in any sense? Yes, no doubt, in some sense it may be spoken truly by S. John and all the holy Apostles, and most eminent Saints of God, that if they say they have no sin, they deceive themselves, &c. when we understand [having sin] largely. For there is no doubt, but S. John and the rest of the holy Apostles and best Saints of God, had sinned some∣time in the whole course of their life. For the Apostle speaks gene∣rally, , All have sinned and are come short of the glo∣ry of God, Rom. 3.23. Nor do I doubt, but the words may so be here understood: And therefore what he saith in the text, If we say, we have no sin, &c. he varies, and explains what he means, v. 10. if we say, we have not sinned, we make him a lyar, &c. But to say, as some have done, that the most holy men and women that ever were or are, sin in every thing they do, or think, or speak, and that daily and hourly, is an assertion most false and ridiculous, and most derogatory from the power of Gods holy Spirit in them; nor can it be proved by any divine testimony in the holy Word of God. It were a strange madness that admitted of no Lucidū inter vallū. A strange sinful life, and that in the Saints of God, that in no part of time they shall be without sin. How then, I marvail, do they come to be Saints? Sure I am, its said of Job, in all this Job sinned not; and again, in all this Job sinned not, &c. To say nothing of Abra∣ham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, David, Josiah, Zachary, and Elizabeth, &c. What reason is there that almost universally, both the antient and later Writers, out of this place especially, plead, in good ear∣nest, for sin, and say, that it is impossible, but that we must have sin. Yea, there is a Canon in Concilio Milevitano, that concludes down-right from this place, That we must have sin. Yea, and whereas Tertullian, and after him, Carthusian, understand the place of venial sin, Lyra will have it to be understood of mortal
sin also. Yea, S. Austin will have the place understood of virgins and those who live the most blameless life, yea, of all Christians. Bona∣venture saith that no man knowes, that he has no sin, but by the revelation of Gods Spirit. I will not doubt but many of these were pious, learned and good men; insomuch as Alexander Hales said of his Scholar Bona∣venture, Profectò puto in Domino Boneventura, Adamum non peccasse. I think that Adam sinned not in Master Bonaventure. Nor do I doubt, but that they all, or the most of them fought the good fight of faith. But I doubt whether many of them had laid hold upon the eternal life, so far as to have attained unto the dispensation of the Spirit. And therefore we may beleive, that they speake, many of them their own experiences, and found daily temptations from without, and corruptions within. That which the Philosopher spake touching the authorities of others brought against him, give me leave once more to use his words, . Though all these be my friends, its an holy thing to honour the truth be∣fore them. That we may the better understand this, we must know, that sin against God, is considerable according to the three dispensa∣sions of the Father, Son, and Spirit. As to the first of these; Man by his fall, is become far estranged from his God, deeply revol∣ted, and at a great distance from him. For so God is a Spirit and spiritually minded, and opposite unto man, who is flesh and blood, and fleshly and ungodly minded. And man, on his part, would ne∣ver return, or be reconciled unto God, did not the Lord extend mercy, love, and goodness, unto the fallen man; were he not in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. did he not allure and draw him to himself, Joh. 6.44. When therefore God the father, by his law (so called, Psal. 40.8.) raised up in the fallen man, and testifying against him,Psal. 78.5, Psal. 78.5. corrects him, informes, and instructs him to amendment of life; and man meantime neglects, and respects and opposeth this attraction and drawing of the Father; and knowes not, or duly considers not, that this goodness of God eads him to repentance, Rom. 2.4. This is the sin against the Father, which, upon repentance, at the teaching of John, is forgiven unto men. But when now we are by the discipline of the Father brought unto the Son, and look on him whom we have pierced, who hath suffered for our sins, the death of the Cross; and he now begins to arm us with the same minde, we are yet in great ignorance and weakness, as 1 Cor. 2.3. and when he drawes us, we draw back; when he would, we will not. The contention is long between the house of David and the house of Saul. In many things we offend all. Nor can we say, that we have no sin, until the Spirit be powred
from on high; until we be born from the dead; until death be swal∣lowed up in victory; until we have fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. Of this progress, very much might be spoken, which I reserve for a fit opportunity, if the Lord shall give it. Meantime a few words are enough to the wise. Whereas therefore little notice hath been taken, and in these dayes much less, of the three dispensations and states of men in the Father, Son, and Spirit; that there is a sin against the Father, and against the Son; those children of the Father, who have their sins forgiven them through his Name; and are now brought unto the Son, and grown so strong in him, that they overcome the evil one; these at length attain to the old age in the Spirit, and experi∣mentally know him who is from the beginning. This is that state , that is without sin. Such an estate is possible and attainable through the grace of God, and his holy Spirit, that men may be without sin. All belie∣vers, yea, even they who dissent and agree not unto this truth, yet by consequence even they themselves confess it. For who is there that does not acknowledge, that communion and fellowship with God and Christ is possible? which yet cannot be, while men walk in dark∣ness. Do not all agree, that its possible we may be partakers of the divine nature? We have the promise of God for it, 2 Pet. 1.4. which yet cannot be until we have escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust. Do not all the faithful believe this, that they are in Chrict, and Christ in them. Otherwise they are re∣probates, saith S. Paul, 2 Cor. 13.5. Now he who saith he abides in him, ought himself so to walk, even as he walked, 1 John 2.6. and his walking was without sin. Do not all believers hope to inherit eternal life? This is put upon this condition, if ye, by the Spirit, shall mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Rom. 8.13. Is not the Lord Jesus Christ our example for this very end, 1 Pet. 2.20, 21. They therefore are much to blame, who abuse this Scripture, which S. John applyes to little children in Christ, 1 John 2.1. and extend it even unto all Christians, in all their spiritual ages. And whereas the Apostle makes use of it, to express presumption, there are who abuse it to harden men and make them despair even to be saved from their sins. Its a Scripture almost in every mans mouth, as frequently used or abused rather, as any, except that which is indeed no part of holy Scripture, That the most righteous man that is, sins seven times a day. They mean, Prov. 24.16. which we are taught to sing, in the Complaint of a sinner, and tell the God of truth an untruth. For in the place named, there is no mention of falling into sin, but into misery and affliction, and that not seven times a day, but only seven times; and what is that to this purpose?
O beloved! How much better were it to enure our selves to such Scriptures in our discourse one with another, as might en∣courage and hearten us toward the subduing of our sins? many such Scriptures there are in this Epistle. These things I write unto you, little children, that ye sin not, He that saith he abideth in him, ought himself so to walk, as he walked, 1 John 2.6. He that hath this hope, pu∣rifies himself, 1 John 3.3. Faith is the victory that overcomes the world; and many the like. Thus men are by little and little drawn out of the kingdom of darkness, into the light of life; whereas such speeches as these, In many things we offend all, If we say we have no sin, &c. Though true, if rightly used, they plunge men, more and more in darkness, insomuch that they beleive not that they can come out of darkness, Job. 15.22. Come we to the Second Point; Their Reason, who so say, They who say, they have no sin, deceive themselves. The word we turn deceive, is , which properly signifies to seduce and lead out of the way. They who are thus lead out of the way, de∣ceive themselves many wayes. 1. By the deceitfullness of sin, Hebr. 3.13. When sin and vice hath got on an habit of vertue and good∣ness, by deceitfull lust, Ephes. 4.22. When they obtrude themselves upon us, as if they were naturall unto us. But because these are so grosse, that they cannot deceive all, the grand impostor covers them with appearances of righteousness, as, 1. By sole and onely hearing and not doing. 2. By doing and not beleiving. 3. By be∣leiving and not obeying. 4. By obeying but not to the end. 5. By a will, (or half will) and not the deed. 1. By sole and onely hearing and not doing. For thus the sole hearers deceive themselves, saith S. James, Be doers of the word, and not hearers onely deceiving your owne selves, Jam, 1.22. And self-deceit, in a matter of so great importance, is a great deceit. For not the hearers of the law, are just before God, but the doers of the law, shall be justified, Rom. 2.13. Thus, Act. 8.9. Simon the Sorcerer bewitched the people of Samaria. And the like Simon, that is, Hearing bewitches the people of this City and Nation, while they obey not the truth, Gal. 3.1. 2. By doing and not believing. Thus the Jew going about to establish his own righteousness, hath not submitted himself to the righeousness of God: For Christ is the end of the law for righteous∣ness, to every one that believeth, Rom. 10.3.4. Thus the Phari∣sees justified themselves by the works of the law without faith in Jesus Christ. But S. Paul and S. James are solidly reconciled, if the judicious Reader well consider; (and it is worth his con∣sideration,) what S. Paul saith, which our Translators have not truely rendred in these words, knowing that a man is not Justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, Gal. 2.16. Whereas the words are truely to be turned thus. A
man is not justified by the works of the law, , si non, or, nisi, unless by the faith of Jesus Christ. All other reconcilia∣tion is unsatisfactory. 3. They who say, they have no sin, deceive themselves by be∣lieving and not obeying; as if an idle, lazy faith could save us from our sins. Why? because they believe, that Christ has died for them, and suffered for them; and that the Father hath accepted Christs righteousness for theirs; so that now they have no sin at all. Surely, to believe that God accepts Christs sufferings and death for ours, without our conformable sufferings and death, is to believe a lye. For if we die with him, we believe that we shall live with him, Rom. 6.8. And, if we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him, Rom. 8.17. 4. They who say, they have no sin, deceive themselves by obeying, but not continuing in their obedience. They that believe, shall be saved; that is, they who continue in the faith to the end, the same shall be saved, Rom. 2. They who by patient continuance in well doing, &c. They who trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion; that is, con∣tinue in the faith, not for a day or two. Thus we are kept in that happy estate, Prov. 28.14. of fearing alwayes: whereas that false position, Once a Saint and alwayes a Saint renders men secure, so that they perfect not holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. nor work out their own salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. 5. They who say, they have no sin, deceive themselves by a good will, or a pretence of a good will, instead of the deed. It is true, that God accepts the will for the deed, namely, when the deed can∣not be done. For it may so come to pass, that a believer, upon his first act of faith elicited, may be suddenly surprized and taken away, before he can compleat his will by being obedient, and do∣ing the deed. I will not question the possibility of this hypothesies; because I dare not shorten his arm, with whom all things are possi∣ble; nor dare I straiten his bowels, whose mercies are over all his works. So that I believe, the good God would accept of such a good will for the deed it self, and esteem of such a believer, accord∣ing to what he hath, not according to what he hath not. Why? because such an one virtually harbours in his heart a full purpose of well do∣ing, if God afford him opportunity so to do. For completa voluntas pro facto aestimatur, a compleat will is accounted for the deed. Which cannot be true of a velleity while men neglect their pre∣tious opportunities. The reason of all this, is self-love which flatters men into a good opinion of themselves. This self-love blindes them that they discern not their own self-deceit, and so become such as are fit to be deceived by the grand Impostor, being disposed there∣unto by the deceitfuluess of sin, 2 Thess. 2.10.
Obs. 1. Hence it appears, that, although there he manifold Seducers and deceivers, yet the most dangerous deceiver, without which we cannot be deceived, is every mans own self. Obs. 2. The most dangerous deceit of all other, is, for a man to walk in darkness; yet to imagine himself to have fellowship with the light; To have sin, yet to flatter himself, that he hath none. The onely way to be undeceived, is to beleive and obey unto the end. The Apostle gives this counsell to the spiritual little children subject to be deceived, 1 Joh. 3.7. Little children let no man de∣ceive you: he that doth righteousness, is righteous, as he is righte∣ous. Let us suffer our selves to be undeceived, by those who would lead us into the way of truth. Account not them Seducers, who would indeed undeceive us. As deceivers, yet true, 2 Cor. 6.8. So the A∣postles were accounted; yea, such they thought Christ him∣self the truth it self to be, Matth. 27.63. Yea that he was the most notorious of all others, , that deceiver: Yea, they fear, least God himself the essential truth should deceive them, when the divine testimonies out of his express word are alleaged unto them. Yet the same men with full consent, credit and yield themselves to be seduced and deceived by the lusts of errour. O that men could so far suspect themselves, as to think it possible for them to be decieved, and that the truth may not be in them! Axiom 3. If we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. What is here meant by truth? Thy Law is the truth, Psal. 119.142. By the Law, is the knowledge of sin. That discovers, re∣proves, corrects, and chastens us for our sins. That brings us to acknow∣ledgement and confession of our sins, as in the next verse. And there∣fore if we say, we have no sin, its evident, that the Law, that Truth which discovers, reproves, and chastens sin, and moves us to con∣fess sin, that Truth is not in us. I have shewen hitherto. 1. Of whom these worde were not properly spoken. 2. Were figuratively spoken. 3. Of whom they were truly spoken. They were not properly spoken of S. John, or his fellow Apo∣stles, as I have proved by reasons, I think, demonstrative they were spoken figuratively by a , they were spoken to the spiritual little children, who, no doubt, are principally here meant. But there is no divine birth so much opposed as this, and that by all sorts of Christians unlearned and learned; And the reason is. The evill one well knowes, that if such a state be beleived possible, wherein all sin being subdued, men may performe exact obedience unto God, such as that estate is whereunto S. John and his fellow Apostles had attained, well he knowes, that his kingdom would be toward an end; And therefore he hath endeavoured mainly, and made it his work to perswade men, that it is impossible but that
they must have sin while they live in this world. And if it be beleived to be impossible, who will go about it? As, who will endeavour to fly, Since no man hath power, by nature, so to do? And who will fly youthfull lusts, according to the Apostles counsel? Who will fly from sin as from a Serpent, as the wise man advises us, if he be perswaded, that there is no spirituall power given him from above, so to do? By this meanes, all exhortations, admoniti∣ons, &c. Shall be in vaine, if men be perswaded before hand, that it is impossble for them to be obedient thereunto, but the evill one hath in all ages, endeavoured to win to this perswasion of impossibilitie, learned men, and men of reputation, for pietie and holyness of life. For by corrupting those, he gaines multitudes unto his party, by their authority. Ye remember how the evill Spirit plotted mischeife against Ahab and all Israel, I will, saith he, be a lying Spirit in the mouth of all the prophets. Thus when Tan the dragon the old Serpent is joyn'd to Levi & become Leviathan, as I have shewen formerly then he does all his mischeif. Let them two alone to deceive all the world. Thus of old, he got in with Peter, as our Lord Jesus discovered him. When Peter had disswaded our Lord from his death, Matth. 16.22. , Christ turned with a countenance composed to severity, as (that word signifies) he said unto Peter, (even to him whom he had called Blessed, ver. 17.) Get the behinde me Satan. He who gives us such counsell, acts the devills the enemies part, under the vizard of a friend. He is an offence unto us, and causeth us to stumble in the narrow way of mortification, which leadeth unto the perfect life. And Satan having so far prevailed with Peter, he doubted not to give the on set upon some, though less pious than he, yet of greater esteem in the Church for piety and learning also. And therefore one of the Antients of great name, wrote unto Pope Innocent, who had greatest power in the universal Church, to advise him, That it was altogether impossble in this life to be without sin. But let us hear his reasons, and answer them. His first and principal reason is; Because, saith he, all men ought to pray, Forgive us our sins, as we are taught in the Lords Prayer to say, Forgive us our trespasses, &c. And if we pray for forgiveness of them, we must be guilty of them. I answer; our Lord Jesus teaches us to pray for forgiveness of sins, not only in particular, but also in general. For although our sin, and failings be many, by reason of our ignorance and weak∣ness, while we are yet spiritual little children, and babes in Christ; and the Lord be gratious unto us, and vouchsafe the forgiveness of them, 1 John 2.12. yet the plenary and full remission of sins, is given, upon the ratifying of the new and second Covenant, Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. and 33.8. Hebr. 8.8.—13. In which places, the last clause of the Covenant, is, the remission of sins, as being last accomplished.
This was figured by the Jubile, as it is spiritually interpreted; Esay 61.1, 2. liberty to the captives, &c. Our Lord— or Brother and Redeemer applyes it to himself, Luke 4.18.—21. This day, saith he, this Scripture is fulfilled in your ears; as he who redeems us from the service of sin, and restores us unto our spiritual inheritance, remitting the sin, and removing it from us; which is the proper sense of , whence Jubile is rendred , by the LXX above twenty times, Levit. 25. 2. Besides, we must take special notice here, that our Lord taught his Disciples to pray this prayer, while they were as yet but spiritual children; and had not as yet received the holy Ghost; and while they were yet subject unto many failings; and there∣fore our Apostle saith, 1 John 2.12. I write to you little children, that your sins are forgiven you through his Name. And therefore how ever the Apostles & Disciples might possibly use the Lords prayer, while the Lord Jesus was with them, and before they had recei∣ved the holy Spirit; yet after they received the Spirit, we do not read, that any one of them used it. And although S. John in the text say, that, if we say, we have no sin, &c. and teach us confession of sin; yet is that onely figurative by a , and by way of condescension unto us: because he with his fellow Apostles had fellowship with God and Christ; which no man can have who walk in darkness, as our Apostle reasons, v. 6. 3. Our Lord does not command his Disciples to use that prayer alwayes; but he teaches them to pray for remission of sin both in part, and plenarily, until they have obtained it: And in reason when they have obtained what they prayed for, why should they longer pray for it? Now the Lord Jesus hath promised, that whatsoever we ask the Father in his Name, he will give us. If therefore we ask remission and forgiveness of sins, in his Name, we shall obtain what we pray for. But when? Without doubt in the time of this mortal life. For in the life to come, we neither read of prayer for forgiveness of sin, nor of any sin then forgiven. Obj. 2. If such a state were attainable, as to live without sin, then might the Law be fulfilled. I answer. And must not the Law be fulfilled, Matth. 5. compare ver. 17. and 18. with 19. But what hinders, but that the Law may be fulfilled by the power of Christ and his Spirit? For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sent his Son, &c. Rom. 8.3. that the righteous∣ness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Obj. 3. There is a perpetual strife between the flesh and the Spirit, while we live here in this world. I answer. This is in every mans mouth almost. But the Psalmist said, All men are liars. 1. It is true, that the flesh lusts against the Spirit, so long as the flesh lives. But the lusting flesh is dead in the obedient and regenerate souls. 2. The
Spirit lusts against the flesh, that we may not do the things that we would, according to the flesh, as those words ought to be read, Gal. 5.16, 17. Obj. 4. If we should attain to such an estate, we should not need the mercy of God. I answer; that followes not: But this is true, that, as sick men being heal'd of sickness, need not to de∣sire healing of that disease whereof they are cured. So they, who have obtained mercy of God, that they are healed of their spiritual diseases, they need not the same mercy in regard of the same diseases; because that mercy of Christ is fulfilled in the spiritual cure of their maladies. But that we are healed and saved, it is from the free grace and mercy of God in Christ. By grace ye are saved, Ephes. 2. and of his mercy he saved us. But whereas these men will allow the Physitian, his honour, for perfecting his Patients bodily cure, they will not allow the greatest Physitian of souls, his honour, who comes with healing in his wings, that he should be able to make a man every whit whole, and perfectly cured of his spiritual diseases. Obs. 1. We learn here a rule of prudence and discretion from S. Johns example, how the spiritual teacher should behave him∣self towards yong Disciples, to condescend and stoop unto their weak∣ness, to be even as one of them. This wisdom S. John had learn'd of the Lord Jesus, who so attemper'd his Doctrine to his Disciples, as they were able to bear it, John 16.12. Thus Elisha stretched himself upon the childe and brought him to life, 2 Kings 4.34. And this is the practice of the true Elisha, God the Saviour (so Elisha signifies;) he applyes himself unto us, and becomes as one with us; Sic oculos, sic ille manûs, sic or a ferebat; because the chil∣dren are partakers of flesh and blood, he takes part of the same. Yea, though he be  the mighty God, or the strong God, the Gyant, Esay 9.6. yet to us while yet we are children, he is born a childe. Obs. 2. Hence we have discovered unto us, a refuge of lyes, whereunto all ungodly men resort, , as all Malefactors of old, were wont to run to their Altars for refuge: If we say we have no sin, &c. As if it ought to be so, as if they should do amiss, unless they did amiss; as if they should sin unless they sinned. As if there were no better, no more eminent and holy estate to be aimed at, and attained unto, through the grace of God, and power of his holy Spirit. Obs. 3. Hence we perceive how falsly some speak concerning the life and actions of Gods Saints, that they sin in all and every thing they do, and think, and speak. The Apostle expounds himself in the tenth verse, how he would be understood in the eighth. If we say we have not sinned; he saith not, that there is any necessity of sinning. But if the Saints of God sin in every act, how come they to be Saints?
Obs. 4. We have hence matter enough to humble us, if we consider our fore-past life, our prevaricating nature, our many frail∣ties and weaknesses, until the God of peace make us perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in us what is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Hebr. 13.21. Such is the wisdom of the Lord Jesus; and such he teaches his Apostles. For when he gives S. Peter his charge, his first and principal care is of his Lambs. S. Paul had learned this lesson ex∣actly, and practised it most wisely and discreetly in his Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 7. where he, who is described as a childe, the Apostle takes upon himself; so likewise in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 2. v. 2, 3. Such as they were, such he became unto them. For although he had wisdom, secret and hidden truth to impart unto perfect men, 1 Cor. 2.8. yet he behaved himself to∣wards them, according to their capacity. He could not speak unto them as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal even, as unto babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. This the Apostle did Ex professo, 1 Cor. 4.6. and 9.19.22. Thus S. James, Chap. 3. and thus S. John in my text. These things Brethren, I have in a figure transferred to my self and to Apollo, for your sakes. And 9.22. To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak; I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some. So S. James, Chap. 3.1.2. My brethren, be not many Masters, knowing that we shall receive the greater con∣demnation. For in many things we offend all. And ver. 9. with the tongue bless we God even the Father, and therewith curse we men. And S. John useth the same  and condescent unto his little children, if we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Much more might be written on this subject, had not my worthy friends Dr. Thomas Drayton, , and Mr. William Parker published a Treatise upon the same argument, entituled A Revindication of the possibility of a total mortification of sin in this life; And of the Saints perfect obedience to the Law of God, to be the Orthodox Protestant Doctrine, &c. Now that we and many thousands more, in this and other na∣tions, may not be thought Insanire sine ratione, to differ from o∣thers in these points of doctrine without good reason, I thought fit to annex hereunto a brief Catalogue cursorily gathered, of such Scriptures as  and expresly, or per evolutionem terminorum, in∣terpretativè, by short and easie interpretation, speak the same things; as being such as prove a possibility of  having no sin, and living a perfect life according to the will of God. In which, the most wise & just God, either commands these, or threa∣tens men for the want of these, or promises rewards, upon conside∣ration of these. Or else commends those who have been examples of these in their generations, or have prayed for these, which must
be in faith of obtaining them, or otherwise endeavouring after these; which cannot be without hope, the foundation of endea∣vour. Or, by some other testimony, the Lord hath given his ap∣probation to these truths, and to those who lived, or shall live them. Now that Catalogue speaks thus. Gen. 6.9. Noah was a just man perfect in his generation. Noah walked with God. Gen. 17.1. The Lord said to Abraham, I am the Almighty God, walk before me and be thou perfect. Gen. 25.27. Jacob was a perfect man  which Ours turn a plain man. Gen. 26.5. Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my Com∣mandements, my Statutes, and my Lawes. Exod. 24.3.7.8. All the words which the Lord hath said, will we do, &c. Deut. 4.2. Ye shall not adde unto the word which I command you: neither shall you diminish from it, that ye may keep the Com∣mandements of the Lord your God, which I command you. And Chap. 12.32. What thing soever I command you, observe to do it, &c. and Chap. 28.14. and thou shalt not go adside from any of the words which I command thee this day, &c. Deut. 30.8. And thou shalt return and obey the voice of the Lord and do all his Commandements, which I command thee this day. Josh. 8.35. There was not a word of all that Moses commanded which Joshua read not before all the congregation of Israel. Judges 5.31. Let them who love him, be as the Sun when he goeth forth in his might. 1 Kings 15.5. Because David did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him all the dayes of his life, save only in the matter of Ʋriah the Hittite. And Verse the 14. Asa his heart was perfect with the Lord all his dayes. Chap. 18.21. If the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, fol∣low him. 2 Kings 23.25. Like unto him was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses, &c. Job 1.1. Whose name was Job, and that man was perfect and upright. Chap. 8.20. Behold God will not cast away a perfect man, &c. Chap. 27.5. God forbid that I should justifie you till I die, I will not remove my integrity from me. The word is  my per∣fection. Psal. 15.2. He that walketh uprightly (the word is  per∣fect) and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the truth in his heart.
Psal. 17.3.5. Thou hast proved mine heart, thou hast visited me in the night, thou hast tryed me, and shalt finde nothing: I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. And 18.21, 23, 24, 25, 26. For I have kept the wayes of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God, for all his judgements were before me, &c. I was also upright (Heb.  perfect) be∣fore him, &c. Verse 32. It is God that girdeth me with strength, and ma∣keth my way perfect. Psal. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. V. 12, 13. Cleanse thou me from my secret sins. Keep back thy ser∣vant also from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me; then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression, (the word is  perfect. Psal. 24.4. He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lift up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. 26.1. Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine integry∣ty: Heb.  perfection: I have trusted also in the Lord, I shall not slide. 37.18. The Lord knoweth the dayes of the upright (Heb.  perfect: and their inheritance shall be for ever. 41.12. And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity: (Hebr. perfection;) and settest me before thy face for ever. 45.13. The Kings daughter is all glorious within; her clothing is of wrought gold. 51.2. Wash me throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. 7. Purge me with hysope, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow. 10. Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me. 64.4. That they may shoot in secret at the perfect: suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear not. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. 68.21. But God shall wound the head of his enemies: and the hairy scalp of such an one as goeth on still in his trespasses. 73.1. Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart. 78.72. So he fed them according to the integrity (Heb. perfection of his heart, and guided them by the skilfulness of his hands. Psal. 82.4.8. Arise O God, judge the earth: for thou shalt inherit all nations. Psal. 84.11. For the Lord God is a Sun and shield: the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Heb. In perfection. 101. I will sing of mercy and judgement, &c. See the whole Psalm.
103.3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities: who healeth all thy diseases. 12. As far as the East is from the West: so far hath he removed our transgressions from us. 18. To such as keep his covenant: and to those that remember his Commandements to do them. 105.45. That they might observe his statutes and keep his Lawes. Psal. 119.1, 2, 3. Blessed are the undefiled (Heb. perfect) in the way: who walk in the law of the Lord, Blessed are they that keep his te∣stimonies, that seek him with the whole heart. They also do no iniquity: they walk in his wayes. V. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy Commandements. V. 10. With my whole heart have I sought thee. V. 32. I will run the way of thy Commandements: when thou shalt enlarge my heart. V. 34. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law: yea I shall observe it with my whole heart. V. 44. So shall I keep thy Law continually: for ever and ever. V. 55. I have remembred thy Name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy Law. 56. This I had; because I kept thy precepts. V. 69. The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts with my whole heart. V. 101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way: that I may keep thy word. V. 129. Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore doth my soul keep them. V. 166, 167, 168. Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy Commandements. My soul hath kept thy testimonies: and I love them exceedingly. I have kept thy precepts, and thy testimonies: for all my wayes are before thee. Psal. 130.8. And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities. 138.8. The Lord will perfect that which concerneth me: thy mercy, O Lord, endureth for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands. Prov. 2.7. He layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous: he is a buckler to them that walk uprightly. Heb. perfectly. V. 21. For the upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall remain in it. Prov. 4.18. The path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. Prov. 10.9. He that walketh uprightly, (Heb. in perfection) walk∣eth surely: but he that perverteth his wayes, shall be known. V. 29. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright. Heb. to the perfect. Prov. 11.3. The integrity, (Heb. the perfection) of the upright shall guide them. V. 5. The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way, &c.
V. 20. They that are of a froward heart, are an abomination to the Lord: but such as are upright (Heb. perfect) in their way are his delight. Prov. 13.6. Righteousness keepeth the upright (Heb. the per∣fect) in the way: but wickedness overthroweth the sinner, 19. Prov. 19.1. Better is the poor that walketh in his integrity, (Heb. in his perfection,) then he that is perverse in his lips, and is a fool. Prov. 20.7. The just man walketh in his integrity: (Heb. in his perfection) his children are blessed after him. Prov. 28.6. Better is the poor that walketh in his uprightness, (Heb. perfection) then he that is perverse in his wayes, though he be rich. V. 7. Whoso keepeth the Law is a wise son: but he that is a companion of riotous men, shameth his father. V. 10. Whoso causeth the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he shall fall himself into his own pit: but the upright, Heb. the perfect, shall have good things in possession. V. 18. Whoso walketh uprightly, (Heb. perfectly) shall be sa∣ved: but he, &c. Prov. 29.10. The blood-thirsty hate the upright, (Heb. the per∣fect:) but the just seek his soul. Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee. Cant. 5.2. I sleep, but my heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved that knocketh, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: Heb. my perfect one. Cant. 6.9. My dove, my undefiled, (Heb. my perfect one) is but one: she is the only one of her mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her: the daughters saw her, and blossed her; yea, the Queens and the Concubines; and they praised her. Esay 24.23. Then the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his antients gloriously. Esay 26.3. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose minde is staid on thee, because he trusteth in thee. Esay 38.3. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. V. 17. Behold, for peace I had great bitterness, but thou hast in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption: for thou hast cast all my sins behinde thy back. Jer. 15.19. If thou return, then will I bring thee again, and thou shalt stand before me: and if thou take forth the pretious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them.
Jer. 33.8. And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me: and I will pardon all their iniqui∣ties whereby they have sinned against me, and whereby they have transgressed against me. Jer. 35. See the whole Chapter. Ezech. 36.33. Thus saith the Lord God, in the day that I have cleansed you from all your iniquities, I also will cause you to dwell in the Cities, and the wasts shall be builded. 35. And they shall say, this land that was desolate, is become like the garden of Eden, and the waste, and desolate, and ruined Cities, are become fenced, and are inhabited. Hos. 14.8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with Idols? Amos 5.10. They hate him that rebuketh in the gate: and they abhor him that speaketh uprightly. Heb. Perfectly. Mich. 7.19. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us: he will subdue our iniquities, and thou wilt cast all their sins into the depth of the Sea. Malach. 4.4. Remember ye the Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgements. 2 Esdras 39, 40. Which are departed from the shadow of the world, & have received glorious garments of the Lord. 40. Take thy number, O Sion, and shut up those of thine that are clothed in white, which have fulfilled the law of the Lord. Chap. 6.25, 26, 27, 28. Whosoever remaineth from all these that I have told thee, shall escape, and see my salvation, and the end of your world. And the men that are received shall see it, who have not tasted death from their birth: and the heart of the inha∣bitants shall be changed, and turned into another meaning. For evil shall be put out, and deceit shall be quenched. As for faith it shall flourish, corruption shall be overcome, and the truth which hath been so long without fruit, shall be declared. Tob. 4.21. And fear not, my son, that we are made poor: for thou hast much wealth, if thou fear God, and depart from all sin, and do that which is pleasing in his sight. Chap. 51. Tobias then answered and said, Father, I will do all things which thou hast commanded me. Chap. 12.9. For almes doth deliver from death, and shall purge away all sin. Those that exercise almes and righteousness, shall be filled with life. Wisd. 1.4. For into a malitious soul wisdom shall not enter: nor dwel in the body that is subject to sin. Chap. 4.13. He being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time. 16. Thus the righteous that is dead shall condemn the un∣godly which are living; and youth that is soon perfected, the many years and old age of the unrighteous.
Chap. 15.2, 3. For if wee sinne wee are thine knowing thy power: but we will not sin, knowing that we are counted thine. For to know thee is perfect righteousness: yea, to know thy power is the root of immortality. Ecclus. 13.24. Riches are good to him that hath no sin: and po∣verty is evil in the mouth of the ungodly. Chap. 38.10. Leave off from sin, and order thy hands aright: and cleanss thy heart from all wickedness. Chap. 44.17. Noah was found perfect and righteous in the time of weath, &c. 2 Mac. 12.42. Besides, that noble Judas exhorted the people to keep themselves from sin, for so much as they saw before their eyes the things that came to pass, for the sin of those that were slain. Matth. 3.12. Whose fan is in his hand, and he shall throughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the garner: but will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire. 15. For thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. Matth. 5.18, 19, 20. For verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandements, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do & teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. For I say unto you, that except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharises, ye shall in no case enter in∣to the kingdom of heaven. V. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your father, which is in hea∣ven, is perfect. Chap. 7.18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Chap. 10.24, 25. The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his lord: It is enough for the disciple that he be as ma∣ster, &c. Matth. 11.30. For my yoke is easie, and my burden is light. Matth. 12.50. For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, sister, and mother. Matth. 19.17. But if thou wilt enter into life, keep the Commande∣ments. 21. Jesus said unto him, if thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, &c. Matth. 21.9. Blessed is he that cometh in the Name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. Matth. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world.
Mark 2.17. They that are whole have no need of the Physitian, but they that are sick, &c. Luke 11.36. If thy whole body be full of light, having no part dark, the whole shall be full of light. John 14.15. If ye love me, keep my Commandements. And Chap. 15.14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I com∣mand you. Rom. 8.4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. 1 Cor. 2.6. We speak wisdom among them that are perfect. v. 16. We have the minde of Christ. 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Phil. 1.6. That he which hath been beginning a good work in you, will throughly finish it until the day of Jesus Christ. Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ enabling me. Col. 1.25. Whereof I am made a minister, according to the dispensation of God, which is given to me for you, to fulfil the word of God. V. 28. Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Chap. 4.12. Epaphras, alwayes labouring fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and compleat in all the will of God. 1 Thess. 4.1. Furthermore then we beseech you, brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk, and to please God, so ye would abound more and more. Chap. 5.23. The Ʋery God of peace sanctifie you wholly, and your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, &c. James 1.4. But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and and entire, wanting nothing. 2 Pet. 3.14. Be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless. 1 John 2.1. My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not, &c. Chap. 4.17. Herein is love with us made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgement; Because as he is, so are we in this world. After this Catalogue might be gathered another as large; yea, larger, speaking the same truth; and yet another most large; proving by consequence the same things. And after that a fourth, an  of mystical names in Scripture; also types, figures, and parabolical and symbolical speeches; all which being opened, hold
forth and evidence the very same things. Nor ought this to seem strange, since God himself is with us in the work; as ap∣pears, 2 Cor. 13.11. Finally, Brethren, rejoyce; be perfect; be of good comfort; be of one minde; live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you. As also, because, since perfection is the end of all the holy Scripture; For, 2 Tim. 3.16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for in∣struction in righteousness, THAT the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished to every good work. 1 Pet. 5.10. Now the God of all grace, who hath called us to his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you! To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever! Amen. 1 Pet. 5. FINIS.
A Table of the Sermons contained in this Book, their Titles, and their Texts. 1. THe Law and the Gospel preached from the beginning. Gen. 3. v. 15. And I will put enmity between thee and the Woman; and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thine Head, and thou shalt bruise his Heel. Pag. 9. 2. The Law and Gospel preached unto Cain, Gen. 4. v. 7. If thou do well, shalt thou not be accepted; and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door; and unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him. Pag. 31. 3. Noah's Legacy to his sons, Gen. 9.26, 27. And he said, Bles∣sed be the Lord God of Shem, And Canaan shall be his servant. God shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant. 4. On the same Text. 5. Imputation of best reputation, Gen. 15. v. 5, 6. And he brought him forth abroad, and said; Look now towards heaven, and tell the Stars, if thou be able to number them; and he said unto him, so shall thy seed be. And he believed in the Lord; and he counted it unto him for righteousness. Pag. 135. 6. A prudent wise is of the Lord. Gen. 24. v. 44. And she say, to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy Camels; let the same be the woman, whom the Lord hath appointed out for my Masters son. Pag. 161. 7. The dressing of, and due address unto the Paskal Lamb, Exod. 12. v. 9. Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but rost with fire, his head with his legs, and with the appurtenance thereof. Pag. 203. 8. Gods meeting with men in their own way, Levit. 26. v. 27.28. And if ye will not, for all this, hearken unto me, but walk contra∣ry unto me, then will I walk contrary unto you also in fury. Pag. 323. 9. : or, The Dispensor of divine mysteries. Numb.
4. v. 19, 20. When they approach unto the most holy things, Aaron and his sons shall go in, and appoint them every one to his service, and to his burden: But they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered, lest they die. Pag. 375. 10. God keeps his time, though men be out of tune. Numb. 14. v. 34. After the number of the dayes, in which ye searched the land, even fourty dayes, each day for a year, shall ye bear your iniqui∣ties, even fourty years; And ye shall know my breach of promise. Pag. 487. 11. Christ conquering and to conquer. Numb. 24. v. 17. There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Is∣rael, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth. Pag. 540 12. : or, The conflict with evil thoughts, Deut. 2.24. Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass over the River Ar∣non: Behold, I have given into thine hand, Sihon the Amorite King of Heshbon and his land. Begin to possess it, and contend with him in battel. Pag. 604. 13. Attende tibi; Look to thy self. Deut. 4. v. 9. Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart, all the dayes of thy life; but teach them thy sons, and thy sons sons. Pag. 631. 14. Attende tibi & doctrinae. Look to thy self and the doctrine. Deut. 6. v. 6.7. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou shalt shalt teach them diligently unto thy children. Pag. 658. 15. Gods Request unto his people. Or, Gods petition of Right. Deut. 10. v. 12, 13. And now Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his wayes, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul, to keep the Commandements of the Lord, and his Statutes, which I command thee this day, for thy good. 16. One and All. Or, Love the fulfilling of all the Commandements. Deut. 19. v. 9. If thou shalt keep all these Commandements to do them, which I command thee this day, to love the Lord thy God, and to walk ever in his wayes, then shalt thou adde, &c. Pag. 701. 17. The Regenerate become Degenerate. Deut. 32. v. 5. They have corrupted themselves: Their spot is not the spot of his children. They are a perverse and crooked generation. Pag. 743.
18. There is no necessity for a wise and just man to sin, Eccles. 7. v. 19, 20. Wisdom strengtheneth the wise more then ten mighty men which are in the City. For there is not a just man upon earth that doth good and sinneth not. Pag. 761 19. Contrary principles mutual impediments. Gal. 5. v. 17. For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit; and the Spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. Pag. 774 20. Some Saints not without sin for a season. 1 John 1. v. 8. If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Pag. 785.
An Index of such Scriptures as are either pur∣posely, or more briefly and occasionally opened in this Book. Genesis. Chap. 1 Vers. 1, 2 Pag. 2 A Chap. 1 Vers. 20 Pag. 3 C Chap. 1 Vers. 24 Pag. 3 D Chap. 2 Vers. 2 Pag. 3 E Chap. 2 Vers. 16 Pag. 5 B Chap. 2 Vers. 17 Pag. 6 D Chap. 2 Vers. 17 Pag. 309 D Chap. 2 Vers. 18 Pag. 5 A Chap. 2 Vers. 18 Pag. 364 B Chap. 2 Vers. 22, 23 Pag. 7 C Chap. 3 Vers. 14 Pag. 716 A Chap. 3 Vers. 15 Pag. 9 B Chap. 3 Vers. 15 Pag. 534 E Chap. 3 Vers. 22 Pag. 25 D Chap. 3 Vers. 22 Pag. 600 E Chap. 3 Vers. 23 Pag. 26 E Chap. 4 Vers. 1 Pag. 27 A Chap. 4 Vers. 3 Pag. 29 B Chap. 4 Vers. 7 Pag. 31 B Chap. 4 Vers. 10 Pag. 40 A Chap. 4 Vers. 17 Pag. 40 C Chap. 4 Vers. 20, 21, 22 Pag. 42 D Chap. 4 Vers. 26 Pag. 43 C Chap. 5 Vers. 3 Pag. 44 A Chap. 5 Vers. 22 Pag. 46 B Chap. 5 Vers. 29 Pag. 52 E Chap. 6 Vers. 7 Pag. 54 C Chap. 6 Vers. 9 Pag. 570 D Chap. 8 Vers. 21 Pag. 56 D Chap. 9 Vers. 1 Pag. 94 A Chap. 9 Vers. 4 Pag. 747 D Chap. 9 Vers. 26, 27 Pag. 62 B Chap. 9 Vers. 26, 27 Pag. 111 B Chap. 9 Vers. 26, 27 Pag. 580 A Chap. 10 Vers. 8, 11, 12 Pag. 131 A Chap. 11 Vers. 2 Pag. 89 C Chap. 11 Vers. 4 Pag. 317 C Chap. 12 Vers. 1 Pag. 133 A Chap. 12 Vers. 1 Pag. 418 A Chap. 12 Vers. 5 Pag. 47 E Chap. 12 Vers. 8 Pag. 134 A Chap. 14 Vers. 14 Pag. 47 E Chap. 14 Vers. 18 Pag. 89 B Chap. 15 Vers. 1 Pag. 136 A Chap. 15 Vers. 2, 4 Pag. 149 C Chap. 15 Vers. 5, 6 Pag. 135 B Chap. 16 Vers. 1, 12 Pag. 103 C Chap. 16 Vers. 12 Pag. 528 C Chap. 16 Vers. 2 Pag. 155 A Chap. 17 Vers. 1 Pag. 690 D Chap. 17 Vers. 5 Pag. 243 E Chap. 17 Vers. 13 Pag. 213 E Chap. 17 Vers. 16 Pag. 155 D Chap. 21 Vers. 25 Pag. 461 E Chap. 22 Vers. 15 Pag. 157 C Chap. 22 Vers. 18 Pag. 156 C Chap. 24 Vers. 2, 3 Pag. 183 D Chap. 24 Vers. 44 Pag. 161 B Chap. 24 Vers. 57, 58 Pag. 126 B Chap. 25 Vers. 22 Pag. 103 D Chap. 25 Vers. 23 Pag. 546 B Chap. 25 Vers. 26 Pag. 779 C Chap. 25 Vers. 27 Pag. 169 A
Chap. 25 Vers. 30 Pag. 532 D Chap. 26 Vers. 5 Pag. 243 E Chap. 26 Vers. 19, 22 Pag. 116 E Chap. 26 Vers. 20, 21, 22 Pag. 615 E Chap. 27 Vers. 34, 38, 39 Pag. 170 B Chap. 28 Vers. 3 Pag. 171 D Chap. 28 Vers. 19 Pag. 172 B Chap. 30 Vers. 8 Pag. 757 D Chap. 30 Vers. 11 Pag. 337 A Chap. 32 Vers. 28 Pag. 543 B Chap. 33 Vers. 9 Pag. 173 B Chap. 33 Vers. 11 Pag. 174 A Chap. 34 Vers. 2 Pag. 554 E Chap. 35 Vers. 2, 3 Pag. 174 D Chap. 36 Vers. 6 Pag. 175 C Chap. 36 Vers. 8 Pag. 527 A Chap. 36 Vers. 36 Pag. 187 A Chap. 37 Vers. 33 Pag. 381 A Chap. 37 Vers. 35 Pag. 176 A Chap. 38 Vers. 18 Pag. 176 D Chap. 39 Vers. 4 Pag. 177 C Chap. 40 Vers. 10 Pag. 512 C Chap. 41 Vers. 13 Pag. 296 C Chap. 41 Vers. 46 Pag. 431 D Chap. 46 Vers. 26 Pag. 183 B Chap. 47 Vers. 10 Pag. 514 D Chap. 48 Vers. 22 Pag. 96 B Chap. 49 Vers. 10 Pag. 192 E Chap. 49 Vers. 26 Pag. 179 B Exodus. Chap. 1 Vers. 3 Pag. 183 B Chap. 1 Vers. 12 Pag. 184 D Chap. 2 Vers. 10 Pag. 185 D Chap. 2 Vers. 11 Pag. 187 B Chap. 3 Vers. 14 Pag. 188 E Chap. 4 Vers. 1 Pag. 191 A Chap. 4 Vers. 13 Pag. 192 D Chap. 4 Vers. 16 Pag. 194 B Chap. 5 Vers. 2, 3 Pag. 195 B Chap. 5 Vers. 9 Pag. 196 B Chap. 6 Vers. 2 Pag. 189 C Chap. 8 Vers. 22 Pag. 196 D Chap. 8 Vers. 23 Pag. 199 C Chap. 8 Vers. 25 Pag. 538 E Chap. 9 Vers. 28, 30 Pag. 200 C Chap. 12 Vers. 9 Pag. 203 D Chap. 12 Vers. 11 Pag. 217 C Chap. 12 Vers. 37 Pag. 287 D Chap. 12 Vers. 43 Pag. 213 B Chap. 13 Vers. 18 Pag. 216 A Chap. 15 Vers. 4, 5 Pag. 218 C Chap. 15 Vers. 4 Pag. 548 E Chap. 15 Vers. 10 Pag. 221 E Chap. 15 Vers. 13 Pag. 222 D Chap. 16 Vers. 4 Pag. 224 C Chap. 16 Vers. 16 Pag. 225 B Chap. 16 Vers. 16 Pag. 530 D Chap. 17 Vers. 16 Pag. 90 B Chap. 17 Vers. 16 Pag. 502 A Chap. 18 Vers. 8 Pag. 526 A Chap. 18 Vers. 3 Pag. 225 D Chap. 18 Vers. 3 Pag. 560 A Chap. 20 Vers. 6 Pag. 713 C Chap. 20 Vers. 7 Pag. 227 D Chap. 20 Vers. 16 Pag. 229 C Chap. 22 Vers. 8 Pag. 230 D Chap. 23 Vers. 22 Pag. 547 A Chap. 25 Vers. 8 Pag. 363 B Chap. 25 Vers. 19 Pag. 234 E Chap. 30 Vers. 12 Pag. 357 E Chap. 32 Vers. 15 Pag. 399 B Chap. 33 Vers. 6 Pag. 232 C Chap. 33 Vers. 7 Pag. 360 D Chap. 33 Vers. 15 Pag. 226 C Chap. 34 Vers. 7 Pag. 236 A Chap. 34 Vers. 28 Pag. 244 B Chap. 38 Vers. 8 Pag. 178 D Leviticus. Chap. 1 Vers. 3 Pag. 238 B Chap. 2 Vers. 5 Pag. 239 B Chap. 4 Vers. 2, 13, 22 Pag. 241 A Chap. 4 Vers. 3 Pag. 246 B Chap. 5 Vers. 1 Pag. 251 B Chap. 5 Vers. 6 Pag. 253 E Chap. 6 Vers. 2 Pag. 404 A Chap. 7 Vers. 7 Pag. 255 D Chap. 8 Vers. 8 Pag. 259 A
Chap. 10 Vers. 3 Pag. 264 D Chap. 11 Vers. 18 Pag. 270 A Chap. 11 Vers. 19 Pag. 280 B Chap. 13 Vers. 3 Pag. 290 A Chap. 14 Vers. 16 Pag. 524 D Chap. 15 Vers. 31 Pag. 285 A Chap. 16 Vers. 8 Pag. 293 A Chap. 16 Vers. 26 Pag. 294 E Chap. 19 Vers. 29 Pag. 559 A Chap. 20 Vers. 9 Pag. 300 A Chap. 21 Vers. 18, 19, 20 Pag. 311 A Chap. 23 Vers. 43 Pag. 566 A Chap. 25 Vers. 45 Pag. 665 A Chap. 26 Vers. 11 Pag. 125 A Chap. 26 Vers. 11 Pag. 532 B Chap. 26 Vers. 13 Pag. 579 D Chap. 26 Vers. 27, 28 Pag. 323 B Numbers. Chap. 1 Vers. 3 Pag. 349 B Chap. 2 Vers. 2 Pag. 360 A Chap. 3 Vers. 3 Pag. 368 A Chap. 4 Vers. 19, 20 Pag. 375 C Chap. 5 Vers. 6, 7 Pag. 395 A Chap. 6 Vers. 6, 7 Pag. 182 A Chap. 6 Vers. 6, 7 Pag. 413 A Chap. 6 Vers. 12 Pag. 333 E Chap. 7 Vers. 14 Pag. 427 A Chap. 8 Vers. 7 Pag. 427 B Chap. 8 Vers. 25, 26 Pag. 428 C Chap. 9 Vers. 2, 3 Pag. 439 A Chap. 10 Vers. 35, 36 Pag. 429 A Chap. 11 Vers. 17 Pag. 447 A Chap. 11 Vers. 32, 33, 34 Pag. 456 A Chap. 12 Vers. 1 Pag. 461 A Chap. 13 Vers. 16 Pag. 465 A Chap. 13 Vers. 22 Pag. 491 E Chap. 13 Vers. 30 Pag. 466 E Chap. 13 Vers. 33 Pag. 675 B Chap. 14 Vers. 9 Pag. 257 D Chap. 14 Vers. 11 Pag. 248 D Chap. 14 Vers. 11 Pag. 496 C Chap. 14 Vers. 24 Pag. 468 A Chap. 14 Vers. 34 Pag. 487 C Chap. 15 Vers. 18, 24 Pag. 500 A Chap. 15 Vers. 30 Pag. 501 E Chap. 16 Vers. 1 Pag. 461 C Chap. 16 Vers. 1 Pag. 507 A Chap. 17 Vers. 8 Pag. 511 A Chap. 18 Vers. 12 Pag. 516 A Chap. 18 Vers. 17 Pag. 517 B Chap. 19 Vers. 4 Pag. 524 D Chap. 19 Vers. 6 Pag. 518 A Chap. 20 Vers. 5 Pag. 528 B Chap. 20 Vers. 14 Pag. 526 A Chap. 21 Vers. 2, 3 Pag. 528 E Chap. 21 Vers. 4 Pag. 529 A Chap. 21 Vers. 5, 6 Pag. 21 A Chap. 21 Vers. 5, 6 Pag. 528 A Chap. 21 Vers. 9 Pag. 534 D Chap. 21 Vers. 9 Pag. 535 C Chap. 23 Vers. 3 Pag. 536 A Chap. 23 Vers. 7 Pag. 544 C Chap. 24 Vers. 17 Pag. 540 C Chap. 25 Vers. 8 Pag. 558 A Chap. 25 Vers. 11 Pag. 563 B Chap. 25 Vers. 17 Pag. 560 E Chap. 26 Vers. 5 Pag. 48 B Chap. 29 Vers. 35 Pag. 564 A Chap. 30 Vers. 3 Pag. 534 B Chap. 31 Vers. 16 Pag. 560 E Chap. 32 Vers. 1 Pag. 780 D Chap. 32 Vers. 8 Pag. 771 A Chap. 33 Vers. 2.5 Pag. 576 B Chap. 33 Vers. 11 Pag. 544 E Deuteronomie. Chap. 2 Vers. 5 Pag. 526 C Chap. 2 Vers. 5 Pag. 529 A Chap. 2 Vers. 24 Pag. 604 C Chap. 2 Vers. 31 Pag. 620 A Chap. 4 Vers. 7 Pag. 628 A Chap. 4 Vers. 9 Pag. 631 C Chap. 5 Vers. 10 Pag. 682 C Chap. 5 Vers. 11 Pag. 649 A Chap. 5 Vers. 17 Pag. 653 A Chap. 6 Vers. 6, 7 Pag. 658 C Chap. 7 Vers. 1 Pag. 107 A
Chap. 7 Vers. 16 Pag. 673 A Chap. 8 Vers. 15, 16 Pag. 592 C Chap. 10 Vers. 12, 13 Pag. 677 C Chap. 12 Vers. 23 Pag. 208 E Chap. 16 Vers. 2 Pag. 694 A Chap. 16 Vers. 20 Pag. 597 A Chap. 17 Vers. 18 Pag. 587 D Chap. 19 Vers. 9 Pag. 701 C Chap. 21 Vers. 12 Pag. 665 B Chap. 22 Vers. 1 Pag. 736 D Chap. 22 Vers. 4 Pag. 718 A Chap. 24 Vers. 1 Pag. 723 A Chap. 25 Vers. 9 Pag. 728 A Chap. 25 Vers. 18 Pag. 22 E Chap. 26 Vers. 5 Pag. 732 A Chap. 27 Vers. 25 Pag. 747 D Chap. 28 Vers. 4, 6 Pag. 107 D Chap. 29 Vers. 1 Pag. 588 B Chap. 30 Vers. 15, 19 Pag. 323 C Chap. 30 Vers. 17 Pag. 735 A Chap. 32 Vers. 4, 5 Pag. 743 C Chap. 32 Vers. 21 Pag. 223 A Chap. 32 Vers. 21 Pag. 757 B Chap. 33 Vers. 2 Pag. 353 B Chap. 33 Vers. 2 Pag. 662 C Joshuah. Chap. 7 Vers. 15 Pag. 501 D Chap. 8 Vers. 32 Pag. 587 D Chap. 10 Vers. 1.24 Pag. 90 A Chap. 10 Vers. 24 Pag. 19 D Chap. 14 Vers. 7 Pag. 472 B Chap. 17 Vers. 17 Pag. 108 D Chap. 23 Vers. 10 Pag. 602 D Chap. 24 Vers. 2 Pag. 152 D Judges. Chap. 3 Vers. 8, 9 Pag. 580 B Chap. 3 Vers. 10 Pag. 299 D Chap. 4 Vers. 18 Pag. 20 C Chap. 5 Vers. 23 Pag. 364 B Chap. 6 Vers. 34 Pag. 211 E Chap. 6 Vers. 34 Pag. 569 A Chap. 8 Vers. 20 Pag. 92 A Chap. 9 Vers. 53 Pag. 20 D Chap. 13 Vers. 25 Pag. 782 E Chap. 18 Vers. 7 Pag. 18 D Chap. 18 Vers. 7 Pag. 106 C Chap. 18 Vers. 24 Pag. 738 C Chap. 18 Vers. 27 Pag. 490 E Ruth. Chap. 1 Vers. 5 Pag. 730 D 1 Samuel. Chap. 2 Vers. 29 Pag. 305 B Chap. 2 Vers. 29 Pag. 533 E Chap. 12 Vers. 10 Pag. 581 A Chap. 13 Vers. 1 Pag. 601 E Chap. 13 Vers. 6 Pag. 19 B Chap. 14 Vers. 47 Pag. 19 A Chap. 15 Vers. 22 Pag. 306 C Chap. 15 Vers. 32 Pag. 90 B Chap. 30 Vers. 10, 24 Pag. 91 E 2 Samuel. Chap. 3 Vers. 12 Pag. 353 D Chap. 4 Vers. 4 Pag. 778 C Chap. 5 Vers. 4 Pag. 431 D Chap. 7 Vers. 19 Pag. 481 C Chap. 7 Vers. 19 Pag. 730 C Chap. 10 Vers. 2 Pag. 18 C Chap. 20 Vers. 1 Pag. 501 C Chap. 20 Vers. 16 Pag. 20 D Chap. 22 Vers. 38, 39 Pag. 19 B Chap. 22 Vers. 2, 3 Pag. 452 A Chap. 23 Vers. 8 Pag. 767 A 1 Kings. Chap. 3 Vers. 12 Pag. 762 D Chap. 4 Vers. 29 Pag. 115 D Chap. 4 Vers. 33 Pag. 518 C Chap. 4 Vers. 33 Pag. 520 A Chap. 11 Vers. 5 Pag. 739 B Chap. 19 Vers. 11 Pag. 766 D 2 Kings. Chap. 4 Vers. 34 Pag. 796 C
Chap. 4 Vers. 39 Pag. 210 A Chap. 9 Vers. 8 Pag. 716 B Chap. 18 Vers. 7 Pag. 18 B Chap. 22 Vers. 8 Pag. 676 E 1 Chronicles. Chap. 4 Vers. 15 Pag. 484 E Chap. 7 Vers. 24 Pag. 783 E Chap. 11 Vers. 11 Pag. 767 A Chap. 27 Vers. 1 Pag. 177 E Chap. 28 Vers. 9 Pag. 344 D Chap. 29 Vers. 18 Pag. 667 E Chap. 29 Vers. 24 Pag. 502 C 2 Chronicles. Chap. 3 Vers. 1 Pag. 109 A Chap. 3 Vers. 1 Pag. 159 D Chap. 6 Vers. 41 Pag. 749 E Chap. 8 Vers. 5 Pag. 784 A Chap. 15 Vers. 2 Pag. 342 B Chap. 15 Vers. 2 Pag. 344 C Chap. 20 Vers. 12 Pag. 151 D Chap. 30 Vers. 8, 10 Pag. 505 C Nehemiah. Chap. 8 Vers. 17 Pag. 571 E Esther. Chap. 2 Vers. 5 Pag. 164 C Chap. 2 Vers. 7 Pag. 425 C Job. Chap. 2 Vers. 10 Pag. 770 A Chap. 11 Vers. 12 Pag. 103 C Chap. 11 Vers. 12 Pag. 28 D Chap. 12 Vers. 5 Pag. 140 E Chap. 14 Vers. 14 Pag. 143 E Chap. 15 Vers. 22 Pag. 721 D Chap. 29 Vers. 3 Pag. 422 C Chap. 31 Vers. 11 Pag. 725 D Chap. 32 Vers. 2 Pag. 308 E Chap. 35 Vers. 11 Pag. 719 B Chap. 36 Vers. 22 Pag. 719 B Psalms. Chap. 2 Vers. 10 Pag. 686 A Chap. 4 Vers. 3 Pag. 750 A Chap. 5 Vers. 4, 5 Pag. 12 D Chap. 5 Vers. 7 Pag. 172 D Chap. 7 Vers. 1 Pag. 462 D Chap. 8 Vers. 1 Pag. 90 D Chap. 12 Vers. 1 Pag. 750 A Chap. 16 Vers. 10 Pag. 748 E Chap. 16 Vers. 10 Pag. 750 A Chap. 17 Vers. 13 Pag. 18 A Chap. 17 Vers. 15 Pag. 227 D Chap. 18 Vers. 23 Pag. 697 C Chap. 19 Vers. 9 Pag. 681 D Chap. 19 Vers. 26 Pag. 757 D Chap. 19 Vers. 9 Pag. 681 D Chap. 19 Vers. 13, 14 Pag. 506 D Chap. 20 Vers. 1 Pag. 90 E Chap. 21 Vers. 6 Pag. 734 E Chap. 30 Vers. 4 Pag. 750 A Chap. 31 Vers. 23 Pag. 749 E Chap. 32 Vers. 1 Pag. 33 B Chap. 32 Vers. 2 Pag. 151 E Chap. 32 Vers. 2 Pag. 153 A Chap. 32 Vers. 6 Pag. 750 A Chap. 32 Vers. 8, 9 Pag. 165 B Chap. 32 Vers. 8, 9 Pag. 719 B Chap. 36 Vers. 8 Pag. 575 D Chap. 37 Vers. 3 Pag. 213 B Chap. 37 Vers. 20 Pag. 576 D Chap. 39 Vers. 28 Pag. 750 A Chap. 40 Vers. 8 Pag. 785 D Chap. 42 Vers. 1 Pag. 693 B Chap. 43 Vers. 1 Pag. 750 A Chap. 44 Vers. 5 Pag. 91 A Chap. 44 Vers. 26 Pag. 605 D Chap. 45 Vers. 4 Pag. 549 B Chap. 45 Vers. 4 Pag. 307 E Chap. 45 Vers. 13 Pag. 167 C Chap. 49 Vers. 6 Pag. 22 B Chap. 49 Vers. 10 Pag. 437 D Chap. 49 Vers. 12 Pag. 746 E Chap. 50 Vers. 17, 18 Pag. 490 D Chap. 50 Vers. 17, 18 Pag. 497 D
Chap. 50 Vers. 21, 22, 23 Pag. 681 B Chap. 51 Vers. 14 Pag. 40 B Chap. 54 Vers. 1 Pag. 91 A Chap. 55 Vers. 9 Pag. 572 D Chap. 56 Vers. 2 Pag. 616 A Chap. 56 Vers. 6 Pag. 22 B Chap. 58 Vers. 1 Pag. 597 A Chap. 63 Vers. 4 Pag. 310 A Chap. 65 Vers. 1 Pag. 417 B Chap. 66 Vers. 12 Pag. 220 C Chap. 66 Vers. 1 Pag. 417 B Chap. 68 Vers. 1, 2 Pag. 440 D Chap. 68 Vers. 18 Pag. 18 B Chap. 68 Vers. 23 Pag. 358 E Chap. 68 Vers. 29 Pag. 762 E Chap. 69 Vers. 27 Pag. 125 A Chap. 72 Vers. 17 Pag. 731 B Chap. 73 Vers. 1 Pag. 595 C Chap. 73 Vers. 22 Pag. 430 B Chap. 74 Vers. 4 Pag. 574 E Chap. 74 Vers. 12 Pag. 220 A Chap. 74 Vers. 12 Pag. 364 E Chap. 75 Vers. 1 Pag. 90 E Chap. 76 Vers. 1 Pag. 90 D Chap. 76 Vers. 11 Pag. 683 A Chap. 81 Vers. 10 Pag. 115 D Chap. 83 Vers. 6, 7.8 Pag. 546 D Chap. 84 Vers. 3 Pag. 125 D Chap. 84 Vers. 7 Pag. 761 A Chap. 85 Vers. 8 Pag. 126 A Chap. 85 Vers. 11 Pag. 125 A Chap. 90 Vers. 1 Pag. 686 D Chap. 90 Vers. 12 Pag. 716 C Chap. 90 Vers. 12 Pag. 762 D Chap. 95 Vers. 7 Pag. 191 B Chap. 104 Vers. 24 Pag. 2 B Chap. 106 Vers. 3 Pag. 771 D Chap. 106 Vers. 19, 21 Pag. 647 B Chap. 106 Vers. 30, 31 Pag. 561 A Chap. 110 Vers. 1 Pag. 542 A Chap. 110 Vers. 1 Pag. 661 A Chap. 115 Vers. 13, 14 Pag. 595 B Chap. 115 Vers. 3 Pag. 147 C Chap. 118 Vers. 10 Pag. 626 C Chap. 118 Vers. 20 Pag. 125 A Chap. 118 Vers. 24 Pag. 581 E Chap. 119 Vers. 1 Pag. 679 D Chap. 119 Vers. 33 Pag. 22 C Chap. 119 Vers. 96 Pag. 706 B Chap. 119 Vers. 106 Pag. 574 C Chap. 119 Vers. 112 Pag. 22 C Chap. 119 Vers. 141 Pag. 391 E Chap. 119 Vers. 142 Pag. 793 C Chap. 122 Vers. 4 Pag. 361 B Chap. 128 Vers. 1 Pag. 679 D Chap. 132 Vers. 17 Pag. 609 E Chap. 133 Vers. 1 Pag. 446 B Chap. 136 Vers. 5 Pag. 2 B Chap. 139 Vers. 17 Pag. 625 E Chap. 139 Vers. 5 Pag. 744 C Chap. 143 Vers. 2 Pag. 769 A Chap. 144 Vers. 13, 14 Pag. 698 E Proverbs. Chap. 1 Vers. 32 Pag. 437 C Chap. 3 Vers. 22 Pag. 661 D Chap. 4 Vers. 21 Pag. 645 E Chap. 4 Vers. 23 Pag. 636 A Chap. 8 Vers. 6 Pag. 566 E Chap. 9 Vers. 6 Pag. 122 A Chap. 13 Vers. 12 Pag. 6 B Chap. 13 Vers. 17 Pag. 506 C Chap. 13 Vers. 20 Pag. 780 E Chap. 13 Vers. 24 Pag. 482 B Chap. 14 Vers. 4 Pag. 429 E Chap. 16 Vers. 31 Pag. 448 E Chap. 17 Vers. 14 Pag. 621 B Chap. 18 Vers. 3 Pag. 132 B Chap. 18 Vers. 10 Pag. 90 E Chap. 19 Vers. 14 Pag. 165 E Chap. 20 Vers. 12 Pag. 642 C Chap. 20 Vers. 18 Pag. 489 C Chap. 21 Vers. 22 Pag. 767 A Chap. 21 Vers. 27 Pag. 536 D Chap. 24 Vers. 5 Pag. 763 C Chap. 30 Vers. 1 Pag. 767 D Chap. 30 Vers. 12 Pag. 23 D Chap. 30 Vers. 22 Pag. 642 B
Ecclesiastes. Chap. 5 Vers. 1 Pag. 736 C Chap. 6 Vers. 7 Pag. 705 C Chap. 7 Vers. 19 Pag. 244 C Chap. 7 Vers. 19, 20 Pag. 761 C Chap. 9 Vers. 9 Pag. 642 E Chap. 9 Vers. 14 Pag. 764 B Chap. 12 Vers. 1 Pag. 641 D Chap. 12 Vers. 13 Pag. 333 D Chap. 12 Vers. 13 Pag. 392 D Chap. 12 Vers. 13 Pag. 682 B Canticles. Chap. 1 Vers. 3 Pag. 90 E Chap. 2 Vers. 4 Pag. 92 A Chap. 4 Vers. 7 Pag. 752 A Chap. 4 Vers. 16 Pag. 545 B Chap. 5 Vers. 10 Pag. 523 C Chap. 6 Vers. 12 Pag. 108 C Isaiah. Chap. 1 Vers. 5 Pag. 328 B Chap. 1 Vers. 10 Pag. 756 E Chap. 1 Vers. 24 Pag. 748 B Chap. 1 Vers. 13, 14 Pag. 573 B Chap. 5 Vers. 4 Pag. 720 C Chap. 5 Vers. 17 Pag. 738 C Chap. 6 Vers. 3 Pag. 414 D Chap. 8 Vers. 8 Pag. 490 A Chap. 9 Vers. 5 Pag. 430 C Chap. 9 Vers. 6 Pag. 371 B Chap. 9 Vers. 15 Pag. 553 B Chap. 10 Vers. 22 Pag. 595 E Chap. 10 Vers. 27 Pag. 109 C Chap. 10 Vers. 27 Pag. 579 D Chap. 11 Vers. 1 Pag. 181 E Chap. 11 Vers. 1 Pag. 236 A Chap. 11 Vers. 1 Pag. 471 D Chap. 14 Vers. 2 Pag. 445 C Chap. 25 Vers. 7 Pag. 383 A Chap. 26 Vers. 5 Pag. 18 E Chap. 26 Vers. 13 Pag. 89 C Chap. 26 Vers. 13 Pag. 226 E Chap. 26 Vers. 15 Pag. 596 B Chap. 27 Vers. 1 Pag. 755 B Chap. 27 Vers. 3 Pag. 660 C Chap. 29 Vers. 9 Pag. 89 C Chap. 29 Vers. 9 Pag. 269 A Chap. 29 Vers. 17 Pag. 651 E Chap. 30 Vers. 1 Pag. 89 A Chap. 30 Vers. 10 Pag. 397 C Chap. 30 Vers. 20 Pag. 392 A Chap. 33 Vers. 20 Pag. 125 C Chap. 40 Vers. 2 Pag. 432 D Chap. 40 Vers. 10 Pag. 293 E Chap. 40 Vers. 10 Pag. 549 A Chap. 42 Vers. 1 Pag. 4 B Chap. 43 Vers. 2 Pag. 534 C Chap. 44 Vers. 2 Pag. 142 E Chap. 45 Vers. 18 Pag. 62 B Chap. 53 Vers. 1 Pag. 476 E Chap. 53 Vers. 5 Pag. 438 A Chap. 53 Vers. 5 Pag. 730 E Chap. 53 Vers. 11 Pag. 33 B Chap. 53 Vers. 12 Pag. 236 B Chap. 57 Vers. 15 Pag. 686 D Chap. 58 Vers. 12 Pag. 125 C Chap. 59 Vers. 1 Pag. 357 B Chap. 59 Vers. 2 Pag. 401 A Chap. 59 Vers. 4, 5 Pag. 21 A Chap. 61 Vers. 1 Pag. 795 A Chap. 65 Vers. 2, 3 Pag. 720 B Chap. 65 Vers. 11 Pag. 336 E Chap. 65 Vers. 16 Pag. 183 E Chap. 65 Vers. 16 Pag. 744 C Chap. 65 Vers. 25 Pag. 444 B Chap. 65 Vers. 25 Pag. 716 A Chap. 66 Vers. 9 Pag. 145 E Jeremiah. Chap. 1 Vers. 14 Pag. 513 D Chap. 3 Vers. 1 Pag. 724 C Chap. 3 Vers. 16 Pag. 204 E Chap. 3 Vers. 20 Pag. 560 B Chap. 4 Vers. 14 Pag. 560 D Chap. 4 Vers. 14 Pag. 624 D Chap. 4 Vers. 14 Pag. 640 A Chap. 4 Vers. 23 Pag. 2. C. 475 C Chap. 4 Vers. 2 Pag. 390 C Chap. 4 Vers. 7 Pag. 558 E
Chap. 4 Vers. 31 Pag. 397 C Chap. 6 Vers. 8 Pag. 645 A Chap. 6 Vers. 16 Pag. 334 C Chap. 9 Vers. 2, 8 Pag. 572 B Chap. 9 Vers. 21 Pag. 419 E Chap. 10 Vers. 11 Pag. 737 C Chap. 10 Vers. 23 Pag. 331 D Chap. 12 Vers. 14, 15, 16 Pag. 252 D Chap. 13 Vers. 23 Pag. 752 E Chap. 14 Vers. 7 Pag. 90 E Chap. 17 Vers. 13 Pag. 770 E Chap. 32 Vers. 3 Pag. 445 C Chap. 32 Vers. 6 Pag. 151 B Chap. 25 Vers. 6 Pag. 399 D Chap. 31 Vers. 22 Pag. 17 E Chap. 31 Vers. 32, 33 Pag. 588 C Chap. 35 Vers. 2 Pag. 307 E Chap. 46 Vers. 25 Pag. 128 D Chap. 51 Vers. 7 Pag. 89 D Chap. 51 Vers. 9 Pag. 766 E Lamentations. Chap. 4 Vers. 13 Pag. 247 B Chap. 5 Vers. 6 Pag. 502 C Ezekiel. Chap. 2 Vers. 2 Pag. 757 A Chap. 2 Vers. 3 Pag. 222 E Chap. 4 Vers. 4, 5 Pag. 258 B Chap. 6 Vers. 9 Pag. 401 A Chap. 6 Vers. 9 Pag. 494 D Pag. 315 D Chap. 8 Vers. 12 Pag. 563 A Chap. 8 Vers. 14 Pag. 738 B Chap. 13 Vers. 19 Pag. 247 B Chap. 15 Vers. 2 Pag. 520 C Chap. 16 Vers. 3 Pag. 756 E Chap. 16 Vers. 30 Pag. 315 B Chap. 18 Vers. 31 Pag. 720 C Chap. 23 Vers. 4 Pag. 127 C Chap. 36 Vers. 21 Pag. 90 E Chap. 36 Vers. 25 Pag. 524 D Chap. 36 Vers. 27 Pag. 13 A Chap. 37 Vers. 1 Pag. 244 A Chap. 37 Vers. 10 Pag. 690 E Chap. 37 Vers. 27 Pag. 125 A Chap. 38 Vers. 9 Pag. 383 B Chap. 42 Vers. 13 Pag. 265 A Chap. 43 Vers. 16 Pag. 675 D Daniel. Chap. 9 Vers. 4 Pag. 713 E Chap. 9 Vers. 13 Pag. 774 E Chap. 12 Vers. 3 Pag. 555 B Chap. 12 Vers. 3 Pag. 771 B Chap. 12 Vers. 10 Pag. 1 D Hosea. Chap. 1 Vers. 2 Pag. 133 D Chap. 2 Vers. 14 Pag. 119 D Chap. 3 Vers. 5 Pag. 189 E Chap. 4 Vers. 2 Pag. 40 B Chap. 4 Vers. 2 Pag. 523 A Chap. 5 Vers. 15 Pag. 401 E Chap. 5 Vers. 10 Pag. 637 A Chap. 6 Vers. 2 Pag. 214 B Chap. 6 Vers. 6 Pag. 536 D Chap. 8 Vers. 12 Pag. 243 C Chap. 8 Vers. 12 Pag. 706 D Chap. 9 Vers. 10 Pag. 685 B Chap. 11 Vers. 4 Pag. 118 D Chap. 11 Vers. 4 Pag. 720 B Chap. 14 Vers. 2 Pag. 152 D Chap. 14 Vers. 2 Pag. 236 E Chap. 14 Vers. 9 Pag. 758 C Amos. Chap. 6 Vers. 6 Pag. 176 C Chap. 9 Vers. 7 Pag. 463 A Chap. 9 Vers. 8 Pag. 150 C Chap. 9 Vers. 8 Pag. 675 A Chap. 9 Vers. 11 Pag. 125 C Obadiah. Chap. 1 Vers. 21 Pag. 444 E Jonah. Chap. 2 Vers. 2 Pag. 176 A
Micah. Chap. 4 Vers. 5 Pag. 91 A Chap. 6 Vers. 5 Pag. 734 D Chap. 7 Vers. 14, 15, 19 Pag. 221 C Chap. 7 Vers. 14, 15, 19 Pag. 538 E Habakkuk. Chap. 1 Vers. 5 Pag. 506 B Zephaniah. Chap. 1 Vers. 15, 16 Pag. 591 E Chap. 2 Vers. 1 Pag. 568 B Zechariah. Chap. 1 Vers. 9, 13, 14, 19 Pag. 133 D Chap. 5 Vers. 5, 11 Pag. 278 A Chap. 6 Vers. 11 Pag. 371 B Chap. 8 Vers. 16 Pag. 597 A Chap. 10 Vers. 5 Pag. 18 A Chap. 11 Vers. 8 Pag. 532 A Chap. 11 Vers. 10 Pag. 495 A Chap. 12 Vers. 6 Pag. 125 A Chap. 14 Vers. 16, 17 Pag. 575 A Chap. 14 Vers. 21 Pag. 108 D Chap. 14 Vers. 21 Pag. 110 A Malachi. Chap. 1 Vers. 2, 3, 4 Pag. 103 D Chap. 1 Vers. 4 Pag. 779 D Chap. 1 Vers. 6 Pag. 684 E Chap. 1 Vers. 14 Pag. 313 C Chap. 4 Vers. 2 Pag. 6 C Chap. 4 Vers. 2 Pag. 698 A Chap. 4 Vers. 6 Pag. 442 A 2 Esdras. Chap. 6 Vers. 8, 9 Pag. 103 D Chap. 15 Vers. 16 Pag. 618 A Chap. 15 Vers. 16 Pag. 686 B Judeth. Chap. 13 Vers. 9 Pag. 20 E Wisdom. Chap. 2 Vers. 22 Pag. 531 D Chap. 4 Vers. 13 Pag. 513 A Chap. 7 Vers. 25 Pag. 762 C Chap. 7 Vers. 27 Pag. 448 B Chap. 8 Vers. 8 Pag. 766 C Chap. 14 Vers. 7 Pag. 5 E Chap. 16 Vers. 21 Pag. 530 C Ecclesiasticus. Chap. 4 Vers. 17, 18, 19 Pag. 757 D Chap. 10 Vers. 12 Pag. 437 A Chap. 24 Vers. 21 Pag. 763 E Chap. 25 Vers. 15 Pag. 17 A Chap. 25 Vers. 26 Pag. 561 A Chap. 33 Vers. 7, 12 Pag. 569 D Matthew. Chap. 1 Vers. 19 Pag. 730 A Chap. 1 Vers. 21 Pag. 650 B Chap. 5 Vers. 18, 19 Pag. 477 D Chap. 5 Vers. 18, 19 Pag. 797 D Chap. 5 Vers. 20 Pag. 242 E Chap. 5 Vers. 21, 22 Pag. 450 A Chap. 5 Vers. 21, 22 Pag. 723 C Chap. 5 Vers. 24 Pag. 306 D Chap. 5 Vers. 25 Pag. 345 D Chap. 5 Vers. 30 Pag. 723 C Chap. 5 Vers. 31 Pag. 725 A Chap. 5 Vers. 45 Pag. 285 C Chap. 6 Vers. 12 Pag. 684 E Chap. 6 Vers. 12 Pag. 794 D Chap. 7 Vers. 14 Pag. 680 D Chap. 8 Vers. 17 Pag. 152 E Chap. 10 Vers. 25 Pag. 475 D Chap. 10 Vers. 37 Pag. 304 B Chap. 11 Vers. 28, 29 Pag. 4 C Chap. 11 Vers. 28, 29 Pag. 57 D Chap. 11 Vers. 28, 29 Pag. 109 C Chap. 11 Vers. 28, 29 Pag. 527 B Chap. 12 Vers. 12 Pag. 577 E Chap. 12 Vers. 50 Pag. 699 B Chap. 12 Vers. 50 Pag. 642 C Chap. 13 Vers. 9 Pag. 642 D Chap. 13 Vers. 11 Pag. 387 B Chap. 13 Vers. 52 Pag. 1 B
Chap. 14 Vers. 20 Pag. 207 E Chap. 14 Vers. 26 Pag. 736 E Chap. 15 Vers. 4 Pag. 305 C Chap. 16 Vers. 22 Pag. 794 C Chap. 17 Vers. 11, 12 Pag. 442 B Chap. 19 Vers. 12 Pag. 537 B Chap. 20 Vers. 3, 6 Pag. 179 A Chap. 20 Vers. 3, 6 Pag. 371 E Chap. 20 Vers. 25 Pag. 686 A Chap. 21 Vers. 2 Pag. 528 E Chap. 21 Vers. 32 Pag. 771 B Chap. 22 Vers. 21 Pag. 684 E Chap. 22 Vers. 37 Pag. 704 D Chap. 22 Vers. 37 Pag. 710 A Chap. 22 Vers. 38 Pag. 712 D Chap. 22 Vers. 37, 39 Pag. 691 E Chap. 23 Vers. 8, 10 Pag. 570 B Chap. 23 Vers. 13 Pag. 562 C Chap. 23 Vers. 19 Pag. 59 B Chap. 23 Vers. 23 Pag. 519 A Chap. 23 Vers. 24 Pag. 315 A Chap. 23 Vers. 27 Pag. 720 B Chap. 23 Vers. 35 Pag. 643 E Chap. 23 Vers. 37 Pag. 752 E Chap. 24 Vers. 12 Pag. 562 D Chap. 24 Vers. 24 Pag. 211 B Chap. 25 Vers. 21 Pag. 170 A Chap. 26 Vers. 26 Pag. 212 E Chap. 26 Vers. 28 Pag. 152 E Chap. 26 Vers. 64 Pag. 252 A Chap. 28 Vers. 19 Pag. 524 C Chap. 28 Vers. 18, 19, 21 Pag. 291 A Mark. Chap. 1 Vers. 23 Pag. 574 D Chap. 4 Vers. 28 Pag. 512 D Chap. 4 Vers. 32 Pag. 769 C Chap. 5 Vers. 2 Pag. 528 D Chap. 7 Vers. 21 Pag. 559 C Chap. 7 Vers. 33 Pag. 125 E Chap. 8 Vers. 36 Pag. 639 E Chap. 9 Vers. 24 Pag. 672 C Chap. 16 Vers. 16 Pag. 32 B Luke. Chap. 1 Vers. 17 Pag. 164 D Chap. 2 Vers. 14 Pag. 346 B Chap. 2 Vers. 31 Pag. 393 B Chap. 2 Vers. 32 Pag. 542 E Chap. 2 Vers. 49 Pag. 304 C Chap. 3 Vers. 23 Pag. 431 D Chap. 3 Vers. 38 Pag. 45 E Chap. 4 Vers. 6 Pag. 18 C Chap. 4 Vers. 18 Pag. 109 C Chap. 4 Vers. 18 Pag. 795 A Chap. 10 Vers. 17 Pag. 19 D Chap. 10 Vers. 28 Pag. 710 C Chap. 10 Vers. 30 Pag. 721 E Chap. 10 Vers. 31 Pag. 337 D Chap. 11 Vers. 4 Pag. 152 E Chap. 11 Vers. 41 Pag. 650 E Chap. 13 Vers. 7 Pag. 520 E Chap. 13 Vers. 15 Pag. 577 D Chap. 14 Vers. 23 Pag. 126 C Chap. 14 Vers. 23 Pag. 454 B Chap. 16 Vers. 15 Pag. 734 A Chap. 19 Vers. 16 Pag. 95 D Chap. 19 Vers. 33 Pag. 90 B Chap. 20 Vers. 36 Pag. 285 E Chap. 21 Vers. 19 Pag. 630 D Chap. 24 Vers. 13 Pag. 608 D Chap. 24 Vers. 21 Pag. 564 B Chap. 24 Vers. 26, 27 Pag. 386 A Chap. 24 Vers. 49 Pag. 569 A John. Vers. 14 Pag. 122 E Vers. 14 Pag. 137 C Vers. 14 Pag. 363 E Vers. 16 Pag. 55 A Vers. 16 Pag. 568 B Vers. 26 Pag. 687 A Vers. 47 Pag. 595 C Chap. 2 Vers. 21 Pag. 123 A Chap. 3 Vers. 18 Pag. 483 C Chap. 3 Vers. 92 Pag. 165 C Chap. 3 Vers. 36 Pag. 24 C Chap. 3 Vers. 36 Pag. 483 D Chap. 4 Vers. 14 Pag. 763 E
Chap. 4 Vers. 22 Pag. 123 E Chap. 4 Vers. 23 Pag. 595 A Chap. 5 Vers. 34 Pag. 720 C Chap. 5 Vers. 39 Pag. 326 E Chap. 5 Vers. 39 Pag. 491 D Chap. 5 Vers. 44 Pag. 555 A Chap. 5 Vers. 44 Pag. 746 E Chap. 5 Vers. 42 Pag. 715 E Chap. 6 Vers. 32, 63 Pag. 224 C Chap. 6 Vers. 33, 50, 51 Pag. 530 D Chap. 6 Vers. 35 Pag. 575 B Chap. 6 Vers. 44 Pag. 121 B Chap. 7 Vers. 17 Pag. 1 E Chap. 7 Vers. 37 Pag. 6 A Chap. 7 Vers. 39 Pag. 508 E Chap. 7 Vers. 39 Pag. 575 C Chap. 8 Vers. 23 Pag. 209 C Chap. 8 Vers. 35 Pag. 105 C Chap. 8 Vers. 35 Pag. 108 A Chap. 8 Vers. 44 Pag. 484 B Chap. 8 Vers. 50 Pag. 581 B Chap. 8 Vers. 59 Pag. 190 A Chap. 10 Vers. 1 Pag. 405 E Chap. 10 Vers. 27 Pag. 325 A Chap. 12 Vers. 24 Pag. 719 A Chap. 12 Vers. 28, 29 Pag. 261 B Chap. 50 Vers. 50 Pag. 573 C Chap. 13 Vers. 34 Pag. 257 E Chap. 14 Vers. 1 Pag. 773 C Chap. 14 Vers. 6 Pag. 679 D Chap. 14 Vers. 6 Pag. 744 C Chap. 14 Vers. 30 Pag. 273 B Chap. 16 Vers. 2 Pag. 14 B Chap. 16 Vers. 8 Pag. 180 C Chap. 17 Vers. 6 Pag. 163 B Chap. 17 Vers. 19 Pag. 180 C Chap. 17 Vers. 21 Pag. 715 A Chap. 20 Vers. 29 Pag. 572 A Acts. Vers. 1 Pag. 569 A Vers. 5 Pag. 157 D Chap. 2 Vers. 37 Pag. 671 C Chap. 2 Vers. 38 Pag. 158 D Chap. 2 Vers. 47 Pag. 595 A Chap. 2 Vers. 47 Pag. 758 B Chap. 3 Vers. 26 Pag. 606 A Chap. 3 Vers. 27 Pag. 223 A Chap. 4 Vers. 32 Pag. 714 C Chap. 5 Vers. 20 Pag. 710 A Chap. 5 Vers. 9 Pag. 176 C Chap. 7 Vers. 51 Pag. 720 B Chap. 11 Vers. 26 Pag. 731 D Chap. 12 Vers. 1 Pag. 699 E Chap. 13 Vers. 10 Pag. 14 D Chap. 13 Vers. 22 Pag. 57 D Chap. 13 Vers. 38 Pag. 151 D Chap. 13 Vers. 41 Pag. 506 A Chap. 46 Vers. 46 Pag. 495 D Chap. 46 Vers. 47 Pag. 167 A Chap. 15 Vers. 16 Pag. 155 C Chap. 15 Vers. 24 Pag. 552 E Chap. 17 Vers. 6 Pag. 652 A Chap. 26 Vers. 26 Pag. 687 D Chap. 26 Vers. 31 Pag. 524 C Chap. 20 Vers. 29 Pag. 733 E Chap. 21 Vers. 26 Pag. 417 D Chap. 26 Vers. 9 Pag. 14 B Chap. 26 Vers. 18 Pag. 774 E Chap. 26 Vers. 19 Pag. 126 D Chap. 26 Vers. 19 Pag. 720 D Chap. 26 Vers. 22 Pag. 564 C Romans. Chap. 1 Vers. 16 Pag. 19 C Chap. 1 Vers. 28 Pag. 397 E Chap. 1 Vers. 28 Pag. 637 B Chap. 3 Vers. 20 Pag. 769 A Chap. 3 Vers. 23 Pag. 740 B Chap. 3 Vers. 23 Pag. 771 E Chap. 3 Vers. 23 Pag. 788 C Chap. 3 Vers. 25, 26 Pag. 696 E Chap. 4 Vers. 3, 8 Pag. 151 E Chap. 4 Vers. 5 Pag. 34 D Chap. 4 Vers. 18 Pag. 721 D Chap. 4 Vers. 14 Pag. 55 C Chap. 6 Vers. 3 Pag. 222 B Chap. 6 Vers. 8 Pag. 792 B
Chap. 6 Vers. 13 Pag. 55 C Chap. 6 Vers. 17 Pag. 435 C Chap. 6 Vers. 19 Pag. 787 B Chap. 7 Vers. 4 Pag. 166 D Chap. 7 Vers. 9 Pag. 14 D Chap. 7 Vers. 13 Pag. 103 C Chap. 7 Vers. 14 Pag. 403 E Chap. 7 Vers. 14 Pag. 770 D Chap. 7 Vers. 17 Pag. 288 B Chap. 8 Vers. 9 Pag. 472 E Chap. 8 Vers. 13 Pag. 750 D Chap. 8 Vers. 13 Pag. 780 D Chap. 8 Vers. 3 Pag. 19 B Chap. 8 Vers. 3 Pag. 795 D Chap. 8 Vers. 4 Pag. 247 E Chap. 8 Vers. 16 Pag. 285 D Chap. 8 Vers. 17 Pag. 792 B Chap. 8 Vers. 26 Pag. 125 B Chap. 9 Vers. 27 Pag. 143 B Chap. 9 Vers. 27 Pag. 596 A Chap. 9 Vers. 29 Pag. 719 D Chap. 10 Vers. 3 Pag. 791 D Chap. 11 Vers. 10 Pag. 579 E Chap. 11 Vers. 26 Pag. 33 B Chap. 11 Vers. 26 Pag. 561 E Chap. 12 Vers. 9 Pag. 715 B Chap. 13 Vers. 12 Pag. 543 D Chap. 13 Vers. 14 Pag. 457 B Chap. 16 Vers. 16 Pag. 728 E Chap. 16 Vers. 19 Pag. 21 E 1 Corinthians. Chap. 2 Vers. 6 Pag. 388 D Chap. 2 Vers. 8 Pag. 770 A Chap. 2 Vers. 14 Pag. 634 A Chap. 3 Vers. 3 Pag. 731 C Chap. 3 Vers. 3 Pag. 788 E Chap. 3 Vers. 6, 7, 9 Pag. 660 C Chap. 3 Vers. 9 Pag. 118 B Chap. 3 Vers. 17 Pag. 22 D Chap. 3 Vers. 17 Pag. 650 C Chap. 3 Vers. 23 Pag. 56 A Chap. 4 Vers. 8 Pag. 131 D Chap. 5 Vers. 8 Pag. 576 C Chap. 6 Vers. 7 Pag. 402 E Chap. 6 Vers. 17 Pag. 495 B Chap. 6 Vers. 17 Pag. 499 C Chap. 6 Vers. 17 Pag. 715 A Chap. 6 Vers. 20 Pag. 227 E Chap. 6 Vers. 20 Pag. 55 D Chap. 7 Vers. 21 Pag. 101 B Chap. 8 Vers. 1 Pag. 716 A Chap. 8 Vers. 4 Pag. 225 E Chap. 9 Vers. 9 Pag. 429 E Chap. 9 Vers. 13 Pag. 258 D Chap. 9 Vers. 27 Pag. 162 D Chap. 10 Vers. 1, 2 Pag. 222 A Chap. 10 Vers. 3, 4 Pag. 212 C Chap. 10 Vers. 3, 4 Pag. 533 D Chap. 11 Vers. 9 Pag. 642 D Chap. 12 Vers. 13 Pag. 222 A Chap. 12 Vers. 28 Pag. 452 E Chap. 12 Vers. 31 Pag. 679 E Chap. 13 Vers. 10 Pag. 771 C Chap. 13 Vers. 13 Pag. 714 C Chap. 14 Vers. 20 Pag. 289 C Chap. 15 Vers. 43 Pag. 730 E Chap. 15 Vers. 45 Pag. 3 C Chap. 15 Vers. 46, 47 Pag. 27 D Chap. 15 Vers. 46, 47 Pag. 778 E Chap. 15 Vers. 47 Pag. 94 E Chap. 15 Vers. 47 Pag. 103 E Chap. 15 Vers. 47 Pag. 523 A Chap. 15 Vers. 50 Pag. 748 D 2 Corinthians. Chap. 1 Vers. 10 Pag. 552 C Chap. 3 Vers. 5 Pag. 12 C Chap. 3 Vers. 6 Pag. 165 B Chap. 3 Vers. 9 Pag. 19 A Chap. 3 Vers. 13 Pag. 9 B Chap. 3 Vers. 17 Pag. 783 D Chap. 3 Vers. 18 Pag. 751 E Chap. 3 Vers. 18 Pag. 711 D Chap. 4 Vers. 7 Pag. 384 B Chap. 4 Vers. 17 Pag. 302 B Chap. 5 Vers. 20 Pag. 684 A Chap. 5 Vers. 21 Pag. 34 C
Chap. 5 Vers. 24 Pag. 255 E Chap. 5 Vers. 1 Pag. 721 B Chap. 6 Vers. 10 Pag. 174 C Chap. 6 Vers. 16 Pag. 125 E Chap. 8 Vers. 12 Pag. 327 C Chap. 10 Vers. 5 Pag. 473 D Chap. 10 Vers. 5 Pag. 551 E Chap. 10 Vers. 5 Pag. 627 E Chap. 10 Vers. 2 Pag. 165 D Chap. 10 Vers. 2 Pag. 563 B Chap. 11 Vers. 3 Pag. 11 D Chap. 11 Vers. 3 Pag. 560 D Chap. 11 Vers. 3 Pag. 627 A Chap. 11 Vers. 13 Pag. 562 A Chap. 11 Vers. 13 Pag. 749 C Chap. 12 Vers. 16 Pag. 302 B Chap. 13 Vers. 3 Pag. 133 E Chap. 13 Vers. 4 Pag. 730 E Chap. 13 Vers. 11 Pag. 446 D Galatians. Chap. 1 Vers. 16 Pag. 192 A Chap. 2 Vers. 10 Pag. 769 A Chap. 2 Vers. 10 Pag. 791 E Chap. 2 Vers. 16 Pag. 607 D Chap. 3 Vers. 1 Pag. 687 A Chap. 3 Vers. 3 Pag. 619 A Chap. 3 Vers. 7, 26 Pag. 285 E Chap. 3 Vers. 24 Pag. 163 A Chap. 3 Vers. 24 Pag. 773 C Chap. 4 Vers. 1 Pag. 107 E Chap. 4 Vers. 23 Pag. 156 A Chap. 4 Vers. 26 Pag. 38 A Chap. 4 Vers. 30 Pag. 103 D Chap. 4 Vers. 30 Pag. 528 C Chap. 5 Vers. 7 Pag. 618 D Chap. 5 Vers. 9 Pag. 751 A Chap. 5 Vers. 17 Pag. 774 C Chap. 5 Vers. 20 Pag. 560 C Chap. 5 Vers. 20 Pag. 777 D Chap. 6 Vers. 1 Pag. 772 B Chap. 6 Vers. 16 Pag. 596 D Ephesians. Chap. 1 Vers. 4 Pag. 166 C Chap. 1 Vers. 4 Pag. 642 D Chap. 1 Vers. 17, 18 Pag. 12 B Chap. 2 Vers. 2 Pag. 18 C Chap. 2 Vers. 10 Pag. 173 C Chap. 2 Vers. 10 Pag. 608 B Chap. 2 Vers. 12 Pag. 339 D Chap. 2 Vers. 15 Pag. 18 E Chap. 2 Vers. 22 Pag. 125 C Chap. 3 Vers. 8 Pag. 733 D Chap. 3 Vers. 14, 21 Pag. 116 A Chap. 4 Vers. 7 Pag. 448 B Chap. 4 Vers. 12, 13 Pag. 561 E Chap. 4 Vers. 14 Pag. 610 D Chap. 4 Vers. 14, 15 Pag. 593 C Chap. 4 Vers. 26 Pag. 186 D Chap. 4 Vers. 26 Pag. 438 B Chap. 5 Vers. 2 Pag. 500 D Chap. 5 Vers. 14 Pag. 721 D Chap. 5 Vers. 25 Pag. 165 C Chap. 5 Vers. 26 Pag. 209 A Chap. 5 Vers. 30, 31, 32 Pag. 308 B Chap. 6 Vers. 1 Pag. 304 C Chap. 6 Vers. 12 Pag. 429 B Chap. 6 Vers. 14 Pag. 627 B Philippians. Chap. 1 Vers. 9 Pag. 412 C Chap. 2 Vers. 9, 10 Pag. 90 D Chap. 2 Vers. 15 Pag. 753 B Chap. 3 Vers. 2 Pag. 734 A Chap. 3 Vers. 8 Pag. 719 C Chap. 3 Vers. 14 Pag. 108 D Chap. 4 Vers. 13 Pag. 477 A Colossians. Chap. 1 Vers. 9, 18 Pag. 12 B Chap. 1 Vers. 13 Pag. 704 C Chap. 1 Vers. 27 Pag. 687 C Chap. 1 Vers. 29 Pag. 562 B Chap. 2 Vers. 5 Pag. 142 A Chap. 2 Vers. 6 Pag. 91 A Chap. 2 Vers. 12 Pag. 720 A Chap. 2 Vers. 15 Pag. 534 E
Chap. 2 Vers. 17 Pag. 564 B Chap. 2 Vers. 19 Pag. 690 D Chap. 3 Vers. 1 Pag. 138 A Chap. 3 Vers. 4 Pag. 573 C Chap. 3 Vers. 5 Pag. 770 E Chap. 3 Vers. 10 Pag. 13 B Chap. 4 Vers. 12 Pag. 561 D 1 Thessalonians. Chap. 2 Vers. 6 Pag. 302 B Chap. 4 Vers. 8 Pag. 308 D Chap. 5 Vers. 22 Pag. 274 D 2 Thessalonians. Chap. 2 Vers. 2 Pag. 625 C Chap. 2 Vers. 11 Pag. 509 C Chap. 3 Vers. 5 Pag. 717 D 1 Timothie. Chap. 1 Vers. 1 Pag. 773 C Chap. 1 Vers. 5 Pag. 682 D Chap. 1 Vers. 10 Pag. 548 C Chap. 2 Vers. 2 Pag. 566 D Chap. 2 Vers. 6 Pag. 58 A Chap. 2 Vers. 14 Pag. 461 C Chap. 3 Vers. 1 Pag. 378 C Chap. 5 Vers. 4 Pag. 305 D Chap. 6 Vers. 3 Pag. 548 D Chap. 6 Vers. 3, 4 Pag. 116 C Chap. 6 Vers. 10 Pag. 437 B Chap. 6 Vers. 17 Pag. 497 B 2 Timothie. Chap. 1 Vers. 5 Pag. 481 C Chap. 1 Vers. 6 Pag. 690 A Chap. 1 Vers. 13 Pag. 548 D Chap. 1 Vers. 14 Pag. 404 D Chap. 2 Vers. 3 Pag. 357 D Chap. 2 Vers. 7 Pag. 12 C Chap. 2 Vers. 11 Pag. 149 E Chap. 2 Vers. 12 Pag. 224 C Chap. 2 Vers. 22 Pag. 220 E Chap. 3 Vers. 12 Pag. 546 B Chap. 4 Vers. 7, 8 Pag. 178 E Titus. Chap. 2 Vers. 11 Pag. 545 E Chap. 2 Vers. 11 Pag. 610 B Chap. 2 Vers. 15 Pag. 305 A Hebrews. Chap. 1 Vers. 6, 20 Pag. 55 A Chap. 1 Vers. 12 Pag. 716 B Chap. 2 Vers. 1 Pag. 645 E Chap. 2 Vers. 2, 3 Pag. 309 A Chap. 2 Vers. 15 Pag. 773 C Chap. 3 Vers. 7 Pag. 325 B Chap. 3 Vers. 18, 19 Pag. 483 E Chap. 3 Vers. 19 Pag. 208 E Chap. 4 Vers. 12, 13 Pag. 472 C Chap. 5 Vers. 13 Pag. 388 D Chap. 6 Vers. 1 Pag. 514 D Chap. 9 Vers. 7, 12 Pag. 363 A Chap. 9 Vers. 13 Pag. 525 A Chap. 10 Vers. 12, 13 Pag. 157 A Chap. 10 Vers. 22, 23 Pag. 525 A Chap. 10 Vers. 29 Pag. 106 B Chap. 10 Vers. 38, 39 Pag. 606 E Chap. 11 Vers. 1 Pag. 143 D Chap. 11 Vers. 4 Pag. 21 D Chap. 11 Vers. 5 Pag. 329 D Chap. 11 Vers. 20 Pag. 170 E Chap. 11 Vers. 34 Pag. 477 A Chap. 12 Vers. 4 Pag. 168 A Chap. 12 Vers. 22 Pag. 125 B Chap. 13 Vers. 5 Pag. 465 D Chap. 13 Vers. 8 Pag. 664 C Chap. 13 Vers. 10 Pag. 59 B James. Chap. 1 Vers. 8 Pag. 330 A Chap. 1 Vers. 17 Pag. 542 C Chap. 1 Vers. 19 Pag. 325 A Chap. 2 Vers. 7 Pag. 91 B Chap. 2 Vers. 10 Pag. 243 B Chap. 2 Vers. 14, 17, 20, 22, Pag. 146 A Chap. 2 Vers. 23 Pag. 153 C Chap. 3 Vers. 17 Pag. 308 A Chap. 4 Vers. 4 Pag. 560 C Chap. 5 Vers. 12 Pag. 649 E
1 Peter. Chap. 1 Vers. 8 Pag. 571 E Chap. 1 Vers. 13 Pag. 627 A Chap. 1 Vers. 22 Pag. 680 B Chap. 2 Vers. 7 Pag. 90 C Chap. 4 Vers. 1 Pag. 15 D Chap. 4 Vers. 1, 2 Pag. 58 B Chap. 4 Vers. 3 Pag. 749 C Chap. 4 Vers. 4 Pag. 81 D Chap. 5 Vers. 3 Pag. 454 A Chap. 5 Vers. 8 Pag. 484 E 2 Peter. Chap. 1 Vers. 4 Pag. 308 C Chap. 1 Vers. 5, 6, 7 Pag. 717 A Chap. 2 Vers. 5 Pag. 570 E Chap. 3 Vers. 12 Pag. 434 B Chap. 3 Vers. 18 Pag. 515 A 1 John. Chap. 1 Vers. 1 Pag. 391 A Chap. 1 Vers. 8 Pag. 771 A Chap. 1 Vers. 10 Pag. 771 E Chap. 2 Vers. 1 Pag. 790 D Chap. 2 Vers. 2 Pag. 89 A Chap. 2 Vers. 12 Pag. 108 A Chap. 2 Vers. 13 Pag. 178 A Chap. 2 Vers. 13, 14 Pag. 358 C Chap. 2 Vers. 20 Pag. 99 A Chap. 3 Vers. 2 Pag. 711 C Chap. 3 Vers. 8 Pag. 18 A Chap. 3 Vers. 18, 19, 20 Pag. 341 D Chap. 4 Vers. 18 Pag. 681 D Chap. 5 Vers. 3 Pag. 706 C Chap. 5 Vers. 8 Pag. 524 D Chap. 5 Vers. 18 Pag. 199 A 3 John. Vers. 2 Pag. 608 D Jude. Vers. 3 Pag. 537 C Vers. 5 Pag. 221 A Vers. 11 Pag. 509 C Vers. 14 Pag. 681 A Revelations. Chap. 1 Vers. 10 Pag. 569 B Chap. 1 Vers. 10 Pag. 581 E Chap. 2 Vers. 7 Pag. 5 D Chap. 2 Vers. 20 Pag. 444 B Chap. 2 Vers. 25 Pag. 690 A Chap. 3 Vers. 11 Pag. 422 D Chap. 3 Vers. 17 Pag. 531 C Chap. 4 Vers. 1 Pag. 785 D Chap. 4 Vers. 8 Pag. 414 E Chap. 6 Vers. 15, 16 Pag. 557 A Chap. 8 Vers. 10 Pag. 351 E Chap. 11 Vers. 8 Pag. 538 E Chap. 11 Vers. 8 Pag. 730 E Chap. 11 Vers. 15 Pag. 156 B Chap. 11 Vers. 15 Pag. 553 D Chap. 12 Vers. 1 Pag. 48 E Chap. 12 Vers. 9 Pag. 11 A Chap. 13 Vers. 9 Pag. 642 D Chap. 13 Vers. 15 Pag. 114 E Chap. 17 Vers. 14 Pag. 524 E Chap. 18 Vers. 13 Pag. 162 D Chap. 19 Vers. 10 Pag. 444 C Chap. 21 Vers. 2 Pag. 167 C Chap. 21 Vers. 3 Pag. 125 A Chap. 21 Vers. 7, 8 Pag. 106 B Chap. 21 Vers. 7, 8 Pag. 497 A Chap. 21 Vers. 7, 8 Pag. 593 C Chap. 21 Vers. 9 Pag. 308 A Chap. 21 Vers. 10, 27 Pag. 125 A Chap. 21 Vers. 11 Pag. 467 B Chap. 21 Vers. 17 Pag. 750 C Chap. 22 Vers. 2 Pag. 6 A Chap. 22 Vers. 11 Pag. 650 C Chap. 22 Vers. 20 Pag. 773 D
An Index of the more gross Errata, which have escaped. As for others meerly literal faults and accents, the judicious Rea∣der is desired to excuse them, and the other, and to amend them as he meets with them. Pag. Vers. Line. 1  a Pentateuch. 4 a.6  b. 10 innitar 5 d. 7  9 d. 9 pars 10 c 5  13 d. 7 been 14. b5  c. 7 which 16 a. 2  c. 5  17 a. 2  19 d. 1 up∣on 21 a. 7 dele ye though 22 a. 9 Heel b. 5  b. 9 the d. 6 the 23 e. 5  24 a. 2. bad 46 d. 2 d. 4.  d. 5  58 c. 7  60 b. 4 my 96 c. 6  99 b. 9  102 e. 4  104 c. 6  109 b. 3 imployed 112 c. 2 none 116 d. 8 amnem 136 a. 3  143 a. 5 sornace rutilat e. 5  d. 5 overcame 155 b. 4 Mostel 165 a. 7 Simon 169 e. 1  172 b 4  174 b. 2  177 d. 8  179 a. 8 dele that 185 c. 8 lateris 94 b. 6  196 b. 8 carnis, terrena 201 a. 5  208 c. 7 eat 209 c. 7 this is 213 d. 7  228 b. 5 world 229 c. 10 recto 246 c. 5  c. 7 dele not 256 d. 1  260 d. 6  266 d. 2 inultum d. 6 laws 268 a. 7  270 a 5 d. 9 Aldrovandus 275 b. 4 failing 279 a. 10 net d. 6 Sesquipedalia 287 b. 10  d. 9  289 b. 9 nourish 294 d. 2  295 d. 2 is to be 297 e. 5 Aeacus 305 he be 318 b. 6  321 d. 1 crime 326 a. 7  328 a. 4 it 329 a. 2 affections 331 e. 7 its 334 a. 8. may walk 336 d. 6  355 c. 5. Nashon 356 a. 8. the father of 361 a. 1  374 c. 10  d. 1  380 b. 3 absorbere 384 c 8 those e. 7 quarrel with 391 b. 2  394 c. 5 is that d. 4 the God 398 a. 1  399 b. 8  e. 2 provoke 400 c. 4 homini d. 2 dirimunt 401 b. 5 arguuntur 406 a. 8  412 a. 4 numerus 416 c. 1 sins 421 d. 9 are 429 b. 2  433 e. 6 worse 437 c. 1  443 b. 5  d. 6 these 445 c. 6  448 b. 3  d. 8  449 b. 5 God 450 e. 2 omni 451 a. 7 his poor 460 c. 10  477 c. 2 God 484 a. 8 ye 488 c. 8  491 e. 3.13.18. 492 a. 1  493 c. 7 Nathans 494 a. 7 dele be 495 c. 4 this d 8 in marg. 13. 504 a. 2 dele ands 506 c. 6 hands d. 6 servant 507 b. 1. king 508 d. 6  d. 8  509 b. 3 swallow 512 b 1. ablactare 514 b. 2  518 d. 2  d. 7  519 a. 2 imposed a. 2  522 c. 4 Mnenis 529 d. 3 have these 532 d. 9 as Homer 536 a. 7 secedit 538 c. 9 direct 541 c. 6 Messiah 546 b. 2  547 b. 2 distressers 561 a. 2  d. 10  565 c. 2 for  read  574 c. 2  575 d. 1 impin∣guatus 576 c. 6 d. 4 e. 2 Raamses 578 a. 1 ones own d. 7 every 579 d. 2  585 e. 3 seeing 591 c 6 seeleratum 597 b 7 b 8 adde a 605 b. 8 captive 611 c. 5. dum-amnis 612 c. 5 nium 618 e. 6 omnium 621 d. 6 dele and 623 d. 6  629 c. 5 reaso∣nable 642 e. 3 loved 645 a. 3 adde, from 650 b. 4 1.21, 653 b. 3 casualty 659 d. 8 dele are the 663 d 9  ossidue 665 a. 4 peregrina 668 d. 5 purgatam{que} 669 e. 6 paroshus 670 e. 6 & tineis 677 c. 1 e. 2 premises 678 c. 1 c. 2 requests e. 8 other 679 b. 2 so∣veraign 680 a. 6 is not only 682 d. 8 Echeneis 684 c. 7 love 686 c. 4 prudence— so to 691 c. 7. adde are 694 c. 5 distinguished 704 b. 4. 1.22. 706 b. 2 cellent 708 a. 5 quà quàm 712 b. 3 ac 714 c. 10.13. ult. 716 d. 5 God 732 c. 1  c. 4  733d 2  736 b. 2 principatus b. 7.  748 b. 2  753 d. 1  c. 1  754 a. 4 -vour to b. 2. depravations b. 5 Index e. 5  755 b. 9 in terram d. 7 injuriously 762 c. 8  764 d. 5 phrase 766 d. 9. Jer. 51.9. 767 d. 7 Ecclus. 768 b. 6  769 a. 2  b. 8 there 772 c. 4 A∣nathema 773 b. 3 columbos c. 3 endangers 778 c. 7.  779 d 5 check 781 a. 7  782 a. 7  783 e 3 Chron. 7. 788 c. 6  789 b. 8  d. 6 disrespects 790 c. 7 Christ 795 c. 5 walks 803 b. 1 wrath d. 5 as his.
