J1035 12900918 95243
London in Luster: PROJECTING Many bright Beams of TRIUMPH: DISPOSED INTO Several Representations of Scenes and Pageants. Performed with great Splendor ON WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER XXIX. 1679. At the Initiation and Instalment of the Right Honourable Sir ROBERT CLAYTON, Knight, LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON. DIGNIFIED With divers delightful Varieties of Presentors, with Speeches, Songs, and Actions, properly and punctually described. All set forth at the proper Cost and Charges of the Worshipful Company of DRAPERS. Devised and Composed by THO. IORDAN, Gent. — Pictoribus atque Poëtis Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas. Hor. de Arte Poet. London, Printed for Iohn Playford at the Temple-Church, 1679.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE Sir ROBERT CLAYTON, Knight, LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON. MY LORD, THE most Generous Ingenious Persons do never think themselves more affronted, than when most flatter'd; because Imperfections commonly are the Objects of such Varnish, but good Complexions defie Painting: I shall therefore avoid all florulent Expressions, and make my Addresses to your deserving Person, with such Encomiums, as are only delivered to me by the Dictates of Verity, which are these: By Divine Manuduction, Ability, Opportunity, Legal Election, and Regal Authority, you are invested and confir∣med a Vicegerent over the most Celebrious City of all Europe, LONDON; yet at such a Season, when the Trouble of the Times will prove the Trial of the Magistrate; in which, an even Carriage may render you a good Governour, of great Circumspection, and an Example for Succession, betwixt this and the Period of Time. In order thereunto, your Com∣pany have dignified your Day with much Cost, disburs'd in delightful Devices of Triumphant Scenes, and Significant Representations, to illustrate your Lordships Inauguration, and conduct you with splendour to your Center of Honour, the Chair of Government: Which, that it may prove a Seat of Safety to your self, and Security to the City, shall be the daily devout Wishes of, My Lord, Your really obliged humble Servant, THO. IORDAN.
TO THE WORSHIPFUL COMPANY OF DRAPERS. GENTLEMEN, HAving Invented, Composed, Reviewed, Corrected, and Transcribed this Copy of Structures, Figures, Habits, Gestures, Postures, Speeches and Songs, contained in this Day's Triumph (wherein, I hope, I have Copiously accomplished your Commands) I present them to your Judicial Examination, and favourable Approbation, with presumption that I have not at all prevaricated from the Substance of your Subject Matter, or deviated from the Circumstance of your Instructions, alluding to the Honour of my LORD, the Glory of the CITY, and deserved Dignity of this Worship∣ful SOCIETY: And although our Triumphs are clouded with Troubles, and the whole Kingdom is terrified with dismal Expectations; yet the Magnificence and full Grandure of the Magistrate ought to flourish, and bid defiance to Trechery, as the true Method to encourage our Friends and disanimate our Enemies: Which I hope will be confirmed by Providence, who is the Author of peace, Lover of Concord, and Confounder of Cruelty, who will I hope Conserve this City and Company from Desolation and Destruction, accor∣ding to the assidual Wishes and dayly Deprecations of, GENTLEMEN, Your humble and faithful Servant, THO. JORDAN.
In proper Habits orderly Array'd, The Movements of the Morning are display'd. SElected Citizens i'th' Morning all At Sev'n a Clock, do meet at Drapers-Hall. The Master, Wardens, and Assistants, Joyns For the first Rank, in their Gowns fac'd with Foyns. The second Order do, in merry moods, March in Gowns fac'd with Budge and Livery Hoods. In Gowns and Scarlet Hoods Thirdly appears A youthful number of Foyns Batchellors. Forty Budge Batchellors the Triumph Crowns, Gravely attir'd in Scarlet Hoods and Gowns. Gentlemen-Ushers which white Staves do hold Sixty; in Velvet Coats and Chains of Gold. Next, Thirty more in Plush and Buff there are, That several Colours wave, and Banners bear. The Sergeant Trumpet Thirty six more brings, Twenty the Duke of York's, Sixteen the Kings. The Sergeant wears Two Scarfs, whose Colours be, One the Lord Mayors, t' other's the Company. The King's Drum-Major follow'd by Four more Of the Kings Drums and Fifes, make LONDON roar. Seven Drums and Two Fifes more in Vests of Buff March with Waste-Scarfs, and Breeches of Black Stuff. Two City Marshals mounted and attended, Are by the Company with Scarfs befriended. And (next to th' Drums) do Troop it in the Reer. But the Foot Marshal doth the next appear; Who puts them all in Rank and File, and wears A Shoulder Scarf as broad and rich as theirs. Attended by six persons that dare do What e're their Marshal may Command them to. Next the Fence-Master troops, and (to defend him) Divers with drawn broad bright Swords do attend him. Many poor Pensioners that march ith' Rear, With Gowns and Caps, Standards and Banners bear; A numerous Troop of Persons that are poor, In Azure Gowns and Caps, one hundred more, With Javelins and with Targets are all Actors, And bear the Arms of their good Benefactors.
Being thus prepar'd: By the Foot-Marshals Judgment they are guided, And into six Divisions are divided: Rank'd out by two and two. The first that stirs Are the poor Company of Pensioners; But in the front of them orderly be Placed the Ensigns of the Company. Ith' Rear of them four Drums and one Fife more, Then Pensioners in Coats describ'd before. Persons of worth who do in Martial manner, Bear each of them a Standard or a Banner. Four Trumpets more to them, and in their Rear Two of the Drapers Ensigns march, which bear (As by the Herald Painter in exprest) The Draught of their Supporters, and their Crest: Six Gentlemen-Ushers in order trudge, And after them the Batchelors in budge: Marching in measur'd distance, and endu'd With Order, This Division doth conclude. I'th Rear of them six Trumpets do appear, And after them two Gentlemen, that bear Two Coats of Arms, which appertaining be To th' City and the Drapers Company. Then do march up Eight Gentlemen that wears The Golden Chains, then the Foins Batchelors, In amicable measure, move like Friends Fill'd with one Joy: So this Division ends. Two Gentlemen in velvet Coats array'd, March after them with two Banners display'd; Then succeed them Ten Gentlemen-Ushers more, In Coats and Chains of Gold describ'd before; And gradually after them you'l see A very worthy large Society; With each of them a Gown and Livery Hood, And all LORD MAYORS in the Potential Mood. I'th Rear of these (with silver sounds to fit ye) Do fall in divers Trumpets of the City; And after them two Gentlemen accord, To bear the Arms o'th' City and my Lord:
And then the Gentlemen with equal distance That usher in the grave Court of Assistants. I'th' Rear of them, four Drums, six Trumpets, be Order'd to bring up the Catastrophe. Three Gallants gradually follow them, Bearing the Banners of the Diadem. Kings, Queens, and Cities Ensigns, which engages Six Gentlemen to wait on them as Pages; The Masters and the Wardens bring up all. And thus equipp'd, they march from Drapers-Hall To my Lords House, where th' Aldermen and He Take Horse, and rank according to Degree: Which being done, the whole Body in State Doth move towards Guild-Hall, but at the Gate The new Lord with the old Lord Mayor unites, Guarded by Gentlemen, Esquires, and Knights. Then thus attir'd, with Gown, Fur, Hood, and Scarf, March all through Kings-Street down to Three-Crane-Wharf; Where the Lord Mayor and th' Aldermen discharge A few Gentlemen Waiters, and take Barge At the West end o'th' Wharf; and at the East The Court Assistant, Livery, and the best Gentlemen-Ushers: Such as stay on shore Are Ushers, Foins, and the Budge Batchelor: Who for a time repose themselves and Men, Until his Lordship shall return again: Who now with several Companies make hast To Westminster, but in the way is plac't A Pleasure-Boat that hath great Guns aboard, And with Two Broad-sides doth salute my Lord. They Row in Triumph all along by th' Strand, But when my Lord and Companies do Land At the New Palace-Stairs, orderly all Do make a Lane to pass him to the Hall; Where having took an Oath that He will be Loyal and faithful to His MAJESTY, His Government, His Crown and Dignity, With other Ceremonials said and done, In Order to his Confirmation; Sealing of Writs in Courts, and such-like things, As shew his power abstracted from the King's,
He takes his leave o' th' Lords and Barons, then With his Retinue he retreats agen To th' Water-side, and (having given at large To th' Poor of Westminster) doth Re-imbarge, And scud along the River 'till he comes To Black-Fryers Stairs, where Guns and thundring Drums Proclaim his Landing; when he's set ashore, He is saluted by three Vollies more By (the Military Glory of this Nation) the Company of Artillery∣men, they being all in their Martial Ornaments of Gallantry, some in Buff with Head-pieces, many of them Massy Silver. From Black-Fryers-Stairs, they march before the Lord Mayor and Alder∣men through Cheapside to Guild-Hall. Those that went not to Westminster, viz. the Pensioners and Banners, being set in order, ready to march, the Foot-Marshal in the Rere of the Artillery-Company leads the way along by the Channel up Ludgate-Hill, through Ludgate into St. Paul's Church∣yard, and so into Cheapside, where his Lordship is entertained by the first Scene or Pageant. A Description of the First Pageant WHich by a double Denomination is called The Fountain of Feli∣city, and Triumph of Time. A famous Fabric, erected and designed according to the delightful Dimensions of the Dorick Order of Architecture, situate in the Medium of a pleasant Garden, adorned with the beautiful bravery of divers-colour'd Flowers, suitable to all the Seasons of the year, and on the extream top of this Fountain is artfully elevated the Figure of Time, properly accomodate with all the Emblematical signa∣lities, which are pertinent to his Representation, as Shape, Fore-lock, Wings, Hour-Glass, Syth, &c. Round about beneath him on several Descents, gradually distinguished, sit the Twelve Months of the year; but in the front of this Fountain on a Pedestal, is perspicuously placed, a Person representing the judicial, critical, and punctual faculty of that minutary Minion, Opportunity, which is the Speaker, whose Habits with all other, pertinent accomplishments, I shall orderly describe in this method. 1. OPPORTUNITY, In a Robe of Watchet-colour'd Satten, richly Embroidered, and all over laced with Silver, a silver Scarf fringed with Gold, a long lovely bright flaxen Hair, a golden Coronet about his Head, on the front of which is a very large Oval Clock-Dial-Plate,
the ground of which is Azure, with the Hand and literal Figures OR, the Finger pointing at xii. On his Shoulders a pair of golden and purple Wings; on his Feet a pair of carnation Buskins, laced and surfled with gold and silver Ribon. In his left hand he beareth on a large Shield, Vert, an Angler fishing in a River proper, drawing up a large Fish, the Motto, In tempore veni quod omnium rerum est primum. The Twelve Months described. 1. MARCH, A young man with a swarthy Complexion and fierce Aspect, in a tawny velvet Coat, button'd and loop'd with Gold, a large shoulder Belt embroider'd with Gold, in which hangeth a Sword with a gold Hilt, a black short curl'd Hair, on which is a golden Helmet, with a plume of red, white, green, and blew Feathers, a Chain of Gold about his Neck, at which is hung a large Medal before his brest, charged with the first Sign of the Zodiack, called Aries, the Ram, golden Buskins laced and surfled with scarlet-colour'd Satin Ribon. In his left hand he bears a large Target, on which is painted the Arms of the first in order of the Twelve Companies, viz. the Mercers: In the other hand, a Banner of the King's. 2. APRIL, A handsom young Lady, in a long grass-green silk pru∣nello Robe, a blossom-colour'd Mantle, a bright brown Hair, on which is a Garland of Myrtle and Hawthorn Buds, Primroses, Violets, Crocus's, and Emonies; and on an oval Plate springing up from the Garland above his Forehead, the Sign Taurus, with green and silver Wings upon his shoulders; holding in her left hand a Shield, bearing the Arms of the Wor∣shipful Company of Grocers; in her right hand, a Banner of the Com∣panies. 3. MAY, A lovely young Boy, clad in a florid Robe, with a Mantle of poppinjay-green silk and silver, winged with purple and gold, flaxen Hair curl'd; on his Head a Garland of Damask, white and red Roses, Blew-bottles and Scarlet Poppies, and (on the like oval as the former) above his Forehead the Sign Gemini: In one hand a Target, with the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Drapers; in the other hand a Banner of the City. 4. JUNE, A Lady of well-grown stature, in a Robe of French green Silk thick-laced with Gold, a pink-colour'd silk Mantle mixt with silver, winged with silver and gold; a long brown curl'd Hair, on which is a Gar∣land of Honey-suckles, Strawberries, Bugloss, and Columbines of all
colours, with an erected sprig and oval in front, on which is the Sign Cancer; Buskins of silver, laced and surfled with grass-green silk and silver Ribon. On her left Arm a Buckler, on which are the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Fishmongers: In her right hand a Banner of the Lord Mayor's. 5. JULY, A proper Lady, in a Robe of light yellow-colour'd Satten, a Mantle of silver and carnation Silk, a dark-brown Hair, curl'd, on which is a Garland of Gilliflowers, Musk-Roses, French Mary-golds, and blew Mary-golds with Africana's, winged with crimson and silver, and on the oval in the front, form'd like the rest, the Sign Leo. On her right Arm hangeth a Shield, charged with the Arms of the Worshipful Com∣pany of Goldsmiths. In her right hand a Banner of the King's. 6. AUGUST, A young Man, of a fierce and choleric Aspect, in a flame-colour'd Garment of silk, a black and Gold Scarf, a sun-burnt Hair, a Garland of Wheat and Rie, bearing the Sign Virgo; lemon-colour and silver Wings. In one hand a Target, with the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Merchant-Taylors: In the other hand a Banner of the City. 7. SEPTEMBER, A Lady of merry chearful countenance, in a purple Robe, a French green and gold silk Scarf, a brown flaxen Hair, a wreath of white and purple Grapes, Apples, Plumbs, Pears, green Walnuts mixed with their leaves; on her Forehead the Sign Libra, with Wings of divers colours. In one hand she bears a Shield, charged with the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Skinners: In the other, a Banner of the Companies. Her purple Robes sheweth how she reigneth like a Queen above other Months, abounding with plenty of things pleasant and necessary for Man's life. The Sign Libra is now an indifferent Arbiter between day and night, poizing equal hours according to Virgil: Libra dies, somnique pares ubi fecerit horas. This hath its name, as being the seventh Month from March. 8. OCTOBER, A young Man, in a Garment of yellow and carnation silk, a farsnet scarf of Foli-mort colour, a bright brown Hair, on which is a Garland of Oaken leaves, Acrons, and Apples, wearing yellow Wings, and on his front the zodiacal Sign Scorpio; yellow Buskins laced with purple Ribon. In one hand he beareth the Shield, adorned with the
Worshipful Company of Haberdashers: In the other, a Banner of my Lord Mayor's. 9. NOVEMBER, A swarthy complexion'd Lady, in a Robe of changeable green silk, a black silk and gold Mantle, with orange and purple Wings, on her head a dark brown Hair, about which is a Garland of Olives, (fruit and leaves) and fronted with the Sign Sagittarius. In one hand she beareth a Target, dignified with the Arms of the Worship∣ful Company of Salters: In the other, a Banner of the City. 10. DECEMBER, An old Man of a crabbed visage, his Nose red, he is wrap'd in an Irish Rug, girt about him, an old white Peruke, on which is no Garland, but three or four Night-caps, and over them a Turkish Tur∣bant, stuck with Holy, Ivy, and Misletow, with black Wings; and on his Forehead the Sign Capricornus. On his hands are furr'd Mittens, in one of which he holdeth a Buckler, illustrated with the Arms of the Worship∣ful Company of Ironmongers: In the other hand a Banner of the King's. 11. JANUARY, An old Woman clad all in white Flannel, with a white shag'd Irish Mantle, (like the colour of the Earth at this time when apparel'd in Snow) a gray long Hair, with a wreath of Parsnips, Cabbage, Turnips, and Carrots, with milk-white Wings, bearing the Sign Aquarius. In one hand she beareth a Target, beautified with the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Vintners: In the other a Banner of the City. 12. FEBRUARY, An ancient Person in a Robe of dark sky-colour, edg'd with light sky and silver Fringe, semined all over with bright-shining and sparkling golden Stars, which commonly glare and glister in freezing nights, a Mantle of silver, embroider'd with frost-work, a Coronet of Ew, Cypress, Juniper, Pine-leaves, and their Apples, tipp'd all of them with snow-drops; black, blew, white, and yellow Wings; on her Forehead the pedal Sign of Pisces. In one hand a Target, enriched with the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Cloth-workers: In the other hand a Banner of the Lord Mayor's. OPPORTUNITY, perceiving my Lord Mayor well fixt and setled in the posture of Attention, endeavours to answer his expectaion by rising up, bowing his Body, and delivering with audible Elocution this following Speech.
The FIRST SPEECH Spoken by OPPORTUNITY. TIME, the Twelve Months, with Opportunity, In this fair Fountain are all come to be Actors and Speaker in your Jubilee: For Love and Honour, now in Triumph ride, A Day, your own Deserts have dignifi'd: (I speak the sence of all the City, which Are Old and Young, Wise, Generous, and Rich) A Season that is Influenc'd by me Without whom nothing is done seasonably. My Lord! My Name is OPPORTUNITY. The Twelve Months, which these Persons represent, Contain the Limits of your Government: Who, on their Garland Foreheads, undertake To wear the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac. The Shields (on which their Honour much relies) Contain the Arms of the Twelve Companies. Plenty hath sent her Fountain too, by me, That you may take your Oppurtunity: Without which, Princes, Politicians, States, Soldiers and Sea-men, Merchants, Magistrates, Lovers and Labourers, in each degree, Shall simply Center in Uncertainty; And lose the prosperous event of Fate, By setting forth too Early or too Late. I'th' restless Wheel of Time, there is a Nick, Which who so hits, is Fortune's Politic; But you, my Lord, know well, (by reading Men) Both what, and where, and how, and why, and when To apt your Power, though in this very point Of Time, I doubt, all things are out of joynt. But when Extremes on either hand do sway, 'Tis safest sure to chuse the Middle-way. Extremes are dangerous, and apt to hurt us, We read, in medio consistit Virtus.
Virtue and Providence hath made you rise, To serve the State in Two Capacities, Which grow as near as Brother is to Brother, Head of the One, and Member of the Other. If therefore you'l gain good Esteem on Earth, And dignifie your Name, your Place, and Birth, If you will raise a future Fame, and be A Precedent to all Posterity, Let Equity with even hand, my Lord, Advance your Ballance, and direct your Sword. Nothing can make a Nation so well live As Justice, when it is distributive, And equally dispenc'd. Consider, that This Demi-Godlike Power of Magistrate, Is given to try what Spirit you will be, Then do not lose your Opportunity. Advance true Virtue, punish every Crime, Y' have but a Year to Rule, This is the time. At the last period of this Oration, we had just cause to presume (by many significant Expressions, in motion, looks, and gesture) that his Lordship was well pleased; who separating from his Station, advanceth, with his worthy Senators, the Aldermen, through an unruly throng of admiring Spectators, 'till coming to Milk-street end, he is intercepted, and civilly importuned to apply his Observation to a Second Scene, which is rendred more manifest by this following Explanation. The Second Pageant, IS the Shepherd's Sanctuary, or Bower of Beatitude: A very proper and pleasant Scene, of quadrangular Form, situate on a delightful Mount, adorned with all the delectable Varieties that Art can present, or Nature produce; whose Center is circled with a fragrant boundary of beautiful Borders, containing as much Diversity of Flowers and Fruits, in as plea∣surable a Plantation, as Poetry hath pictured Paradise: In the front of which sitteth the Royal-Shepherd, attended by a double Pairroyal of Shep∣herds, and Shepherdesses, whose noble Names, well adapted to their
Virtuous Natures, are these, 1. Vigilius and Precaria; 2. Canonicus and Evangelia, 3. Orthodoxus and Protestantia, 4. Fidelius and Bonopera; which are the Pious Pastoral Courtiers that wait on the wise Commands of the Royal Shepherd; who, according to his Dignity, is thus Attired. A Close-bodied Coat of Scarlet-colour'd Sattin, richly beautified with Silver lace, and over that a Purple-colour'd Velvet loose Robe, richly laced with Gold; a Dark Brown Curl'd Hair; on his Head, a Ducal Crown; on his Left Arm hangeth a Shield Argent, Charged with a Giants Head Coupee; in his Right hand, a Golden Crook, on which hangs down a Golden Sling with Silver strings. Green Silk Hose, with Sandals of Gold. The Habits of Shepherds aud Shepherdesses, are as followeth, figured by Pairs. 1. VIGILIUS, in a Grass-green-silk Robe fringed with Silver, seeded with waking Eys; a Siver Mantle edg'd with Gold, a brown Peruque, on which is a Chaplet of Bays and their Berries all tip'd with Gold, with gray-silk Hose, silver Buskins laced and surfled with green and silver Ribon, a grey-silk Scrip laced with Gold by his side, a silver and green Sheephook in one Hand, with a Banner of the Kings in the other. PRECARIA, in a Robe of Ash-colour'd silk and Gold, a Sea-green and silver Mantle, a curl'd flaxen Hair, a Chaplet of Flowers, Pearl-silk Hose, and gilt shoos tyed with green and silver Ribon. By her side hangeth down a silver Scrip, a golden Sheephook in one hand, and a Banner of the Cities in the other. 2. CANONICUS, in a silk Robe of dark russet colour, edg'd with broad gold Fringe, a Cloth of gold Mantle, a fair curl'd Hair, a Coronet of golden Stars, Green-silk Hose, Russet Buskins laced with gold and green Ribon, a green Scrip, imbroidered with silver by his side; holding in one hand, a Silver staff with a golden Sheephook at the end on't; In the other, a Banner of my Lord Mayors. EVANGELIA, a Beautiful Lady in a silver Robe, an Olive-colour and gold Mantle, a long bright brown curl'd Hair, a Chaplet of white Roses, with an Olive-branch in front, upon her head, white silk Hose, and green shoos, tyed with gold Ribon: In one hand a silver Sheephook, and in the other a Banner of the Virgin, the Patroness of the Worshipful Company of Drapers. 3. ORTHODOXUS, in a Robe of dark-green silk and silver, a willow-green silk and gold Mantle, a long curl'd black Hair, on which is
a Chaplet of Laurel, tip'd with gold, french-green-silk Hose and silver Buskins, laced and surfled with gold and scarlet Ribon; a grey silk and gold Scrip by his side: In one hand a silver Sheephook; in the other hand, a Banner Charged with the Ensign of St. Iohn the Evangelist, which is a Golden Eagle, holding a Pen and Inkhorn with the string in his Beak; the Arms of his Lordships primary Society, the Scriveners Company. PROTESTANTIA, a prudent Virgin, of gracious Aspect, in a Cypress-colour'd silk Robe, fringed with Gold, a Gold and Jay-green Mantle, a long bright flaxen Hair, on which is a Coronet of white Lilleis intermixt with Thorns, to signifie her Innocence and persecution. By her side a Silver Scrip; In one hand, She holdeth a golden Crook; and in the other, a Banner of the Company. 4. FIDELIUS, in a Sage-green Robe, laced and fringed with Sea-green silk and gold, a Mantle of Dove-colour'd silk and silver, on his Head a dark brown Peruque, crowned with a Chaplet of Holly, the Leaves tipt with silver, and golden Berries, Ivy-green silk Hose, laced and surfled with grass-green and gold Ribon. A greet and silver Scrip; in one hand, a silver Sheephook; in the other, a Banner of the Kings. BONOPERA, a Princely Shepherdess of a lovely look, in a Robe of gray-green silk and silver, on which is a Mantle of Brimstone-green silk and gold; with the like Fringe, a bright brown Hair, on which is a Chaplet, containing variety of Fruits to signifie Good Works, according to her Name, Willow-green silk Hose; white shoos tyed with yellow and green and gold Ribon; a golden Scrip by her side; in one hand, a golden Crook; and in the other a Banner of the City. In the Front of this Scene, on the Stage is conveniently first plac'd a Golden Ram, back'd by a pretty Rider, which is a very beautiful Boy, with such features of Face, curiosity of Complexion, and Symmetry of Limbs, that he would have been an excellent Original to draw an Angel by; and have prevai∣led with Medea as far as Iason did when he obtained the Golden Flecce at Colchos. He is Arrayed in a bright silk Sea-green Robe, largely Fringed with Gold, a poppinjay green and gold Mantle; bright, long curl'd flaxen Hair; a Chaplet of Roses, Lemon-colour'd silk Hose, and silver Buskins, laced and surfled with grass-green and silver Ribon; a Bridle of Purple and gold Ribon in his left hand, and a silver Sheephook in the other on which hangeth a Banner of the Company. His Lordship being in a propense posture of Expectation, the Royal Shepherd, with reverend Eyes, beholds the Venerable Object, and makes his civil Adress to his Lordship, in these Expressions following.
The ROYAL SHEPHERD'S Speech. I Represent that Shepherd whose abode Was Palestine, One who Divinely trod, And said, My Shepherd is the Living God: One that could use the Sheephook, Harp and Sling, A Shepherd, Souldier, Psalmist, and a King. That much condemn'd the vile Wits of his Age And ours, when wisely, in a Sacred Rage He did in this line Atheism explode, The Fool hath said in's heart, There is no God. A Royal Shepherd, One that gave Content To his Creator with good Government. Four Shepherds and their Shepherdesses do Attend on Me, and com to wait on You, Divinely Qualified, Celestial Swains, 'Bove all that keep upon Arcadian plains. This Golden Ram with Antlers of defence [Points to the Ram▪] Doth shew the Drapers, Strength, Wealth, Innocence. And as to Trade, the Sheep may serve ye both, In that it doth produce Parchment and Cloth. This little Scene, and I, do represent A Model of Your greater Government. For you present a Shepherd, This great Town Infolds your Flock, (a Plain of great renown) You do present a Soudier, when, by Law, You sit and Act in the Militia. In your distinct Capacities, Men know You are tam Marti quàm Mercurio. You do present a Judge, when you dispence Guerdon to Guilt, Succour to Innocence. You'r a Musician too, in the Consent And Harmony of well-tun'd Government. You do present a King, in this degree, For you present His Sacred MAJESTY.
I hope you will present them all so well, You'l be a Pattern, no Time shall excell. So shall you please King, Citizens, and Peasants, And be well known to all Men By these Presents. His Lordship having exposed his patience, and dignified the ceremony and circumstance of the whole Design with his acceptation and approba∣tion: According to regularity and custom, he continueth his March far∣ther, 'till the approach of another Scene prepareth to receive a third Salu∣tation, which is, The Third Pageant. A Delicate stately rich Royal Chariot, according to the exact and most curious Roman Order of building, rarely dignified and wrought upon, by the ingenious and artful hands of able Painters, Gilders, and Carvers, in accurate painting, as well statuary as perspective, by which the admiring beholders are honestly, though wittily, deceived into a great deal of fantastic Felicity, which is drawn by two golden pellited Lyons, that are Supporters to the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Drapers, and are back'd by two Negro's, richly and properly habited. And on several parts of this celebrious Chariot, are properly placed in elegant Order, certain eminent Figures, whose pertinent Dresses, signifi∣cant Emblems, and majestic Motion, add Life and Soul to the body of the building, which are in number Eight, viz. 1. LOYALTY, A young Man of Heroic Aspect, thus accomplish'd; On a close Coat with silver sleves, a suit of golden Armour, viz. Back, Breast, and Corslet, with a gilt Elbow-Gauntlet, a pair of Roman Bases, with several Labels, or Panes of purple, gold, scarlet, and silver, hanging down from his waste to his knees, a long bright flaxen curl'd Hair, on which is a golden Helmet, with a red and white large Plume of Feathers, scarlet silk Hose, and gold Buskins, laced and surfled with silver and purple Ribon. On his left Arm is braced a large Target, where, on a Field Gules is born the Rose and Crown OR, with this Motto, Pro Rege, Lege & Grege: In the other he advanceth a golden Truncheon, who sitteth eminently on the supreme seat of the Chariot. 2. PIETY, In a black silk Robe, a silver Mantle, a fair Hair, on which is a Coronet of golden Stars; white Hose, silver Buskins laced with
black and gold Ribon, bearing a Buckler in one hand, whereon a Mount Vert, is the Figure of Devotion, kneeling in the posture of praying: In the other hand, a Banner on an Angelical-staff, bearing a cross Gules in a Field Argent. 3. EQUITY, In a crimson scarlet Robe, and on it a gold Mantle, fringed with silver, on her Head a long dishevel'd Hair of flaxen colour, curiously curl'd, a wreath of white and red Roses; sky-colour'd silk Hose, white Shoos. In her right hand she holdeth a golden Ballance equiponde∣rant, to weigh equally and impartially: In her other hand she beareth a Banner of the King's. 4. VERITY, A very beautiful Virgin, in a white sarsnet Robe, a Cloth of silver Mantle, a fair bright crispy curl'd Hair of pure flaxen, a Garland of white Lillies and white Roses, white silk Hose, white Buskins laced with silver Ribon. In one hand a large Fan of Stars (with which she chaseth away the mists of Error:) In the other hand, a Banner of the Cities. 5. UNITY, In a Robe of green Sarsnet, sprinkled with divers Annu∣lets of gold, a Chain of Gold thrice double about her Neck, an orange-colour'd Mantle deeply fringed with gold, her Legs and Feet beautified with Buskins of gold, surfled with watchet silk and silver Ribon, a wreath of green Laurel (about a long Peruke of brown Hair) on her Head. Bearing in one hand an Escutcheon Vert, charged with a Triangle within a Circle OR: In the other hand a Banner of the Companies. 6. FIDELITY, A lovely Lady, adorned with a Robe of purple silk, trim'd with silver and gold Net-work, a rich Cloth of gold Scarf, a bright brown Hair, curiously curl'd on her Head, about which is a Coronet of Hands and Hearts, scarlet-colour silk Hose, silver Buskins laced with purple and gold Ribon, surfled. In one hand a Target sable, with two hands conjoyned in Fess OR: In the other hand a Banner of the Cities. 7. MAGNANIMITY, A Masculine Virgin inrobed with Cloth of silver, a sky-colour and gold Scarf, in which hangeth a short Sword, with a gold Hilt, a long curl'd Peruke of Raven-black Hair on her Head, about which is a wreath of Oaken Leaves and Acrons tip'd with gold, sky-colour'd silk Hose, with yellow Buskins laced and surfled with silver. In one hand she beareth a Shield Azure, charged with a golden Heart: In the other, a Banner of the Lord Mayor's.
8. STABILITY, In a scarlet-colour'd silk Robe fringed with silver, an orange-colour and silver Scarf, a long dark brown Hair curl'd on her Head, about which is a wreath of Bays tip'd with gold, pearl-colourd silk Hose, with gilt Buskins laced and surfled with carnation Ribon. In one hand she beareth a Shield Vert, charged with a Fess Wavey betwixt the two Pole Stars, Artic and Antartic, OR: In the other hand a Banner of the King's. LOYALTY, seeing my Lord in a fit posture of Attention, riseth up, and ceremonially addresseth to his Honour in these words: The SPEECH of LOYALTY. THat I appear thus Arm'd with Shield and Sword Is proper, my Name's LOYALTY, my Lord. True Loyalty, without Schism or Rent, For th' King, my Country, and The Government, Against all those that hatch'd the late damn'd Plot As black as Hell, and would have been as hot, If Providence and Loyalty had not Discover'd it; who will as long as able Persist with Spirits indefatigable. Except true Concord be amongst us bred, We shall be ruin'd, as your Lordship said. I do, my Lord, the more insist upon't, 'Cause y' have declar'd for a True Protestant; For so am I, a Vessel of such Rate As ventur'd against Spain in Eighty Eight: According to that Church, i'th Life and Death Of peaceful, blessed, Queen Elizabeth.— [A good Pause.] Y' have gain'd the Love of LONDON, o're which, Fate, Merit, and Choice, have made you Magistrate, The great and good Lord Mayor, in such a Season As will require your most refined Reason, Authority, and Iudgment, (all the Town Is big with Expectation) and to Crown With happy Omen, your deserved Honours, Your Company have display'd all their Banners.
Open'd their Treasuries, willing to pay Their Tributary Triumphs on your Day: They've sent their Lyons too, that they and I May defend you from all Conspiracy. This Rich and Royal Piece of Art you see [Points to the Chariot.] Is call'd The Chariot of Loyalty, Furnish'd with all those useful Graces, that Exalt the Seat of a just Magistrate, Which I'le not nominate, lest with pretence Of pleasing, I oppress your Patience; Although not many, their intrinsic Virtue Shall fortifie you so, no ill can hurt you, Your Prudence will direct you how to chuse 'em, And when, and where, and in what case to use 'em, Vice to suppress, and virtuous Souls to nourish, So, the whole City, and your Fame shall flourish. The Speech being ended, his Lordship giving sufficient demonstration of being well contented, proceedeth through a tumultuous Torrent of crouding People, which to describe is so numerous and various, that it would exceed the full length of a Show in the Description. But in brief they were Shows to one another, the disorder'd People below in the Street was an excellent Scene of confusion to the Spectators above in the Belconies, who like waves of the Sea, did in continual agitation, roul over one anothers necks like Billows in the Ocean, and the Gallantry above were as pleasurable a sight to the Spectators below, where hundreds of various defen∣sive postures were screw'd, for prevention of the fiery Serpents and Crac∣kers that instantly assaulted the Perukes of the Gallants, and the Merkins of the Madams. In that Scene below, I saw a fellow carried in a throng of Squeezers, upon Men's backs like a Pageant for the space of thirty Yards; in all which time, being somewhat over-sensible of his Elevation, strutted, cock'd his Beaver, and rid in Triumph, 'till at last a new provocation of diversion sepa∣rating the shoulders of his Supporters, drop'd him in a dismal dirty kennel, whil'st a race of fresh Gamesters ran over him. Like a popular Favourite, who when the Faction dissipates, is left to himself, and laid liable to all misfor∣tunes. But (in this time) my Lord is come to St. Laurence-Lane end, where he is jovially saluted with a Scene of Drolls, being all pertinent persons in merry conformity to the Drapers Company.
The Fourth Pagent. THis Scene is a Landscape of Salisbury Plain, where Rustic Shepherds and Rural Shepherdesses are feeding and folding their Flocks, and for the future Exaltation of the Drapers delight, here are several Trades met together all pertinent for making of Cloth; as Carders, Spinners, Dyers, Wool-combers, Sheerers, Dressers, Fullers, Weavers which are set whout Order, because the Excellencie of this Scene doth consist in confusion, although their Number and weight are too cumbersom and ponderous for all of them to work, according to their distinct Arts and Mysteries, yet they are here met in their Persons to rejoyce and express their Frolicks, in Dancing, Tumbling, Jumping, Pipeing and Singing; and all such jovial Actions and Movements of Agility, as may express their Joy and Exultation in their Complement to the New Lord Mayor, and their Service to the Drapers Company. When they had done over their Tricks of Activity; as much silence (as could be in that place at that time) was Commanded, whilst a Jolly Shepherd and his Bonny Shepherdess advance their Voices in in this following Ditty, in praise of a Shepherds Life, sung by Opilio and Pastora. A SONG. Opi. OF all the blest Lives in the World that are fam'd, The Shepherd's condition ought first to be nam'd, Which may be defended from every Degree, Past. For Piety, Honour, and Antiquity. Iust Abel 'tis said, A Shepherd by Trade, Did dye the first Martyr that ever was made. Opi. And by his own Brother received his Doom, Although their Formation were both in a Womb. Past. This Example may teach us, if well understood, That there's no Infallible friendship in Blood. Opi. When David did follow the Ewes great with young, He liv'd like a Shepherd, he pip'd and he sung; Past. But when he was cramp'd with the cares of a Crown, His own complaints tell us, his comforts fell down. Opi. His days of delight Were trouble and fright, His hands were taught War, and his fingers to fight:
Past. But though he was blest with the Death of Goliah, His crosses increas'd with the fall of Uriah; He had a fair Fortune, and stoutly he kept her, Turn'd Hook, Scrip, and Bottle, to Ball, Crown, and Scepter. Opi. Thus far Divine History dignifies Shepherds, Preserving their Flocks from Wolves, Lyons, and Leopards: Apollo (ador'd as a God yet) did keep On Thessalian Mountains King Admetus's Sheep; Past. And Pan must not be Forgotten by me, Whom Shepherds did Worship as their Deity. Opi. In Arcadian plains he Dominion did bear, When Argalus and his Parthenia were there, Past. These Presidents ev'ery Objection convinces; Shepherds have been Martyrs, Gods, Prophets, and Princes, Opi. One other (to amplifie all) I shall name, Of Courage and Conduct, good Fortune and Fame, Past. A Shepherd by Trade, and a Scythian by Birth, As you will confess when you hear of his worth, Tamberlain did make The Turk's Empire to shake, When he in a Battel did Bajazet take. Opi. Though five hundred Thousand men there did engage, He took him, and put him into an Iron Cage; Past. In one little Cabin his Empire and Throne is, Who with his one Tongue declar'd Lex talionis. Opi. But we simple Shepherds on Salsbury plain, Live in more content than some Princes that Raign▪ Past. In Vallies and Mountains we pipe and we sing, Love God and our Neighbours, the Church and the King: Opi. We are not such Sots To harbour black Plots, To call in the French-men or draw in the Scots. And in civil War ev'ry Honest-man loses: They that love it I wish they may hav't in their Houses: Chor. No Kingdom, nor Dukedom, nor Popedom can be With all their Dominions, so happy as we. Opi. We are not for Pistols, Guns, Backsword, nor Rapiers, But pray for good Tradeing amongst LONDON Drapers,
Of whose Corporation and Society Sir Henry Fitz-Alwin first Lord Mayor was Free. Who, as it appears By our Overseers, Did Rule as Lord May'r above Twenty four yeers. And it is presum'd (he so justly did do) If he had not dy'd then, might have sat there till now. Then let's sing and Dance up, Curvet, and cut Capers, Wee'l pray for the King, the Lord Mayor and the Drapers. The Song being ended the Foot-Marshal, having placed the Assistants, Livery and the Companies on both sides of King-street, and their Pensioners with their Targets hung on-the Tops of the Javelins: In the Reer of them the Ensign-bearers; Dums and Fifes in the Front, and hasten the Foins and Budg-Batchelors, together with the Gentlemen-Ushers to Guild-Hall, where his Lordship is again saluted by the Artillery-men with Three Vollies more, which Concludes their Duty; His Land Attendants pass through the Gallery or Lane, so made into Guild-Hall, after which the Com∣pany repairs to Dinner in the Hall, and the several Silk-works, and Triumphs are likewise conveyed into Blackwell-Hall, and the Officers aforesaid, and the Children that sit in the Pageants there refresh themselves until his Lord∣ship hath Dined at Guild-Hall. But I must attend my Lord in the Hall at Dinner, and give an account of the delightful Diligence, with the Jocal Accomplishments and per∣formances of the Musical Movements. His Lordship and the Guests being all seated, the City Music begin to touch their Instruments, with very Artful Fingers, and after a Consort Lesson or two being played, and their Ears as well feasted as their Pallats, an Accute Person with good Voice, brisk humour and Audible utterance (the better to provoke Digestion,) sings this pertinent Frolic, called, The CORONATION of CANARY. DRink your Wine away, 'Tis my Lord Mayor's day; Let our Cups and Caesh be free: Beer and Ale are both But the Sons of froth, Let us then in Wine agree To tast a Quart Of every Sort, The thinner and the thicker; That spight of Chance We may advance The Nobler and the Quicker, Who shall by Vote Of ev'ry Throat Be Crown'd the King of Liquor.
II. Muscadel Avant, Bloody Alligant, Shall have no free vote of mine; Claret is a Prince, And he did long since In the Royal Order shine. His Face is spread With sprightly red, And so he loves to see Men; If he bears sway, His Subjects they Shall be as good as Free-men. But here's the blot Almost forgot, He's too much burnt by Women. III. By the River Rhine Is a valiant Vine, That can all our Veins replenish; Let us then consent To the Government, And the Royal Rule of Rhenish. The German Wine Will warm the Chine, And frisk in every Vein; 'Twill make the Bride Forbear to chide, And call him to't again. But that's not all, He's much too small To be our Soveraign. IV. We shall never think Of a nobler Drink; Then with votes advanced high, Let us all proclaim Good Canary's Name, Heaven bless His MAJESTY. He is a King In every thing, Whose Nature doth renounce ill; He'l make us skip, And nimbly trip, To the Ceiling from the Ground-cill, Especially When Poets be Lords of the Privy-Council. V. But a Vintner he Will his Taster be, There is no Man that can him let; And a Drawer that Hath a good Pallat, Shall be made Squire of the Gimlet. The Bar-boys shall Be Pages all, A Tavern well prepar'd; In jovial sort Shall be his Court, Where nothing may be spar'd, Wine-Porters shall With shoulders tall, Be Yeomen of the Guard. VI. If a Cooper we With a Red-Nose see, But in any part o'th' Town; That same Cooper shall With his Adds Royal Be the keeper of the Crown. Young Wits that wash Away their Cash In Wine and Recreation, That hate dull Beer Are welcom here To give their Approbation: So shall all you That will allow Canary's Coronation. Dinner being ended, and Night approaching, his Lordship being attended by a private Retinue of his own Company, takes Coach, and is conducted to his Mansion-House, without the troublesom Night-Ceremony which hath been formerly, when St. Paul's was standing. When his Lordship is housed, those that attend on him depart with order and conveniency; and the Triumphs and Silk-works are by the care of the Master-Artificers, lodged for that Night in Blackwell-Hall 'till the next day following, and then are to be convey'd to Drapers-Hall. To close up all, the Artists and Arti∣ficers (each of them deserving Commendations) bid you Good Night. FINIS.
