l180a 27246944 110049
THE POLICY AND GOVERNMENT OF THE Venetians, Both in Civil and Military Affairs. Written in French by the Sieur de la Hay, and Faithfully Englished. LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter in Fleet-street, near Temple-Bar. 1671.
The Table of Chapters. The First Book. Of their Civil Policy. OF the Foundation of Venice. page 1 Chap. 1. Of the Duke. page 9 Chap. 2. Of the Counsel of Ten. page 20 Chap. 3. Of the Sages Grands. page 30 Chap. 4. Of their Procurators. page 34 Chap. 5. Of their Podestats. page 38 Chap. 6. Of their Camerlingues. page 44 Chap. 7. Of their Ambassadors. page 46 Chap. 8. Of the Nobility of this Commonwealth. page 54 Chap. 9. Of their Ladies. page 67
Chap. 10. Of their Citizens. page 75 Chap. 11. Of the Nobles upon Ter∣ra-firma. page 80 Chap. 12. A particular Discourse upon some of their Maximes. page 90 The Second Book. Of their Military Policy. Chap. 1. Of the Venetian Militia in general. page 97 Chap. 2. Of their Generalissimo. page 100 Chap. 3. Of the General of the Gulf. page 109 Chap. 4. Of the General of their Ga∣leasses and their Governours. page 114 Chap. 5. Of the General of the Galli∣ons, and the Captains under his Command. page 119 Chap. 6. Of the Sur-Comites of the Gallies. page 122
Chap. 7. Of the General, or Gover∣nour of Candia. page 129 Chap. 8. Of the General of Dalma∣tia. page 133 Chap. 9. Of the Grand-Captains. page 137 Chap. 10. Of their Forreign Gene∣rals. page 145 Chap. 11. Of the Forreign General in Dalmatia. page 147 Chap. 12. Of the General of the Forces drawn out of the Fleet upon occasion. page 15 Chap. 13. Of the Governour of Candia. page 156 Chap. 14. Of Reflexions in manner of a Recapitulation. page 158 Chap. 15. Of their Armies in gene∣ral. page 162 Chap. 16. Of their Cavalry. page 166 Chap. 17. Of their Light Horse. page 172 Chap. 18. Of their Infantry. page 177 Chap. 19. Of their general Rules and Maximes in War. page 188
THE POLICY AND GOVERNMENT OF THE VENETIAN, Both in Civil and Military Affairs. The Introduction. Of the Foundation of Venice. DUring the Wars of Attila, that Flagellum Dei, (as he was usu∣ally called) there being no refuge or sanctuary a∣ainst the fury of his Arms, the
demolishment of Towns, the de∣solation of Countreys, the smoak∣ing and blazing of whole Provinces set on fire on all sides by the multi∣tudes of his insulting Barbarians, be∣ing but a pastime and recreation to his tyranny, he left behind him no other monuments of his victories where-ever he came, but horror and dispair. Aquileia being a Town more than ordinarily considerable, had a greater share than ordinary of the calamities of the War, and the miserable remainder of the Inhabi∣tants which had surviv'd them, choosing rather to expose them∣selves to the infidelity of the Sea, than once more to fall into his merciless hands, having imbark'd themselves upon the Adriatick in such lamentable Vessels as their condition could supply, they sail'd up and down for some time, but at
length growing weary, and unsa∣tisfied with their wandring, they landed upon certain little Islands, and laid the foundation of the most honourable Republick in the World. Their first accommoda∣tion was Hurts, or Cabbins which they built, and setled themselves in them when they had done, though not without great difficul∣ty, for having consum'd the small stock of provisions they brought along with them, they found themselves under a necessity of ta∣king up some trade, and profession, for their subsistance. Fishing and Navigation appearing to them the most proper, they embrac't them with both arms, and trading into the neighbouring Countrey they gain'd a reputation by degrees sui∣table to their Traffick and Mer∣chandize. Their Comportment from the first was with so much
amity and concord, that their manner of living alluring all such as had conversation with them, their little Islands were grown insensibly full of People submitting to their Government, who by little and little form'd themselves into a bo∣dy that is now become conside∣rable both for its grandure, and policy. And forasmuch as those who outliv'd the destruction of their Countrey, were of a mixt conditi∣on, consisting both of Nobility and Commons; to cement their Estate, and make it more durable they agreed to have their Govern∣ment mixt too, in which the No¦bility were to be the chief, but with such coherence and depen∣dance upon the Commons, they should do nothing without them To take away all pretence of Emu¦lation, it was concluded that th
Citizens and Gentlemen indiffe∣rently should be habited in the same fashion, which has been ob∣serv'd through so many Ages, to this very day; it was ordain'd also they should all of them wear a certain Bonnet of black Wool, (which they call Barrett) with a fringe of the same stuff about it, to put them in mind of their former condition, and rebate the edge of their pride, to which otherwise, young and capricious People (as they were) might be too prone, and propense. But envy and virtue being al∣wayes concomitant, their Neigh∣bours taking notice of their en∣crease, began to be jealous, and by degrees, resolv'd to oppose them. However they thought it not fit abruptly to declare them∣selves their enemies, but by a neat∣er and more cleanly piece of subtil∣ty
they concluded to interrupt them privately in their commerce, and by that means to force them at last to begin the rupture them∣selves. If our new Planters, in the posture they were in at that time, were defective in any thing, it was in their conduct and disci∣pline of War, which must be ac∣knowledged was not so exact, as their rudiments for Peace. But these great persons having but one soul (as it were) and acting by one motion, in a short time esta∣blisht such Laws and Maximes for War, that they were own'd the principal Souldiers of that Age, and have been ever since esteem'd not only the ablest Politicians, but the most potent enemies in the World. This being the Cradle or Mould in which this great body was form∣ed, and continued till it grew
stronger and adult, it has since not only ventur'd abroad amongst its Neighbours, but acquainted it self with the most remote corners of the Universe, for what Countrey is it which has not tasted of her commerce, or what part is there of the Levant Seas that is not afraid of her Arms, in spight of the pro∣tection of the Turk. It will not be amiss if I follow their Me∣thod in my description of their Civil, and Military Policy, the first being the basis and foun∣dation of their grandure, and the last that which has advanc't them to a miraculous height, and render'd them formida∣ble all over the World. I shall begin with their Civil Affairs, and when I have made relation of what I observ'd (in my Travels) of that kind, I shall proceed to their Militia,
in which having serv'd also for some time, I made my Ob∣servations according to my Ta∣lent.
THE POLICY OF THE VENETIAN, Both Civil and Military. The First Book. Their Civil Policy. CHAP. I. Of the Duke. THat a body without a head how vigorous and robust soever it may be, is notwith∣standing but an im∣moveable Trunck, and inanimate Mass, is so clear,
and inexpugnable a truth, that be∣ing but alleadg'd in a Fable to the people of Rome, when in defiance of the tyranny of the Senate they were retired into the Mount Aven∣tini, it brought the numerous and unquiet multitude down again to their obedience, and wrought up∣on them to submit to a domination they believ'd before insupportable. Accordingly the Republick of Ve∣nice understanding of what impor∣tance it would be, never thought themselves safe or compleat, till they had made themselves a Chief. And this Election as I conceive was grounded upon three principal Reasons: The first was to fru∣strate the hopes of the ambitious, who would not so readily embrace any design against their Countrey, nor attempt the subversion of their liberties, seeing a Prince already
in possession of the place, (by the universal consent of the Common∣wealth) which he might other∣wise desire to usurp. The second, to cool and asswage that heat of dominion which reigns in the breast of most of the Gentry, by giving every man hopes of arriving one day at the Supremacy, it being most certain, there is not one a∣mongst all the Nobles but has his expectation, and sometime or other may pretend to it. The third is to satisfie and fix the vola∣til spirit of the Commons, giving them an appearance of liberty in their Republick, and in their Dukes the shadow of a King. I call it the shadow of a King, because in reality the Prince which they choose has more of the Name than Authority, and is so strictly limited and circumscrib'd, that in an hours time the Grand Councel
(which they call the Councel of ten) can call him to account, form a Process against him, and cashier him. He is I must needs say accommodated well enough, and magnificently lodg'd, yet he is but as it were an illustrious Pri∣soner, seldom permitted to go out of his Pallace, and when he does, it is incognito, without any Ensigns of his place. That which is most strange, is, to oblige him to keep close and at home, if the people have taken any disgust against their Doge or Duke, they are al∣low'd to throw stones at him, and to commit what insolencies they please, if they meet him in the Streets, or in his Gondolo, except it be upon Festivals or publick Ceremonies, when he is accompa∣nied by the Senate, and all the Ambassadors in the Town. Being the most jealous people in
the World of their liberties, they could not find a better expedient than that, to keep their Prince low and dependant, and to cut off all wayes he might possibly take to make himself absolute. For not being allowed to do any thing of himself, it cannot be apprehended he can attempt or accomplish any thing of importance, besides the very Officers and Servants of his Houshold, are recommended and paid by the Commonwealth, and by consequence expecting nothing from him but the honour of his ser∣vice, they are not so weak, to ha∣zard the preferment they may rati∣onally hope for, by being faithfull to those which plac't them in that Sphear. Nevertheless in some things he has the reverence or resemblance of a Prince, he has admission into all publick Counsels, he has a
double voice in respect of his qua∣lity, he has precedence of all the Nobility, and the whole Senate, he creates all Officers, and sup∣plyes all Offices, he gives out Or∣ders and makes most part (though not all) of the Ordinances, yet all this is with so much dependance, that he may be said to do nothing alone without the assistance of the said Number, some of which un∣der pretence of attending him in point of honour, are as so many Spies watching over his actions perpetually. They choose their Dukes commonly the most ancient that they can, as well to satisfie many in a short time, as believing the ardour of dominion to be dead and extinguish't, in persons of their age. In the four years time which I spent in their service, I was a spectator of the Reigns and Fune∣rals
of Contarini, Valiero, and Pezaro. The Ceremony in which the Doge appears in the greatest splen∣dor and Majesty is at the Celebra∣tion of the Ascension, upon which day he marries the Sea with a Ring. At that time he makes a publick Feast; to which (in great State) he comes in very late, and makes but little stay, after which he marches in a most triumphant pro∣cession from the place where he lands, to the Church of St. Mark. Take him in his Gondolo, (which is call'd le Bucentaure) and he is a Prince indeed, it is guilt all over to the very water, cover'd from the Poup to the Stroud with a large Baldaquin or Cloth of State, of Crimson Velvet embroider'd with gold and silver, with a rich Fringe of the same: he is set upon a kind
of a little Throne, the Senate ran∣ged on both sides of him, bare: he is in a purple Vest with a Dia∣dem upon his head, which is a Bonnet of an odd kind of fashion, encompast with a Band Royal of white a l'antique, a habit which nevertheless has something August and Majestick in it. In this man∣ner, at no great expence they suf∣fer their Prince to reign for one day; yet 'tis remarkeable also that even in the midst of this Grandure, they give him a gentle remem∣brance of his dependance, and the hazard he will run if he exceeds the bounds they have prescrib'd, and that is by conducting him betwixt two pillars, which is to be the fa∣tal place of his chastisement, if he attempts any thing against their liberties. Could any body with greater address restrain the imperious spi∣rits
of those, who transported with the Grandure of their dignity, are not contented with the station and mediocrity in which the Rules of the Republick have plac't them? Could any more gently and more agreeably lull that furious passion asleep, which not only disturbs, but subverts so many States? But the excellency of their Po∣liticks consists in the Election of their Dukes, it being a fundamen∣tal and inviolable Law amongst them, That no person how quali∣fied soever in respect of his Ex∣traction, can be admitted to that dignity if he be married, and if all their Chronicles be consulted from the very foundation of the Com∣monwealth to this day, there will not be above two or three to be found who have had Wives. For knowing very well the ambition of that Sex, and their insatiate appe∣tite
to govern, they have excluded them by a Law which allows them no preheminence though their Husbands be Princes. Knowing likewise how violent the passion of that Countrey is towards them, and how inclinable even to the most servile respects, and conside∣ring that a man though otherwise very honest and devoted to the in∣terest of his Countrey, may not∣withstanding be too weak to defend himself against the importunities of his Wife, and it being contrary to the Laws both Humane and Divine to separate those who they have mutually joyn'd, by a singu∣lar dexterity they have avoided both the one inconvenience, and the other, and decreed no person capable of Election but such as are single, whereby it proceeds that neither their Sons, nor Relations, are the more considerable amongst
them, nor live in any greater splendor than before, not being al∣low'd the least priviledge to signi∣fie their alliance to the Prince. Nay so far is it from that, the Duke is not permitted to con∣verse privately with any of them unless some body be by, inso∣much that as soon as he is chosen to that dignity, he bids adieu to his Children, his Friends, his Family, and all that is dear to him, none of them being suffer'd to enter into the Palace with him.
CHAP. II. Of the Counsel of Ten. TO speak properly, the Counsel of Ten are the ve∣ry soul of that Liberty which the Venetians have preserv'd immacu∣late for twelve hundred years. They are the Poles upon which that potent Machine moves, in which the perpetual and inexhau∣stible course of their Wisdom is to be admir'd. They are the Foun∣tains from whence those Maximes have sprung, which rightly pur∣sued, have hitherto succeeded, and advanc't their reputation to the condition it is in. In short, though the Senate of Rome exceed∣ed
them in number, they came short of that refulgent puissance and address which imbellishes this little body. They are chosen above-board, without any favour or under-hand dealing, for the most part persons experienc't in publick affairs from their very youth, and in truth such as are elected into this Soveraign Counsel, are ordinarily well ad∣vanc't in years, it being but neces∣sary a State of that importance should be entrusted to no hands, but such as have been accustomed to the greatest Negotiations. They are more Soveraign, than their Soveraign himself, for (as hath been said before) if the safety and advantage of the Common∣wealth requires it, they can pull him down, and degrade him as they please. They have secret and unconcei∣vable
wayes of discovering what is done in the State, besides their private, they have publick infor∣mations which give them very considerable advice. They have one Denoncie (as they call them) particularly for Oaths, which is a thing cannot be forbidden too strictly. They have others for pompous extravagancies in appa∣rel, and it is no more than is ne∣cessary in so opulent a State, where the Youth and Nobility are as it were glutted with riches, and doubtless was there not a severe hand kept over them, we should see their Vests and their black Bonnets in a short time upon the ground, and their Damoiselles clat∣tering in their gold and their sil∣vers, with as much profusion and vanity as they do with us. This Law against extravagance in their Cloathes, is so rigid and
austere, that the Curtezans them∣selves, who in other things have great priviledges, are not exempt∣ed in this. And one of the great∣est and most paenal charges can be brought against them, is to accuse them of having their Gowns or their Cloathes too rich, and con∣trary to the prescription of that Edict. By this Policy it is, the mediocrity (which was the princi∣pal aim of their Ancestors) is maintain'd to this day. This it is which prevents the transportation of their Money into forreign parts, and hinders the luxury of that Sex which most commonly occasions it. They have another Denoncie pe∣culiar to the affairs of State, and this is the most dreadfull and dan∣gerous of them all: for a person inform'd against by a Billett or Ticket thrown privately into the
mouth of this Denoncie, is imme∣diately apprehended, and clapt up close in a horrible Dungeon, where he lyes without any possibi∣lity of knowing the cause of his ca∣lamity, till after some time he be confronted at a little Window by the person which accus'd him, where he may apologize if he plea∣ses, but being seldom believ'd, (such is their extraordinary jealou∣sie of their freedom) they are fre∣quently condemn'd to the Canal call'd Orphano, which is the place of Execution, where (let his con∣dition be what it will) they fasten him to a board, and tying Cannon Bullets to his feet, and others to his head, they let him down betxt two Boats into the Water. That which I call Denoncies are certain Mouthes cut with a Chiffel on the outside of the Walls of the
Palace, which correspond to cer∣ain Pipes falling into Boxes of Stone within of which the Sena∣ors of the Counsel of Ten keep he Keyes, and those that are in service do visit them every night, o see what fatal information is gi∣ven that day. It was the design of the grave Politicians which establish'd this Counsel, to advance their number o Ten, to prevent combination r partiality in their affairs, it be∣ng almost impossible in so many, ut one or other will prefer the in∣erest of the Commonwealth be∣ore his own, and because we can∣ot keep our selves from certain hwartings and accerssions to such eople as we have alwayes in our ye, the Senate did very wisely comply with the course of our hu∣mane affections, and encrease them o that number, to divide and bal∣lance
their sentiments, if not by a generous inclination to their Coun∣trey, at least by an insuperable in∣stinct of Nature, which suffers us not to concur with the judgement of every one. This Counsel or Magistrate (for that is the name they com∣monly call it by) is the same which is call'd in France the Privy Counsel of State, in which the Prince himself does sometimes preside. But there is this diffe∣rence between them, in France all things are transacted according to the pleasure of the King, and if he cannot be present amongst them himself, he substitutes another, and he is call'd President of the Counsel, but the Doge is not al∣wayes admitted to their Assem∣blies himself, and so far from depu∣ting another, that they will no vouchsafe to communicate their
transactions with him, but now and then. This Counsel is the Eye that watches perpetually for the good and safety of the State, the Eye which never fleeps, which divides their care and sollicitude for their Countrey with so much equa∣lity and proportion, that let one come to the Palace when he plea∣ses, he shall alwayes find them rea∣dy to dispatch them, forasmuch as there is not an hour in the night but they succeed and relieve one ano∣ther in order, that they may be al∣wayes ready to act, and oppose themselves against all the machina∣tions of their enemies. This is the Court of the highest Jurisdiction, which judges and de∣termines absolutely without appeal in all things, especially belonging to the Publick. They have the Authority of chastizing the Nobi∣lity, which they can extend very
far if they think good. The Ge∣nerals receive all their Orders from them, and when their Commissi∣ons are expir'd, they are oblig'd within six moneths next ensuing to attend that Court, and to answer to such Questions as shall be ob∣jected, in case they be accus'd of abusing their Commands. But whether there be any information against them or not, it is their duty of course to present themselves be∣fore them to give them an account of their Moneys, Magazines, Men, and whatever else was under their Conduct and Authority. The great Power which they ex∣ercise makes them not only venera∣ble, but dreadfull, and their Prince himself not daring to con∣tradict their Decrees, they have gotten such an Empire upon the spirits of all people, that the very name of the Counsel of Ten will
make one tremble, though his of∣fence be never so small. The Par∣liaments with us, and even our Counsels of State, have not that force and authority as they: in all our transactions, their motions are but slow, their power bounded, and restrain'd, which hinders their dispatch, and certainly could they exercise their zeal with the same priviledge and freedom as these, there would not be so many muti∣nies and conspiracies in France, nor so many cruel Wars to destroy us.
CHAP. III. Of the Sages Grands. THey are alwayes Elected out of the Nobility, nor can a meer Citizen ever hope to arrive at that honour. They are chosen for their merit and capacity, and their places are never sold. In some re∣spects they are like our Secretaries of State. They are three princi∣pal persons which have a kind of su∣per-intendancy over the rest, and manage the springs and motions of that great Machine the Common∣wealth. They have each of them their peculiar Province which they administer distinctly, and there∣fore there is the Sage de la Mer,
the Sage de la Terre-ferme, and the Sage de l' Ecriture. The Sage de la Mer disposes of all Orders which are given, rela∣ting any wayes to Maritime affairs, there being nothing happens in that nature which passes not tho∣row his hands. He has the care and provision of all Arms, Victuals, and Ammunitions, and gives out all Commissions requisite thereun∣to. He gives Patents and Com∣missions to all the Commanders and Officers in their Galleys and Gallions. He Signs all necessary Orders, and conveys them to them, and in short has full cogni∣zance and authority over all their Navigation. The Sage de la terre-ferme has the same inspection upon the Conti∣nent, takes an accompt of all Chamberlains, and Treasures of the Armies. It is his office to pay
the Souldiers, to give all Orders to the Militia in Garrison in all places under his dominion, and in a word it is he is to be apply'd un∣to, in any thing relating to affairs upon land. The Sage de l' Ecriture has the oversight of the Records and Regi∣sters of the Counsel, Signs all Or∣ders which pass there, sees the Letters Patents and Commissions seal'd which are given to the Magi∣strates sent abroad to govern and command the Provinces, and no∣thing is receiv'd from the Senate, either recompence, donative, or office, but must pass through his hands. Each of these Grandees are allow'd their Secretaries and Clarks under them for their assistance, and they are Citi∣zens. The mark or ensign of their de∣gree is a long purple Robe with large Sleeves.
They have separated these Offices, and made them three, though in most Kingdoms they are commonly executed by one person, but their design was to enfeeble and debilitate all dig∣nities, which in one mans hand might be too puissant and dan∣gerous. They have each of them a Seal belonging parti∣cularly to their Office, with which they seal their several dispatches, but all of them have the same impression.
CHAP. IV. Of their Procurators. THe Procurators in this Re∣publick may be called Prin∣ces without a Solecism, and they are of two sorts: One is chosen al∣wayes by the Senate, and confer'd as a reward of some emiment piece of service, or else as an encourage∣ment of virtue and honesty. The other buy their Principalities, and for the most part very dear, it be∣ing one of the readiest wayes the Commonwealth takes to raise mo∣ney in their greatest and most im∣portant necessities. They have their places in all Counsels, and Pregadis, but they have but a single voice no more
than the privatest Gentleman, and can do no more than any of the rest; yet they have their perquisites and priviledges, which makes them many times very considerable, and enables them to oblige or gratifie any one for whom they have a kindness. All Nations which have any commerce with the Venetian, are very sollicitous to acquire one of these Procurators for their Patrons. The Towns upon the terra-ferma, put themselves under their pro∣tections, and even the Nobility themselves think it no small corro∣boration to have an alliance with one of these Princes; and this is that which gives the greatest lustre to that Office. In the Senate they have their places above the rest, have the preheminence in all debates, and are alwayes the first in giving their
judgements. Yet for all these prerogatives, their train is no greater than theirs, nor are they suffer'd to walk the Streets in great∣er Equipage, and the design is to keep that happy mediocrity invio∣late, which was establish't at the Commencement, and has been continued so fortunately ever since. Nevertheless in their Houses they appear like themselves, living with the greatest affluence and gran∣dure imaginable. Strangers are not admitted to speak with them till they have formally demanded audience first; and when it is granted them, they are conducted by a long train of Officers of his Chamber to the place where they are to be receiv'd. Most of them are very proud and morose, but some of them civil and fine Gentle∣men: In the time whilst I was in their service, one of these Princes
named Morosini managed his digni∣ty so nobly, he gain'd the affecti∣ons of all people, and put them in∣to an equal admiration of the sweet∣ness of his behaviour, the noble∣ness of his extraction, and the charms with which he attracted the hearts of all such as had occasion to approach him; a virtue (to speak truth) with which the Venetian Nobility have but little acquain∣tance. They are distinguish't from the rest by a Magistrale Robe, of the same colour with the Robe of the Sages Grands.
CHAP. V. Of their Podestats. THe Dignities of the Podestats are of no long duration, con∣tinuing not above two or three years in the Towns to which they are sent for the distribution of ju∣stice. Their Office is properly to hear and dispatch all Suits or Con∣troversies arising either in the Towns where they preside, or the Territories depending. From the day of their departure from Venice, and their entrance upon the Magistracy, they lay by the equality in which they lived before, and comport themselves as Soveraigns. They have their
Gentlemen, their Stewards, their Officers of their Chambers, their Confessors, their Pages, their Footmen, and their Guard, which consists commonly of thirty or for∣ty persons, with a peculiar sort of Bonnetts upon their heads, their Swords by their sides, and their Snap-hanches in their hands after the manner of the Bressians, which is a kind of Arquebuss, somewhat larger than our Musquetons. The Guards are alwayes drawn up, and in their Arms, at the Gate of the Court where the Podestats hold their Assizes, and attend him constantly whenever he goes abroad. Though the Senate allow their Podestats these priviledges, yet they will not suffer them in other things to behave themselves like Princes, lest the elation of their heart might make them forget their
station and dependance. Their Jurisdiction seldom extending above four or five leagues, they cannot have interest or power enough to attempt any innovation; yet what authority they have given them, is to imprint a character of respect and obedience in the people under their several jurisdictions, that the Majesty of these Presi∣dents may as a Copy represent the original Grandure of that august bo∣dy, of which these are as it were, the most inconsiderable mem∣bers. Their Robes and their habits are red, their Vest is of scarlet with large Sleeves, they are daily at Mass in their Chappels, with the usual Ceremonies, and those of their Counsel accompanying them. Their Counsels consist generally of Gentlemen of the Terra-ferma, who seem to be assistant and joyn'd
to these Podestats, in the discussion of all occurrences which present themselves, but indeed it is but a complement and shadow of liberty which they give them, for in af∣fairs of greatest importance they never are called; and if by accident they be there, and their judgement contrary to the Podestats, they stop their mouthes, by shewing them a Decree of the Senate, confirm'd by the opinion of the present Ma∣gistrate. They have authority over all Prisoners, and judge in all Cases of life and death, in the highest resort. They have the care of all Hospi∣tals, High-wayes, and Bridges. During the time of their Commis∣sion, they lay Tolls, and set prices upon all things brought into the Markets, as necessary for the life of man. The Innes and victualling Houses are oblig'd every night to
bring to them the names of all the Guests and Lodgers in their re∣spective Houses, by which means they understand not only the num∣bers, but the qualities of all per∣sons which come into their Towns. If they have any apprehension of the Plague, they choose another Officer under them which is call'd the Magistrate of Health, who suf∣fers no man to enter whatever he be without a Ticket or attestation signed by their Secretaries. No Nobleman (I mean of the Terra∣ferma) is allow'd to be absent, but by their permission; and so strict is their eye over all numerous Assemblies, there is seldom any sufficient to give them an alarm. They live after the manner of the Gentlemen of that Countrey, yet though they converse with them freely, and afford them familiar ac∣cess, it is alwayes with such cir∣cumstances,
as make them know them to be their Masters. To insinuate however into the affection of the Gentry, and oblige them in some measure, they vouchsafe them some little incon∣siderable imployment, where they have the entire management of no∣thing, and yet they call this, (as I have heard some of them my self) sharing their authority with them, and desiring earnestly their assist∣ance, when (in truth) they are but their servants, and led about by the Noses, as they are pleas'd to direct.
CHAP. VI. Of their Camerlingues. I Might adde in this place an Of∣ficer they call the Captain Grand, but his imployment being Military, I shall reserve him till I speak of their Militia, and pass to their Camerlingues, or Receivers, which for the most part are Veneti∣an Gentlemen of small Estates, who are put into those Offices on purpose to recruit themselves, which they seldom neglect, by the several Receipts and payments which they make; and the Senate has that kindness for them, they never enquire too strictly into their behaviour. They are habit∣ed
in scarlet like the Podestat, receive their Orders both from the Podestat, and Grand-Cap∣tain, and discharge their Bills. When they hold a fair cor∣respondency with these two Magistrates, they make up their Markets the better, and they are continued in this little (but advantageous) Of∣fice, till such time as they are suppos'd to have got e∣nough, to support their qua∣lity in the Commonwealth.
CHAP. VII. Of their Ambassadors. THe principal aim of their Po∣licy is to obtain and preserve an amity with all the Princes of Europe by all possible means, of which they are so great lovers, they have many times purcha'st it at a dear rate, of the cruellest of their enemies. One of the most powerfull and dexterous wayes of maintaining this union with forreign Kingdoms, is by this ancient mode of Ambassadors, which they send to all Courts in Christendom with great equipage and splendor. They choose them constantly out of the Patrician race, that is to say
of the ancient Senators, such as were the first of their State, and such if possible as have merit and abilities added to the Nobility of their bloud. They are permitted to habit themselves according to the fashion of the Countrey to which they are designed, and to live after another manner than they do at Venice, which scarce one of the other Ma∣gistrates dare venture to do. In these kind of Negotiations they are so subtil and accute, they can penetrate the most secret Ca∣binets of Kings, and by a Key of gold which is forg'd in the Senate, open and shut the most obscure and intricate Springs in any soveraign Counsel. They spare no charges upon such an occasion, espe∣cially where they have any sus∣pition. These Ambassador  seem
Plenipotentiaries, and to have a full power and authority, but they are really circumscrib'd. They dare not come to a definitive Con∣clusion upon any affair whatever, till they have given notice of their progress at Venice, and receiv'd the directions of the Senate, which is punctually to be observ'd. They have not the liberty to open and peruse any Packets or dispatches alone: to prevent that, they ap∣point them certain Citizens of Ve∣nice, selected out of the most judi∣cious and experienc't persons of the City, who as Secretaries are al∣wayes to be present at the opening and reading of their Letters. And this is no small check to the Nobility, for however glorious they may appear in their station, we see them liable to be curb'd, and that by one single Citizen. With such admirable prudence do
these great Statesmen confine all their Grandees to their particular circuits and bounds, that 'tis im∣possible for them to arrogate any absolute jurisdiction to them∣selves. The reports which these Secre∣taries make, either by their Let∣ters or word of mouth, are of so great credit with the Senate, that they are not only sufficient to de∣stroy a man, but to create a jealou∣sie, and interrupt that harmony and consort which might otherwise be found amongst persons of the same condition. The Republick names a Nobleman expresly, to whom it gives the appearance of being chief of the Embassie, but when that is done, he is sure to have a Citizen clap't at his Elbow, to peep into the most secret of his actions. It is an incredible thing to see with what generosity these
illustrious persons the next day af∣ter they are return'd from their Embassies, lay aside all the Gran∣dure and Glory which they had ta∣ken upon them for the honour of their Conntrey, and march up and down the Streets as it were incog∣nito, with the same modesty as an ordinary Citizen. This condes∣cension of theirs gains strangely up∣on the affections of their Subjects and disposes them to obedience without violence or coersion, for observing how quietly their Go∣vernours resign, they cannot think much to conform to the Govern∣ment themselves. As to the Ambassadors which are sent to Venice, they are receiv'd with great honours. The Senate in their Robes of scarlet go out in their Gondoloes to meet them, in some of the Isles about the Town and having made their Comple∣ments,
they conduct them to the City with a great train of Boats at∣tending, every Senator taking a Gentleman of the Ambassadors Equipage into his Gondolo with him. But after this day they have no liberty to see or converse together more, nor can the Ambassador himself speak or negotiate with ny of them upon any pretence whatsoever. All things after∣wards are transacted in full Senate, he Duke and Counsel being pre∣ent, where no immediate Answer s ever given to any Proposition, ut the Ambassadors withdrawing, he business is debated, and then put to the Vote what shall be re∣ply'd. The Laws are so jealous, and so evere in matters of Intelligence or Correspondence, that if it be known a noble Venetian has had
conference, not only with an Am∣bassador, but the least person in his Retinue, he runs no less hazard than of his life, insomuch that they run as fast and with as much horror from any of them, as from a Basilisk. About twenty six years since, one of the Family of the Contarini, and Nephew to the Doge that was then, was strangled in Prison for having been seen in a Gondoloe with a Secretary of Spain. A Friend of mine, one Labia a no∣ble Venetian, who had spent much of his time in France, when Monsi∣eur du Plessis Besancon took his leave of the Senate, admiring the beauty and accomplishment of the young Chevalier his Son, he could not contain himself from ac∣costing him, and paying his re∣spects, but suspecting that one of the Counsel of Ten (who are al∣wayes about the Ambassadors)
had observ'd him, he was glad of his own accord to throw himself at the feet of those terrible Judges, to acknow∣ledge his fault, and implore their pardon, which at length though with severe reprehen∣sion he obtain'd, because he had prevented their Inform∣ers by accusing himself.
choose their Doge, their Counsel of Ten, their Senators, their Am∣bassadors, their Sages Grands, their Podestats, their Captains-General, their Provediteurs-Gene∣ral, their Governours, their Grand-Captains, their Vice-Ad∣mirals of their Galleys, the heads of their Inquisition, (which is but the shadow of a Court in Venice) because let the Inquisitors be as zealous as they will, they can nei∣ther act nor undertake any thing, without the permission of certain Senators appointed to assist, who commonly (like the rest of the Nation) being not over-scrupu∣lous or severe in such matters, do choak and correct the ardour which your more refin'd Catholicks are prone to. In short, all the chief Offices depending upon the Se∣nate, (whether Military or Civil) are entrusted only with the noble
Venetians, the rest of the Citizens, and the noblest upon the Conti∣nent, never so much as hoping for them in their turns. Till they be five and twenty years old, the noble Venetians are not admitted into the Counsel, yet this severity is not so general, but some few which are of their friends are receiv'd at twenty. Here it is they model and form their young plants for the govern∣ment of the State; here it is they are instructed in their most refin'd policies, and prepared for publick affairs. And though it may seem strange that the heat of youth should accord with the coldness and asperity of old age, yet there has been alwayes observ'd so great n union and concurrence resulting from their Counsels, that it must be acknowledg'd the flame of the young Gentlemen has hitherto had
no other effect but to correct and qualifie the frigidity of the more ancient, and on the other side the Ice and gravity of the seniors have serv'd only to cool and temper the juvenile ebullitions of their juniors. The Pregadis (which are the Counsels to which they are usually called, as is imply'd by the name, for Pregadi in the Venetiau language is as much as invited or convok'd) have their first meeting (all in a body) in the Place of St. Mark, where every one driving on his own designs either for himself or such of his friends as are ambitious of authority, they walk up and down promiscuously, solliciting, and making their Cabals. No body is suffer'd at that time to come near the place where they are walking, and if by accident or presumption any stranger intrudes
himself, he is repuls'd, and runs a great hazard of some publick af∣front. The while they are there, the place is counted as sacred, and call'd by the name of Pregadi, it runs along all the front of the Pa∣lace, and takes up a full half of the Market-place in breadth. One custome they have, I know not whether more subtil or pleasant: When any one who has stood for any dignity, comes out of the Counsel, whether his ambition be prosperous or not, all people sa∣lute him with their Complements, congratulate his advancement, and by a peculiar Oath which they have on purpose, swear they have done their utmost to serve him, by which means the poor rejected per∣son, besides the affront he receiv'd being defeated of his hopes, finds himself under a necessity of receiv∣ing a civility from him, who per∣haps
was the principal destruction of his designs, for he can never be assured, who were either his friends or his foes, because the Elections being made by Tickets put into a Bason without any superscription, the whole conduct remains so con∣fus'd and obscure, it would be be∣yond the skill of an Oedipus to re∣solve him. This invention of Tickets is the most safe way was ever found out for giving their judgements freely, for who is it will deny, but when one is to give his opinion in a pub∣lick Assembly, he is not liable to certain insuperable motions, which oblige him many times to speak against his judgement, being to give his Vote against some great person which he is afraid to dis∣please, or against a Friend which he is unwilling to destroy, against a man of parts which perchance he
has occasion to use, or against a man of power that another time may do as much for him. But this occult way of Election defends them against those dangers, and authoriseth them to be honest, without apprehension of any body. If there be several Children in a Family, the elder seldom marry, but give a good proportion of their patrimony to the younger: it is re∣ported that the youngest marryes for them all; but I cannot think them extravagant to that point. This I know, they are in no great slavery to their consciences, they manage their appetites with a loose rein, and indulge themselves in their pleasures as much as any peo∣ple in the world, yet they have a jealous and suspicious humour, (which is born and dyes with them) that perswades me the
good man of the house would not digest that kind of community. In my judgement it proceeds ra∣ther from a Maxime of State if one only marryes, for the whole Estate devolving by degrees upon him, he has wherewithall not only to support his Family, but to main∣tain it in its opulence and splendor, which they are principally solici∣tous of, not enduring with any pa∣tience to see any exceed them, and by this means (I conceive) it is they preserve their Houses in their ancient authority and lusture. Under their black Vests they are habited in the French fashion, very handsome, the young Nobility having no fancy for the long Robes which they are oblig'd to wear, would willingly change them also, but in that they are oblig'd to ac∣commodate, and preserve the mode of their Countrey, which in
all great Towns, and in their Hou∣ses of pleasure, they retain to their dying day. But out of the Towns, they are dress'd a la Cava∣liere, either when they are in their Coaches, or on Horseback, and accompani'd by a rabble of Hectors they call Bravi, many times only in ostentation, but too often for a worse end, for being very proud and vindicative, they are seldom without some mischief or other in their designs. And for that in this Countrey courage does not lye in the gallantry or generousness of a mans behaviour, but in ridding himself of his enemy by what wayes he can. That they may be in no danger of being surprized themselves, but rather have that advantage upon others, they are attended when they are in the Countrey with these Mirmidons, but in the City they leave them in
garrison, sometimes in their Houses, but never appear with them in the Streets. They never discourage their youth in their debauches, they seem rather to excite them by the permission the Curtezans have to keep publick Houses without be∣ing disturb'd, though to do them right it is in a Quarter by them∣selves. They are not ignorant in the Senate, that a voluptuous per∣son thinks of nothing but his plea∣sures, and he which is inveigled by the artifice of a Curtezan, pursues no bodies destruction but his own, and aims no further than to make himself acceptable to her. By this means these grave Senators suffer the inextinguishable flames of their youth, to evaporate betwixt the arms of these Idols, and with this sweet poison correct the boyl∣ing of those spirits, which unca∣jol'd
might endanger, at least at∣tempt the subversion of the State. But since the famous Tiepolo's dayes, there has not been known any form'd Conspiracy sufficient to give that Republick any apprehen∣sion; what have happen'd, have been immediately suppress'd, and by their vigilance render'd abor∣tive. They are generally much given to play, and very neat and subtil at all Games. They have certain places on purpose which they call Redotti, where they meet, and dis∣pose of several hours without speaking a word. Their success is never known by their behaviour, for they win and lose, receive and part with their money with the same temper and indifference. For the most part the place of their play is at a Senators House, where they have alwayes one of their
Judges in their eye. They are so far from using any corporal Exercise, that they despise it; and I am of opi∣nion they are brought up purposely in that laziness, lest otherwise they should awake their Lethargick spirits, which by this means lye buried in the contemplation and enjoy∣ment of their pleasures.
CHAP. IX. Of their Ladies. THe Ladies making no incon∣siderable part of the Nobless in this Countrey, I suppose it will be allow'd me to make a small di∣gression in their behalf, and to speak a word or two of their Customes en passant. They are naturally very proud, and of opinion there is no Nobility like themselves in the whole world. They never match be∣neath themselves, and will sooner throw themselves into a Nunnery, (where they have all fort of liber∣ty) than entertain the least moti∣on of an unequal Marriage. In
their Houses they are very magnifi∣cent and rich, their Habits of Cloth of gold, or other costly Stuff, made up à la Françoise. When they appear abroad they are dress'd very neatly, their Breasts bare, and commonly plump and white, their Heads are usually dress'd after our mode, and with as much curiosity as in France. When Madam Besançon was at Ve∣nice they most industriously imita∣ted her in all the fashions she brought with her out of France. Your languishing beauties being in no great request among them, they prefer vivacity to sweetness, and a brisk aiery brown is more ac∣ceptable there than a sleepy and dy∣ing aspect, though the fairest ima∣ginable. They take much delight to have their Necks and Faces something more sanguine than or∣dinary,
which to strangers is not so gratefull. They are mightily re∣serv'd at home, but if you will dis∣pence with them there, they will invent wayes enough to satisfie your curiosity any where else. They have certain affected Feasts every Week, upon which under pretence of publick prayer, or par∣ticular devotion to some Saint or other, they take occasion to be constantly at Church, where be∣hind the Pillars you may observe the young Gentlemen lying at catch for their Oeillades and Glan∣ces, which they receive and retort with a slyness and dexterity suita∣ble to the cunning of that Na∣tion. They have most of them their Women absurdly and fantastically clad, which attend and support them, by whose gracious assistance a man may be sometimes admitted
to converse with them, when they enjoy themselves most freely, or have liberty to walk. From the Epiphanie to the first Week in Lent they keep a continued Carnaval, during which time they have the freedom to go in their disguises to the Place of St. Mark, to be present at all Balls, Playes or Assemblies, where there is merriment or dan∣cing. At their Masques they have a particular care of refusing their hand to no body, lest it should prove some Gentleman in Masque∣rade, which amongst them would be an inexpiable affront. At these meetings they place themselves all in a rowe, without speaking a word, and when they are taken out to dance, one must have a special care he does it not with his Glove off, if he does, he not only runs a hazard of an affront, but to be pistol'd or stabb'd. Their Dance
is nothing but a grave and stately motion from one room to another, till at last they return to the place from whence they were taken. They have no want of Musick, but it is so disposed into several ap∣partments, that one is sensible but of one single Melody. In one Chamber they have their Theor∣boes, in another their Lutes, in a third their Viols, in a fourth their Violins, and so in every Chamber one comes, he is presented with a new sort. Their Play is a perpetual Tacet. You shall see fifty or threescore La∣dies about a long Table, shuffling and managing the Cards with as much silence as they were Statues, and losing their money with as lit∣tle concernment, as their Hus∣bands. I was many times at these meetings on purpose to have learn'd the game, but they play'd
so quick, and talk'd so little, 'twas impossible I should do it. Besides these Feasts, they have the same liberty at the Marriage of any of their relations, upon certain dayes which they call Procuratici, and upon all publick solemnities for any victory obtain'd. When they are at home, their entertainment commonly is making their Punti in aria, which are the Points de Venice so much valu'd in France. Their Coaches are their Gondo∣loes, which are a sort of Boats so easie and swift, it is scarce possible to present them to your imaginati∣on. All the Summer long their recreation is upon the Canal above the Pontrealte, and they call this diversion taking the Air. Their Gondoloes are so swift, though the Sea in the Canal be very gentle and calm, yet by the force of the Row∣ers, and the agitation of the Ves∣sel,
it is swell'd and incens'd in that manner, it seems with its waves and foam to threat∣en all people that had the audacity to provoke it. But that which is most admirable is the dexterity of their Wa∣termen, who amongst so great a multitude and confusion of Boats, so many turnings and windings as they make, are never known to fall foul up∣on one another, but follow so exactly the Barque where the Lady of their affections is car∣ried, that without the least suspicion or disorder by all the crosses they make, they will land you at the place where your Mistriss appoints. And here I might make some reflexion upon the jea∣lousie of this Nation, and ad∣mire how upon certain occa∣sions
they can master a passi∣on which amongst them is predominant. But they un∣derstand the complexion of that Sex exactly, and that their desire is more ardent of what is forbidden, for which reason they remit something of the Italian severity, and allow them a certain image of liberty, lest by their strict∣ness they should kindle such a fire in their veins, as should make their own Houses too hot for them.
CHAP. X. Of their Citizens. BEfore I come to speak of the Estace upon the Continent, I think it not improper to place the Citizens next to the Nobility, be∣cause they pretend to be of the same number, and accordingly call themselves Noble Citizens. Un∣less a man be very conversant amongst them, and takes more than ordinary notice, it is no easie matter to distinguish them from the Gentry, they having the same habits, and neither of them more than the other; but if one associ∣ates with them, and observes strictly the difference of their geni∣us
and spirit, 'tis not difficult to dis∣cern them, for the Citizens carry not their heads so high, nor their forehead so open, their counte∣nance is not so free, they have more humility, and their salu∣tations are with more submis∣sion. They are generally men of parts, profound in their judgements, and have great intelligence in forreign Countreys. They are rich and frugal, and exercise no particular Trade, only they are Partners with such as traffick in Gross, their principal commerce is with the Jewes, who have a Quarter in the City assigned particularly to them∣selves. To speak properly they are the chief of the Commons, and the Nobility complyes with them so far as to permit them to wear the same habits for three rea∣sons:
The first is, that by honouring them with the same Vesture the Senators themselves wear, they may the better prevail with them to swallow their Authority, and cajole the Commons with an opi∣nion that in their Citizens they do participate likewise with the No∣bles in the management of affairs, whereas indeed there is nothing common amongst them but their Cloathes. A second is, to conceal the number of their Gentry from the observation of strangers, that by supposing them more numerous than they are, they might be de∣terred from all plots and machinati∣ons against them. The last, and (if I be not mista∣ken) the most prevalent is, that by confounding themselves in that manner with the commoner sort, they might not remain so open and
easie a mark to such as should have designs against them, for he which attempts them upon presumption of their habits, may find himself mistaken, and involve himself in the ruine of a Citizen as soon as a Senator, so that their destruction by this means being not so facile as otherwise, these Citizens may be said to be the Bucklers of the No∣bless, by which they are cover'd and protected. They are never imploy'd in any great Office, and have the management of nothing in the State, but under some of the Gentlemen of Venice. The highest of their preferment is to be Secretaries to the Ge∣nerals, Ambassadors, and Pro∣veditors-General. They are admitted to the Bar, and may go as Voluntiers in any of the Ships belonging to the Com∣monwealth;
but that where∣with they are most pleas'd, and which perswades them they have no small share in the Government, is, that they are nominated to their places by the Counsel, and indeed they are seldome im∣ploy'd about any person but as a spy upon his actions.
CHAP. XI. Of the Nobles upon the Terra-firma. ONe of the most admirable things to all strangers, is the submission (not to say abjectness and baseness) of these Nobles to∣wards the Nobility of the Veneti∣ans, which extends to so poor and servile a veneration, they will not put on their Hats before any of them, but by their reiterated com∣mands. Notwithstanding in the Countrey they retain some little esteem, but in the City they are no more regarded than the most in∣considerable Mechanicks. They are kept in so constant and
so severe a servitude, they are ne∣ver admitted to any considerable dignity in the Commonwealth. They are never call'd to any of the Counsels of State, of whose trans∣actions they are usually as ignorant as the meanest Fisherman of Mo∣ran. They are brought up in this ignorance, and kept at this distance from affairs, to keep them under, and prevent any competition with them who are to be their Masters; for being naturally witty, quick; desirous of novelties, and no more faithfull than consists with their convenience, should they give an inch, they would take an ell, and by the admission of one foot, work in their whole body, till at last they would discover, that not∣withstanding their masque and ap∣pearance of liberty, they were re∣ally and in effect no better than slaves. And to speak truth, this
Republick have so great a diffi∣dence and suspicion of these peo∣ple, there is no stone left unturn'd that may keep them from a fence of their condition, or put them out of any capacity of relieving them∣selves. Nevertheless that they might not provoke them to despair, the superiour Magistrates, sent over by the Senate to govern them, call them to them at their arrival, en∣trust them (in appearance) with their affairs, give them the title of Counsellors, and perhaps the arbitration in some trifling diffe∣rence. The Orders which they receive from the Senate, they communi∣cate with them first, and they are oblig'd blindly to pursue them; they give them little Offices be∣sides, but they are not so honoura∣ble as servile: with which shadows
and delusions the poor Gentlemen march off with an Adio à Vosigno∣ria, as heartily as if they had ad∣vanc'd them to the highest dignity in their Dominions. They are generally implacable, and hold this as an irrefragable Maxime, never Fidarsi al nemico reconciliato; To trust a reconciled Enemy. They are so rooted and habituated to revenge, that in all the Towns belonging to this State, there is scarce any thing to be seen but perpetual Civil Wars. The Bressians and the Inhabitants of Vin∣cenza are so furious, and murders and assassinations so familiar a∣mongst them, it would scarce bring a Citizen out of his Shop, to see a man kill'd before his face, and they are so little concern'd at the execu∣tion of any man, that if they hear a Gun go off in the Street, the most pious person amongst them will pull
off his Hat, and say a short Prayer for the murderers escape. And as if this were not enough, the Pa∣rents adde this way of revenge to the education of their Children, shewing them constantly every night and morning the bloody Shirts in which their Predecessors were slain, inflaming their young veins with desire of revenge, which encreasing with their age, never abates, but with the utter ruine and destruction of their enemy. And yet this liberty would not be altogether unpardonable, if they took but honourable wayes to atchieve their revenge: I call them honourable wayes, because though there be Princes which have forbid Duels, yet upon any complaint they cannot conceal the difference they make betwixt a man that chal∣lenges, and one that refuses. But their wayes are so barbarous, and
base, they are not to be recited but with horrour. They entertain Garrisons of these Bravoes in their Houses, who being arm'd exactly, are many times the perfidious in∣struments of their death, which they ought in gratitude to have de∣fended; and in truth there is no people that I know more unhappy than these Nobles, the most se∣vere Monk of them all not enduring half so much pain with their Hair and their Sackcloth, as these do with their Coats of Mail and their Corslets, which for greater secrecy they wear commonly next their skin also. In short, their lives are so disturb'd and inquiet, by their passionate appetite of revenge on the one side, and their immoderate apprehension of danger on the o∣ther, that the nearest of their rela∣tions have many times fallen under their hands, in the fantastical a∣larms
harms they have created to them∣selves. Their Wives (how vertuous and discreet soever they be) they use like the greatest Criminals i∣maginable. They keep them lock'd up close in their Chambers, which are fortified at all points, and not to be entred but thorow an iron Grate. They do not allow them the conversation of mankind, nor suffer them to be attended, but by their own Sex; and if they do not govern themselves with the highest severity, they run no less hazard than of their lives. For in this case they are so jealous, they will revenge the sin of the Father upon his Children, and extermi∣nate a whole Family for the offence of a single man: and yet for all this their Wives are Women, and Ita∣lians too. This (according to my best ob∣servation)
is the life of the No∣bless upon the Terra-firma. Some will tell me perhaps they cannot but admire, so prudent and potent a body as the Senate should per∣mit such abominable disorders. But in this lyes the subtilty and neatness of their policy; for if they do not promote them on purpose, they at least connive at their out∣rages, to the end that being im∣ploy'd in mining and countermi∣ning at home, they may be taken off from any publick contrivances, to the prejudice of the State. They know very well where there is a radicated and inveterate quar∣rel, there can never be an entire and ingenuous union, which of all things in the world this State is most apprehensive of, as the most probable way for its ruine and sub∣version. And indeed considering how numerous and (in that re∣spect)
considerable they are, should they be unanimous, and live in any correspondence, it were no hard matter for them to be too hard for their Masters, and to tum∣ble them down headlong, that do now trample upon their necks. It is an ordinary saying at Venice, that this great body being full of me∣lancholly and corrupt humours, nothing is more convenient for it than Phlebotomy, and that having that faculty of opening their veins for one another, they save them the labour of applying any other re∣medies. But besides the aforesaid advantages which the Venetian draws from these animosities, there is another of which upon oc∣casion they make considerable use, and that is by declaring any of these Gentlemen of the Terra-firma Re∣bels, if after they have satisfied their fury, and as it were glutted
themselves with the blood of their adversaries, they begin to appear formidable in the Countrey, by the multitude of their Bravoes, or the quantity of their crimes. In such case the Senate understands well enough that the perpetiation of such and so numerous villanies, must of necessity create them ene∣mies ad infinitum, and therefore without more circumstance they banish this terrible offendor, de∣grade him from his honours, de∣prive him of his Estate, set a price upon his head, and having craved the assistance of all the neighbour∣ing Countreys towards the executi∣on of justice, and engaged their concurrence in so equitable a Cause, they constrain the poor Tyrant to an unhappy dilemma, of either living obscurely in some Cave for the future, or else in the highest despair to betake himself to
the Field: from whence it comes there are many times so great par∣ties of Banditi to be seen in their Territories. An incomparable Maxime to give just so much rein to the vitious, as shall make them in∣solent and odious, that they may afterwards ruine them with univer∣sal approbation, and besides pos∣sess the people with a most sacred opinion of their justice, and secure their Provinces against the Gran∣dees of the Continent. CHAP. XII. A particular Discourse upon some of their Maximes. THat which the World looks upon as their Treasure, is (really) no such thing. Their
wealth is suppos'd to consist in great heaps of money, cramm'd up in some secret and secure place, from whence upon occasion they draw forth such immense summes of gold and silver as they judge ne∣cessary for the conservation of their State. Their chiefest riches in their greatest extremities, lyes in the affections of their Nobility and Citizens, there it is they meet with their inexhaustible springs, it is they whose love to their Coun∣trey, and apprehension of forreign dominion, makes them post-pone all Considerations of particular in∣terest, and draw their swords as well as purses in defence of their State. After the death of the va∣liant Marcello, the loss of Tene∣dos, and the fatal allay to their victory in the death of Mccinego, though the Republick was almost dazeled with those blows, and as it
were fainting with the loss of such laudable blood, yet they disdain'd to supply themselves any where but at home, and the generous Pesaro (since chosen Doge) was the first who in that general Consternation rais'd up their declining courages, by a most honourable example, offring the Senate his whole reve∣new for five years, which was no less than sixty thousand Duckats per annum. This noble Propositi∣on not only confirm'd the irreso∣lute, encouraged the timerous, and supply'd their necessities for the present, but has put them into such a posture, they are not probably to be destroy'd by any but them∣selves. For the more effectual execution of the Orders of the Senate, they have a grand Provost in Venice who wears a long scarlet Robe, and is called by them Contestabile, he is
attended by certain Sbires, in the nature of our Archers, and his Of∣fice is to suppress the insolence of such Rascals as disturb the security of the People. Nevertheless these Sbires dare not lay hands upon a Gentleman, and if at any time it be their duty to seize upon any of them, they throw their Cloaks o∣ver their head, and muffling them up in that manner, they carry them to Prison. The Office of these Sbiri is so slavishly miserable, a Nobleman, Citizen, or Stranger, (let his condition be what it will) if he can prove him guilty of the least offence, may stab or pistol any of them, without any danger of being punish'd. The Water and the Gondoloes are as so many Sanctuaries, no medling with any man there, no execution of Justice, a Criminal upon the Water is as secure against
the Sergants, as a man behind a Mud-wall, is against the stab of a Pen-knife. The Houses of Am∣bassadors are in like manner so sa∣cred, that if the greatest Banditi in Italy but touch the threshold of their Door, he is exempt, and se∣cure against any kind of violence: besides these they have certain pri∣viledg'd places, in which no man is to be disturb'd, and their privi∣ledges are kept inviolable, but if they catch any of them out of their Asilum, they are lyable to the Lash, and away they go to Prison. Fire-Arms are so peremptorily for∣bidden in this City, that 'tis an un∣pardonable offence to wear any there, and he that makes use of them, if he be taken, dies with∣out mercy: by which piece of se∣verity they prevent many assassina∣tions, which otherwise would be too frequent in that place, The
stab with a Stidetto (which is a kind of Dagger the Italians wear behind their Robes) is not so cri∣minal, for that sport being acted man to man, and the blows mutu∣al and alternate, the Venetian con∣cerns himself not so much where the combate is equal, and one may kill his enemy, as soon as his ene∣my him. Thus far I have entertain'd you with the pleasantness of that City, and other Towns upon the Conti∣nent, as are happy and at peace, we have made some Observations upon them, and concluded (ac∣cording to our judgement) that notwithstanding the diversity in their age, humours, and qualities, their Unity and Concord is so great, there is no revolution to be suspected in that Common∣wealth. But now the noise of Trumpets
and Drums, the shouts and accla∣mations of the Souldiers calling me away, I must fall down with them to the Island of Lio, where they are usually embark'd. The Galleys and Gallions trick'd up with their Banners and Penons, and as it were sunk and swallow'd up in the smoak of their great Guns, perswades me the General may be embarking himself, and all these valiant men imploy'd upon some extraordinary Enterprize. It would be a shame not to be a Souldier amongst so ma∣ny brave persons, and I that have formerly learn'd my Trade amongst them, (cannot leave them in ho∣nour in any noble Expedition: ne∣vertheless while the Souldiers and Officers are preparing for their Voyage, and the generous Cava∣lier taking) leave, of his Mistniss, I shall have time to speak a word or two of their Military Policy.
THE MILITARY POLICY OF THE VENETIAN. The Second Book. CHAP. I. Of the Venetian Militia in general. THat War of all professions in the World is the most noble and honourable, is a thing so un∣deniably clear, God Almighty amongst his Titles
in the holy Scriptures seems to af∣fect none more than to be called the God of battel, The Lord of Hosts, &c. and the weapon he most com∣monly us'd for the destruction of his enemies was the sword, which to this day discriminates betwixt the Souldier, and the rest of the people. Kings (which are his Vicegerents upon earth) delight∣ed with the Title of Invincible, prefer it to all other Epethites whatever; and the Nobility would never be reckon'd the right arm of their Prince, if they were not naturally more valiant than or∣dinary. The bravery which excites the Gentry of France, and makes them run voluntarily into so many dan∣gers, is in that respect more honou∣rable than the Venetians, the No∣bility amongst these being oblig'd by indispensable necessity, (as be∣ing
the heads of that State) to do their own business themselves; for being eternally jealous of stran∣gers, and afraid to put the sword into their hands, who may possibly make use of it to their prejudice, they seldom imploy them in any considerable Command, and if at any time they be forc'd, it is with such caution and restraint, that they seem rather to tye up their hands, than to put them in arms. But that their proceedings may be less obscure, and their Military Methods transmitted more clearly, I shall begin with their chief Offi∣cers, and give a description of them.
CHAP. II. Of their Generalissimo. THe Authority of the Generalis∣simo is so absolute from the very moment of his Embarkment, that during his Government (for three years) the Republick it self can scarce take notice of his actions. His Cabbin is like a little Senate, from whence all Orders relating any way to the Wars do constantly is∣sue; and in some respects he might be call'd independant, were he not at the end of his Reign to give an account of his behaviour to the Counsel of Ten, to answer to such Questions as shall be ask'd, to purge himself of such Crimes as he
may be accus'd of, and in defect of that, to suffer and be expos'd to the same punishment as the mean∣est of the people. And it is no ex∣traordinary thing there, if he has any enemy considerable, or has not demean'd himself with the civility expected, to fall under the lash, and receive a severe chastisement from the Counsel of Ten. There are most commonly seve∣ral Generals in the service of the Venetian, but with such subordina∣tion and dependance upon this, they receive their Orders from him, and his Command is their sufficient direction: and this is a custome far from the practice of any other part of Europe, where fre∣quently by the multitude and inde∣pendance of their Generals, they weaken their Armies, and render them rather dis-membred than commanded. It is no easie mat∣ter,
(especially if they be persons of conduct and courage) to pre∣serve a sincere amity and affection betwixt two plac'd in equal autho∣rity. For the jealousie of being less esteem'd than his Partner, thrusts him violently upon all ha∣zards, and sets his wits upon the Tenter, to find out some way or other of depriving him of honour, and working himself into the sa∣vour of the people: if they be dif∣ferent in their humours, one brave and adventrous, the other slow and deliberate, how is it possible such diversity should consist with any design, or produce any thing to the honour of the State? And of this, in the late Wars we have seen sun∣dry examples, where these kind of divisions have been so prejudicial, that more than one Army have been defeated, (or endanger'd at least) for not being seasonably re∣liev'd
by those who though they were distinct by their Commissions, ought nevertheless to have made but one body, seeing both had ta∣ken arms for the same interests. The satisfaction to see ones Com∣petitor beaten will not suffer a man sometimes to come in to his rescue, every one triumphing in the mis∣fortunes of his Rival. Battels at Sea are much more dangerous and uncertain than the Engagements upon Land; in those, providence, diligence, and the knowledge of the Countrey, are the three things which give life and assurance to an Army, there upon any sudden, or unexpected accident or advantage, their deliberation is short, and their resolution easie; but at Sea if any thing be to be debated, they cannot run immediately to Coun∣sel, and they must attend the turn∣ing of the Wind, the coming in of
the Tide, (which perhaps is six hours too late) before they can be in a possibility of executing their Orders, insomuch that many a fair Enterprize is lost, which two mo∣ments before would have been glo∣rious and successfull. For these Reasons the Republick of Venice commits all to the Generalissimo, who has full power of himself to fight, retreat, or attempt any thing, that in his judgement may be honourable, or advantageous to the State. The principal business of this omnipotent Office, is to prevent or interrupt the coming down of the Ottoman Fleet from the Euxine Sea, into the Archipellago, to this purpose having got his Navy toge∣ther, he places it behind certain desart Islands, (of which that Sea is full) in manner of an Ambus∣cade, or else takes his Post in a
strait passage under the currant of the two Castles (Cestos and Abi∣dos) by which the Turks must of necessity come, which is not to be done without disorder, if the least opposition be added to the strait∣ness and rapidity of the Sea. Te∣nedos was formerly an incomparable advantage, where their whole Fleet might ride securely at anchor, attend their motions with patience, and assail them upon occasion with very probable success, but the Treason of one of their own Coun∣treymen depriv'd them of that, which was of universal importance to all Christendome. I my self was at that time in their service, when that accident happen'd, and could perhaps give a particular ac∣compt of the whole transaction, but I shall say no more, than that there are the Heads of four or five hundred French still to be seen upon
the Walls of the Castles, which seem to cry out for vengeance, a∣gainst the perfidiousness of those who deliver'd them into their hands. The place of the Generalissimo upon any considerable Engage∣ment, is alwayes in the Van of his whole Fleet; no Ship being per∣mitted before him but the General of the Gulf, who alwayes begins the Charge. The Generalissimo's Galley is constantly very rich, and having serv'd one General, never descends to his Successor. The Ventian-Generals may (not im∣properly) be said to resemble the ancient Consuls among the Ro∣mans, which History has describ'd to us marching alwayes in their Robes, and not putting them off in the very Crisis of the Battel. They are commonly persons of choise experience and resolution,
otherwise if they behave them∣selves dishonourably, they are sure to be punish'd severely. They are not so precise and curious of their age, if they have merit and capaci∣ty, tis sufficient for their Election. The brave Moccinego who died with so much honour at the head of his Fleet, was not compleat five and thirty years old, and doubtless had he escap'd that misfortune, the great designs he had on foot, (which yet were easie with his con∣duct) would questionless have succeeded, and advanc'd him to that height which his virtue de∣serv'd. To speak the truth, there were many, and those considerable Errors in that Engagement, which I have heard many grave Captains enumerate and prove. The Ba∣lott is the way which they make use of in the Election of this Officer, every one giving his Vote in a little
Bowl. Upon these occasions, the young Gentlemen of the City will endeavours all boldly as any of the rest; and though there was great contest in the Election of Moccenigo, and the ancienter sort carried it at first, yet the youth sollicited so vigourously, in spight of all opposition they created him at last. This Command is not perpetual, but constituted by the Republick pro re nata, when War is openly proclaimed, and the necessity of their affairs requires it; when they cease, that Office ceases with them, and the principal Com∣mand devolves upon the General of the Gulf.
CHAP. III. The General of the Gulf. THe General of the Gulf is a perpetual Charge, and (as a man may say) never expires, for the Venetians looking upon themselves as soveraign in the A∣driatick Sea, (which is call'd the Gulf of Venice) maintain a con∣stant squadron of Galleys, and men of War on foot, as well in peace as in war, to keep their Subjects in the Isles of Dalmatia in obedience, to protect their Frontiers upon the Mediterranean, and secure them from the surprizes of the Pirats and Corsaires, with which that Sea is grievously infested.
The War in the Gulf is prosecu∣ted without quarter, no Prisoners are taken there, and that Captain who for compassion or advantage gives any of them their lives, loses his own most certainly for his la∣bour. All the Renegadoes they meet with, are hang'd immediate∣ly upon the Main-yard, and if their Wives he in their company, they never part them: if any Christians turn Pirats, and fall into their clutches, they run the same desti∣ny infallibly, and by this impartial justice it is they preserve their Do∣minion in the Gulf. This being the most ancient of all their Officers, he has upon that score the honour of commanding (as it were) the forlorn, and ma∣king the first insult upon the ene∣my, though otherwise he is com∣manded by the Generalissimo, and receives his Orders without dis∣pute.
His Command is simply at Sea, and as soon as any of his Soul∣diers are landed, they are out of his jurisdiction: yet among the Vene∣tians he is reputed a very conside∣rable Officer, upon whose conduct and integrity the peace of all Italy depends, that Countrey being (as every one knows) bounded on one side by that Sea, as high as Capo-d' Histria. His authority extends no fur∣ther than Zant, Cephalonia, and Corfeu, (the most remote Islands in the Gulf) he never sets foot on shore, but upon some necessary, or very important occasion. His ordinary station in time of peace is either at Corfeu, the Gulf of Cat∣ro, or Zant, which are three Ports of necessity to be pass'd by all that go to Venice. This Squadron is a kind of an Out-guard, plac'd on purpose to break the first effort of
the enemy, to obstruct their pas∣sage, and to give opportunity to the Countreys under their pro∣tection to put themselves into a po∣sture of defence. When the Re∣publick is not engaged in any actu∣al Wars, their young Nobless are sent constantly to the General of the Gulf, to be educated in arms, and out of this Nursery it is they are furnished with those illustrious Officers, who so frequently and successfully attempt the vast Na∣vies of the Turk. By this policy they reap two very considerable Effects: one is, they bring up their youth (as it were) in the lap of danger and War, and by a continual custome of confronting them to the enemy, they give them such a habit of va∣lour, as is never to be dismai'd ei∣ther by the potentest enemy, or the most terrible accident they can
meet with. And yet the other is more considerable than this, enu∣ring them by degrees to an obedi∣ence to their Equals, and not to mutiny against their Commands, by a sottish pretence, That they are as good, and know as much as them∣selves. This I have seen in other places, but to speak truth, it nei∣ther savours of a Souldier nor a gal∣lant man, who whilst he lives will never decline any honourable action upon any occasion whatever. If the Generalissimo dies, or comes to any unfortunate accident, the General of the Gulf succeeds him on course, and takes the Command of the Army without any contradiction; a wise and pru∣dent way to break the neck of all divisions which might arise for the Command, which too often proves like a Plague in an Army, and destroys more men than the e∣nemies Sword.
CHAP. IV. Of the General of their Ga∣leasses, and their Gover∣nours. THis Command requires a man of resolution and judgement, the whole success of their Battels depending principally upon him. He has the Command (as a man may say) of the Bulworks which secure the Fleet, opposing his Ga∣leasses as so many impregnable Ramparts against the fury of all at∣taques, and when-ever he forces himself into the middle of his ene∣mies, he breaks their Squadrons, disorders their Battaliaes, and for∣ces even victory it self to declare for his party.
The Captain of every Galeass under his Command is call'd the Governour, to shew the impor∣tance of the Charge with which he is entrusted, and that not imperti∣nently, seeing in effect they are as so many floating Castles, in which they have commonly a thousand men in Garrison, who mount the Guards, and are reliev'd, take their several Posts, keep their Sentinels, and go the Rounds with as much order and punctilio, as they use in our Citadels. They have each of them a hundred pieces of whole Canon, (which demon∣strates their puissance when they are in a body) and by the help of their Sails and their Oars, they perform the service both of the Gallies and Gallions, making their way in a calm by the force of their Oars, and by the benefit of their Sails, (with the least gale of wind)
they manage themselves as nimbly as any other of their Ships. These Ships being of an unima∣ginable expence, the Venetian en∣tertains no great number of them in his service; the most I ever saw at one time together in their Fleet was but six, yet for fear of any ac∣cident, they have several more in their Arsenal of this and all other sorts ready to put to Sea. Their confidence in these Ships is so great, they conclude them invin∣cible, and a Town which has one of them to make good the entrance into its harbour, believes it self se∣cure, and despises all other pro∣tection. The famous Tenedos had two of these Machines for the de∣fence of its fortress, and certainly it had been safe, had they been kept to their station, but the pow∣er of his money having carried them away, the Bassa found a way to carry the Island.
Besides the Punctilio of honour which animates the Governours, they are under a necessity of being brave, or dying with infamy. This is it which makes them fight with resolution, and neither take nor give quarter to any, if one of these Governours yields to five and twenty Gallies, (though the num∣ber be sufficient to fright a whole Fleet) he must have a care of com∣ing again into the clutches of the Venetian, if he does, the best en∣tertainment he can expect is to have his head chop'd off in his own Ship, in the sight of the whole Armada. Never was any stranger entrust∣ed with the Command of the Ga∣leasses not but the Souldiers and Crew are generally forreign, and the Officers for the most part of the same Countreys with them; but all are subordinate to their Gover∣nour,
who receives no Orders but from his General, and the Gene∣ral none but from the Generalissimo himself. I might in this place give a Character of the severity of their Military Laws, which for∣gives no body that is either Cow∣ard or Traytor: but it is scarce to be imagined, a man who has the ambition of putting for so great a Command, can want courage and resolution to manage it when ob∣tain'd: and when any of them are executed, 'tis not so much for their cowardise or fear, as for their Trea∣son, in betraying the good opini∣on conceiv'd of their Conduct. If we were but half so rigid in France, it would preserve many a Town, and people would consider very well how they engaged in a Command, that abus'd never so little would cost them so dear. By this way the Venetian reaches
his Officers to know them, yet he seldom puts these Charges into any mans hands, but such as they are sure are faithfull, and capable to manage them. CHAP. V. Of the General of the Galli∣ons, and the Captains under his Command. THese Gallions are alwayes commanded by a Gentleman of Venice, no other Nation being admittable to that Charge; the roguery of some forreigners who ran away with some of these Ves∣sels ready rigg'd, having taught them more wit than to trust them for the future: but their Work∣men and Mechanicks are indiffe∣rently
of all Countreys. Some∣times they hire Ships of the Hollan∣der or English, ready equip'd, and pay them every moneth, but they must be Commanded by a noble Venetian. The great Vessels which they take now and then from the Turk, they call Sultans, and they are set out again at the expence of the publick: though the Comman∣der of a Sultan be in reality no more than the simple Captain of a Ship, yet he is more considerable, it be∣ing look'd upon as the mark of a particular esteem, when one is ad∣vanc'd to such an authority as that. And this they do to diffuse an insensible jealousie among their Commanders, recompensing him whom they judge to have deserv'd well, with the honour of a Charge, which has nothing in it above the
rest, but an innovated name. In this particular they seem to imitate the example of the Romans, who (to animate their Souldiers) pre∣sented them with rewards, very trivial and inconsiderable to the eye, but (if measured with the honour they brought along with them to the party) they were vast accumulations of glory. This General having all the Ma∣gazines of the Fleet on board his Gallions, he is of no mean impor∣tance amongst them, and to speak truth no man is ever admitted to that Command till he has given undeniable evidence of his prudence and Conduct. They seldom come to grapple, or to a very close fight with their enemy, but with their broad sides they do terrible execu∣tion.
CHAP. VI. Of their Sur-Comites of the Gallies. THat is the name by which they distinguish the Com∣manders of their Galleys from their other Captains. They are gene∣rally young Gentlemen, who go on purpose to enure themselves to the Wars, and make themselves eminent by some remarkable ser∣vice. The Hull, and materials of the Galleys are deliver'd out of the Arsenal, with all manner of provi∣sions both for the belly and the Wars, but the Rowers, the Soul∣diers, and all manner of imbellish∣ment, is at the charge of the Offi∣cers.
As to their pay, the Re∣publick discharges it from the time they are imbark'd, and to recom∣pence the expence of the Captain in some measure, he disposes of all inferiour places in his Galley. There being alwayes an unsatiable emulation amongst the young No∣bless, this is the occasion that eve∣ry one strives and contends with his whole force to out-do his compani∣on, and signalize himself by some remarkable action. In their Ca∣bins and Quarters there is no want of guilding or fine painting, and the rich Stuffs of which their▪Flags and Penons are made, demon∣strates most clearly how unwilling they are to be out-done. In this manner the Republick appears most pompously splendid, at the charge of other people, and imploys the vanity and ambition of her young Gentlement, to her own magnifi∣cence and glory.
Before these newly equip'd Gal∣leys venture out to Sea, they are exercis'd by their Officers twice or thrice a day, betwixt the Place of St. Mark and Lio, and when their Supervisors think them capable of doing service, within two or three moneths they are sent away, not to the Fleet, but to the Squadron which is left behind for the security of the Gulf, and there it is they compleat and perfect their disci∣pline. The expence of their setting out being but superficial, and the fan∣cy they have for their own contri∣vances, vanishing with the guilt and painting, which in a short time the wind and the weather have de∣fac'd, all the ambition they have left, is only to put themselves as forward as their companions dare go, and it is no small excitement to their courage, to consider they
hazard nothing of their own but their lives, the Republick being ready to furnish them with ten new Galleys for one that is lost. Whereas on the contrary if the Officers be Proprietors, their whole fortune depending upon their Vessel, their interest will make them decline those dangers, which perhaps their valour would attempt. When these Galleys are Com∣manded out to any Engagement, to advance into the Hellespont, and confine the Turks to the white Sea, they are re-inforc'd with forreign Souldiers, besides what they had afore. They are distributed so po∣litickly into the Galleys, they cannot possibly get to a body, and disposed with that artifice, a Cap∣tain shall scarce ever have a dozen of his own Souldiers aboard the Ship where he is himself.
Though this be a mark of their diffidence and distrust, yet by this expedient they secure themselves against the worst; and it is possible they may do it to animate their Souldiers, that by making them suspect they are jealous of their courage, they might be push'd forward the more to convince them of their mistake: for doubtless he who can nettle his Souldiers in point of their honour, has no small command of the courage of his Ar∣my. We have seen in our days several effects of this jealousie, and particu∣larly in the first Wars in Flanders, in which the animosity betwixt the Walloons and the Spaniards, was the occasion of the loss of several Towns to the Hollander, which otherwise the experience or gallan∣try of their General would never have taken. But this variance a∣mongst the Souldiers precipitated
their pains, hastned their assaults, and by a happy temerity thrust them upon that, which without those Considerations they would have look'd upon as desperate. These Captains wear their ordi∣nary Vestments constantly, and are habited in their Galleys at the same rate as if they were in the Place of St. Mark, by which means they preserve to themselves the same respect as if they were in the Town. They retain the same pride and opinion of themselves al∣so, for let things go as they list o∣therwise, they will alwayes be known to be Gentlemen of Ve∣nice. Their Galleys are small and light, of that sort which they call Galle Suttili, but something more nimble and easie to manage, and they have generally aboard them the best Canoniers in the World. Their Canon in their Men of War
seldom carry above thirty or forty pound Ball. Besides the Canon aforesaid, they have alwayes upon the Prow of the Ship four small Guns, which their Canoniers will discharge as certainly, and with as sure execution, as we can do with our Fusils. Upon the sides and flanks of the Ship they have other Engines of mischief, but the great∣est hurt they do is with certain murdring peeces, (which they call Mosquetti a Cavaletto) that are plac'd upon the Steerage. Their Bonnevoglies or Rowers are of great use to them upon any extremity, for being all of them Christians, and accustomed to dan∣ger, they arm them (against any Engagement) with Stones and Cuttelasses, and promising to en∣crease their pay, they make them supply the rooms of such Souldiers as are kill'd. But the Turks dare
not do so, for most of their Oats being Christian Slaves, kept con∣stantly in chains, and most misera∣ble captivity, they seldom dare ha∣zard a Combate, their apprehensi∣on of the Slaves they have on board, being as terrible to them, as the enemy before their face. CHAP. VII. Of the General or Gover∣nour of Candia. THough his Command be strict∣ly upon Land, yet I rank him amongst the Officers of the Fleet, because being in an Island he may be said to be constantly at Sea. His authority is much the same as
that of a Viceroy with us: it is con∣tinued only for three years, to pre∣vent any ambitious designs which otherwise might be suggested by so eminent a Government. He gives a punctual accompt of whatever is done in the Island, and though the principal Command be in him, he dares not enterprize any thing but by the Counsel, and consent of such persons as the Re∣publick have plac'd about him. Before their late Wars with the Turk, this was one of the most il∣lustrious Commands belonging to this Commonwealth; but of late it is much lessen'd, and reduc't to some few Towns which the Arti∣cles of Candia have left them. Since the taking of that, they have only two places remaining, not very capacious, but considera∣ble in their harbours and strength, the Governour of each of them are
nominated by the Governour-Ge∣neral. The Towns are called Spi∣nalonga and Suda, places of good retreat, in case of disaster. The situation of Spinalonga is admirable, and it was strange to me to find it so ill provided with men. But I sup∣pose their great confidence is in the Sea on one side, and the Rocks on the other. In the Offices of Generalissimo, and General of Candia, they never put two persons who are in perfect intelligence, lest having the two Keys of the Commonwealth at their Girdle, they should open the way to any design, and permit their ambition to enter. Before the surrender of the Me∣tropolis, his authority was not on∣ly in Military, but in Civil affairs, and he Order'd them both at his pleasure, insomuch that the anci∣ent Majesty of the Kings of Crete
seem'd not to be altogether extinct, the Generals Court, his Jurisdicti∣on, and Habit, representing no small resemblance of Royalty. The forreign Generals who Commanded the Troops of the Island, had all of them their Or∣ders from him, which were to be constantly obey'd, if not, they were left to his censure, but with appeal to the Senate, who are not subject to those effluxions of passi∣on, as their Viceroys may be. In short, they give him this authority to render him the more respected, and enable him to see the Orders transmitted to him, executed with more exactness. And doubtless were he not supported by this abso∣lute Command, which is no little terrour to the inferiour Officers, who are generally such as have not been much acquainted with the Field, those which have more skill
in their profession, would possibly undervalue his Orders, and from that negligence, grow by degrees insolent and contumacious, which is the next step to rebellion. CHAP. VIII. Of the General of Dal∣matia. THe General of Dalmatia has more Countreys and more Towns under his Command, than the General of Candia, and yet his Charge is not esteem'd so honou∣rable as the other, for which cause I place him after the General of Candia, and amongst the Officers of the Fleet, because his authority extends it self principally along the Coasts of the Gulf.
The chief Towns under his Go∣vernment are Zara, Clissa, Spalatro, Zebenico, Cattaro, Dulcingo, and others, besides an infinite number of little Isles, the Countrey of the Morlaiks, and the ancient Sclavo∣nia. These Countreys are suffici∣ently inhabited with a laborious and warlike people, amongst which the Morlaiks bear the Bell, and are especially eminent. I must confess in all my Travels I never saw any Nation so subtil and dex∣trous at inroads and incursions as theirs, nor that behaved them∣selves better upon any desperate rencounter, but one of their great∣est encouragements is their know∣ledge of the Mountains, with which they are perfectly well ac∣quainted. They usually incamp near some considerable Town with their Families and Cattel, without any military Order at all, and when
they are threaten'd with a Siege, or find themselves unable to keep the Field, they retire into the Town, and are no small re-en∣forcement to the Garrison. The places abovesaid are all of them considerable, and well forti∣fied, only Cattaro lyes under the Command of certain great Hills, which they call the black Moun∣tains. Nevertheless the entrance into the Harbour is secur'd by a strong Castle, which facilitates the access of supplyes, and by conse∣quence makes it no easie matter to reduce. This General has the oversight of all these Towns, he supervises, and supplyes all their Magazines, he gives all Orders, and sends out what parties or persons he pleases, to make discovery of the Enemy. If at any time he conceives a pro∣bability of performing any thing
considerable, without being inter∣cepted by the Turk, he draws out what Souldiers he thinks fit out of his Garrisons, (which are alwayes well furnish'd) and forming them into a flying Army, he pursues his design. He has forreign Generals under him, as the General of Can∣dia had formerly, and Commands them with the same authority. If any considerable disaster happens within the compass of his Govern∣ment, all is imputable to him, which is that which quickens his vigilance, and makes him more than ordinarily diligent and active. The Bassa of Bosnia is a trouble∣some Neighbour of his, but he sweetens him often with his Se∣quins. He pretends to have a great confidence in the people of that Countrey, who are very stout, and by that confidence he acquires their affection. He trusts such
Governments and Garrisons in their hands, as he has power to dispose of himself, yet he is al∣wayes accountable to the State; a sure way to have good Officers, for he who is to answer for such as he prefers, will not readily admit any that are incapable, nor open his eyes to any thing but desert. CHAP. IX. Of the Grand-Captains. HE who considers nothing but the duty of their places, will at first dash believe these Cap∣tains but Officers of peace. But though the Sword be not in their hands every hour of the day, yet they have no inconsiderable part
in the Militia of this State. These are they who in their se∣veral precincts upon the Terra-fir∣ma receive all the new Levies which are made in forreign parts, for the service of this Republick; these are they which model and form them, and teach them their duties; these are they who see them muster'd constantly every moneth, and by some little quali∣fications encourage them in the service. By the gravity of their discipline and comportment, they enure them to a more regular life, and more composedness in their manners: if they behave them∣selves otherwise than well, they punish them as severely; but there is no quarter for one that runs from his Colours. They keep an exact eye over all the Cavalry in their Garrisons, and will by no means suffer either
Horse or Arms to pass Muster that is not punctually passable. And as they are rigid on the one side, so are they as just on the other, pay∣ing them to a day what is due, and supplying them faithfully with whatever is Order'd them by the State. Being not much acquaint∣ed with the management of Horse, upon any general Muster, or some such Parade, they commonly are assisted by a Marshal, or other ex∣perienc'd Officer; for even in those Shews only they are so pre∣cise, one of these Grand-Captains at Padua would not believe me ca∣pable of Commanding the Gens d' Armes of the Chevalier Gremonville, because my Beard and Mustachoes were not so large as he would have had them. Their principal aim is, in the name of the Republick to make themselves Masters of the Towns
where they are sent, but with the greatest sweetness and insinuation imaginable; for taking alwayes the most plausible pretences that are conducing to their ends, they quarter the Souldiers apart by themselves, to prevent (forsooth) their insolencies to the people, and the disorders might otherwise arise, by the inextinguishable antipathy which continually reigns betwixt a Souldier and a Citizen: but in truth it is for two other Reasons: The first is, that they may have alwayes a considerable body toge∣ther, ready to present themselves where the safety or advantage of the Commonwealth requires, be∣cause when they are separate in se∣veral Streets, and remote places, it is not easie to get them together in a short time, without giving the Enemy advantage by this division and delay. Besides nothing being
so natural to a Souldier as debau∣chery, when they have no retreat or place to return to, where they are afraid to be seen, nothing en∣courages them so much to be licen∣tious, or occasions more insolence and disorder. The other is, to take away all means from the Nobility and Citi∣zens of the Town to conspire a∣gainst the Souldiers, and (by sur∣prising them) to commence a Re∣bellion, and that with the more ease, in respect that they have cut off the greatest part of their opposi∣tion. They have heard the Story of the Sicilian Vespers and under∣standing well the Italian humour, (which is their own) they are jea∣lous of all the World, and for that reason they keep exact Guards within their quarters night and day. In their Carnivals and dayes of Recreation, in which they can∣not
plausibly hinder their Assem∣blies and Masquerades, that might give opportunity perhaps to some pernicious design. Under pre∣tence of preserving the peace, and preventing particular quarrels and assassinations, which in those dis∣guises might be perpetrated with∣out discovery, they draw what Forces they have into the Town, clap Guards in the most important places, secure the Avenews, and Commanding the remainder both of Horse and Foot to follow, they go up and down the whole City visiting the Balls and Dancings, where they observe the greatest Confluence of people. By this admirable artifice they make themselves Masters where∣ever they come, and divert the in∣clination of the most turbulent spi∣rits from attempting any thing a∣gainst the State, by rendring it im∣possible
for them to have any suc∣cess. For their Souldiers in the flat Countrey they have another policy, which is both subtil and good: that they may be well disciplin'd, ready for service, and their num∣ber known exactly, they have a ge∣neral Muster every moneth, in e∣very Countrey upon the Terra-fir∣ma, they levy new men, appoint them their Officers, deliver them arms, Command them to be Ex∣ercised, and treat them very graci∣ously with the Title of Signori Sol∣dati, Gentlemen Souldiers: but they pay dear enough afterwards for those two honourable words, and I am perswaded they do it on purpose to make them weary of the Wars. If the weather be worse than other at any time either in Summer or Winter, they will be sure to Muster them in that,
and that they may be certain to have their share of it, they will appoint their Rendezvouz in some open and desart Plain, where the Sun (which in Summer is very vehement in those parts) and the Snow and Cold (which is no less troublesome in Winter) have their full play at them, and do so torture the poor Peasant, that there is nothing they have in the whole World, but they will give to have their Names put out of their Rolls. If (besides their arms which are very heavy) they carry no Provant along with them, they may return a hungry, for any care is taken of them, it being ex∣presly forbid that any Victuallers or Subtellers appear in the place of their Rendezvonz. Their arms are not entrusted with them after their Exercise is done, they have only the priviledge of bringing
them back upon their shoulders, and delivering them up to their Grand-Captain at their return. By this severity they tire out those poor Creatures, and make them abominate the Trade of a Souldier, which is indeed no more than what the Venetian designs. CHAP. X. Of their Forreign Gene∣rals. THe Commanders which we have hitherto presented, are chosen out of the body of the Vene∣tian Nobility, for a long succession of time there having scarce one o∣ther person been entrusted with those Charges. Nevertheless up∣on
on occasion they have been necessi∣tated to have recourse to Strangers, and to give them considerable Commands, either because they believe the Tramontani (which is the name they call all Strangers by) more vigorous and active than their own Countreymen, or else that they desire to preserve their own Nobility, keeping them still for the chiefest and most honoura∣ble imployments, and committing all things of peril and danger to the conduct of Forreigners; in which respect they are not very niggardly of the Title of General, of which sort they will create several accor∣ding to their necessities, and the quality or ambition of the persons they entertain. And in this num∣ber there are three extraordinary, The General of Dalmatia, the Ge∣neral of the Forces Commanded on shore, and the General of Candia.
CHAP. XI. The Forreign General in Dalmatia. NExt to the Proveditor-Gene∣ral, (which is a noble Vene∣tian) this Forreign General is the chief person both in the Countrey and Army, and has the Command of all the Militia, but so as he can do or attempt nothing but by the consent of the Proveditor, in whose absence he gives all Orders both in the Field and the Garri∣sons: and it is remarkeable, (whe∣ther they be chosen on purpose of different humours, or that the jea∣lousie inherent to their Command suffers them not to agree) they
are never in any great intelligence with one another, and yet (which is most strange) never at so much odds as to prejudice the State. One thing in my judgement is something strange in this Charge, and that is the small authority this General has, for besides the ho∣nours and formalities pay'd him by the Souldiers, he has not the pri∣viledge to gratifie any of his men with a dayes pay, or a loaf of bread more than their due, but by the express Order of the Proveditor, and when he does, it is most cer∣tainly out of his own purse. The Souldiers for the most part having greater difference and respect for the person who in all dangers is constantly at their head, fights a∣mongst them perpetually, and bears his share in all the difficulties they endure, the Proveditor (who thinks it beneath him to live in that
Community) keeps a constant eye upon the actions of his rival, and by the Soveraign authority with which he is endued, restrains any exorbitance that might flow from their affection. In this manner they allow the Forreign General power enough to Command the Army, and to March them out when he pleases, yet with such restriction, it is clear they intend all should depend upon the Venetian, and that the honour of all noble atchievements should devolve upon him, as well as the power of punishments and rewards, as he is Commander in chief. Hence it is that the Souldier receiv∣ing nothing but from his hands, believes he is to serve nothing but the Commonwealth, and obeys his Outlandish General for no other reason but because he Commands for them; a policy by which they
are sure to be Masters, let who will Command, and secures them a∣gainst any apprehension of making of parties. Don Camillo Gonzague was General in this nature, the last Campagnia I made in their service, he died as he was upon his return at Capo d'Istria, not without suspi∣cion of having taken a Pill. I shall say nothing of the Gene∣ral of Candia, he being but another arm, which receives its life and agi∣tation from the same head as the other. Some of these Generals have been punish'd severely, and particularly the late Monsieur de la Valette, who was made an eminent example of the power of their Chiefs, when they represent the body of their Republick, and it will not be long before the Cheva∣lier de Gremonville will be able to tell some Stories of his own.
CHAP. XII. Of the General of the Forces drawn out of the Fleet up∣on occasion. THe most considerable strength of the Venetian are his Forces at Sea, which may be call'd their great Outguards, plac'd on pur∣pose to resist and repel any sudden or impetuous insult, which their Enemy might make. In Candia and Dalmatia they do but fence, and put by the Passes which the Turks make upon them, and if they lose nothing in a Campania, they think themselves happy enough: but in their Fleet it is clear other∣wise,
they fight, they attacque, they search for their Enemy, and if they find him not at Sea, they invade him upon Land, penetra∣ting sometimes into the very heart of his Countrey, and making the most remote corners of his domini∣ons tremble for fear, as much as those places which are adjacent to the Sea. But forasmuch as all the Venetian Commanders have (as I said be∣fore) their particular imploy∣ments, which they dare not desert; and a Generalissimo cannot abandon his Fleet, or leave it engaged in the middle of his enemies, they have their recourse to their For∣reign Generals, who have the Command of such Forces as are to be drawn out of the several Ships, upon any emergent design. Mon∣sieur le Chevalier Gremonville serv'd them in this capacity with as much
honour and success as his courage and virtue required. Natolia can very well witness what I say, where we who were upon that acti∣on, saw him (though wounded with a Musket-shot) shewing and directing (with his Sword and his blood) the way to overcome, to those who followed him at the siege of Schismeset. The design upon Land being fi∣nish'd, or defeated, as soon as the Commanded Forces are returned to their Ships, the General lays down his authority, and retains no more than the Title of Excellence, which the proudest Venetian of them all will not refuse him, and this is the only lenitive that makes him swallow his degradation, and endure to walk cross-armed upon the Decks without any Command. True it is, upon any new Expediti∣on he has authority as before, espe∣cially
if he be in any favour with the Generalissimo, then he has much more respect in the Army, and is caress'd as a person likely by his ex∣perience and conduct to procure great advantages to the Common∣wealth, who to speak truth sel∣dom advances any to that Com∣mand, but such as are well skill'd in military affairs. Their enterprises are commonly deliberate, but their executions very quick, lest they should give the Turks (who swarm all along the Coasts of the Archipelago) opportunity to put themselves in arms, and hazard the being over∣laid by their innumerable multi∣tudes, and besides, they are un∣willing to have their Souldiers and Officers any long time out of their Ships, for fear lest a good gale of wind should bring their enemies Fleet amongst them, which they might think further off.
At the beginning of the Wars, these Generals were very well pay'd, but at present they are not so punctual; either that the pro∣traction of the War has exhausted their treasure, or that they think to engage them the better to their service, by keeping them in conti∣nual hopes of receiving a considera∣ble summe together: and perad∣venture to take away all means from them of ingratiating with the Souldier by their largesses and pre∣sents, which considering the great∣ness of their pay, they might pos∣sibly attempt, if it were constantly pay'd them.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Governour of Can∣dia. BEsides the forreign General in Candia, there is a particular Governour in the Town, who to speak properly has the only Com∣mand of the Town, the Generals authority being in the Field, and the Governours in the Garrison. The noble Venetian (who is as Viceroy of this Island) has these two Officers under him in the na∣ture of his Lieutenants, to whom he commits the care and the dan∣ger, but retains the glory and re∣putation to himself. He derives his Orders to the Governour, and
the Governour to the Officers un∣der him. His jurisdiction reaches no further than the Walls of the Town, and his business is to have an eye over the Gates, to see his Guards accommodated, and in good order, to keep his Petrols constantly in the night, to keep his Souldiers to their duty, to fortifie where it is wanting, to repair what is decay'd, to prevent or suppress all disorders, and give an exact ac∣compt of occurrences to the Vice∣roy. In fine, all these Charges how great and considerable so ever they may appear, are notwithstanding so subordinate and depending, that those who enjoy them may be said to pay as much obedience to some people, as they receive from others themselves upon emergency or necessity. There are other Ge∣nerals chosen to Command the
Horse; and to gratifie the ambiti∣on of their suitors, they divide their Infantry into two bodies, (the Italian, and Forreign) and make a distinct General over each of them. The Artillery likewise has its proper General, and indeed when they have occasion for good Officers, and can be sure to keep them under, they do not scruple to give them what Titles they desire. CHAP. XIV. Reflexions in manner of a Recapitulation. THese variety of Generals would make one at first sight expect more confusion than order in their Militia; but all is mana∣ged
with the same justice and ex∣actness, as they were but so many members moved and actuated by one head. Their Territories be∣ing large and remote, they are forc'd to divide their Commands, and according to the example of the first Commonwealths, they give the same authority to their Generals in Candia and Dalmatia, both in Civil and Military affairs, as the Romans in ancient times granted to the Pro-Consuls in their several Provinces. The Generalissimo at Sea seems to entrench somewhat too much upon the Liberty of the Republick, his immense power relishing more of the Soveraign than the Subject. But if we reflect upon the people about him, (who yet behave themselves towards him with all vi∣sible submission) we shall find them so great sharers in his authori∣ty,
that should he meditate the least mischief imaginable to the pre∣judice of the State, or go about to insist upon his own force and au∣thority, he would be deserted in a moment, and not one considerable man left with him to carry on his design. Moreover, not being Master of any one Town, he must be constrained to keep the Sea per∣petually, or at length in the highest despair, to cast himself for pro∣tection into the hands of the Ene∣my, which would be a sad effect of an exorbitant ambition. The private lives which these great persons are to lead when their Commissions are expired, and the strict account they give to the Counsel of Ten, keeps them conti∣nually in awe. They know very well that Court is inflexible, and when those great Titles and nomi∣nal Ornaments are taken away,
they shall be liable to the censure of every Mechanick. For this rea∣son every man looking upon his Neighbour as his enemy, they grow to such a habit of jealousie, they distrust all the World, and not daring to deviate for fear of being impeach'd, they regulate all their actions for the good of the Com∣monwealth. When they admit any Stranger to their principal Commands, tis rather to participate of the peril than the honour, which they are tender of to the highest degree, and therefore they require so ready and so rigid a submission to all their Orders, that it is capital either not to execute them at all, or not to give them the glory when they have. Raillery and jesting, though innocent in it self, and the most common diversion of the Cavaliers in other parts, is so peremptorily
forbidden here, that it is look'd upon as a great want of respect, and provokes these hot-Spurs (who are puff'd up with their au∣thority) so highly, that it re∣quires a great deal of submission and address to recover their favours. CHAP. XV. Of their Armies in gene∣ral. THese Armies, governed and regulated by their military Laws, may without a Solecism be said to be moving Cities, walld a∣bout with their swords, their shields, and their arms; for as in a City they live not in confusion or disor∣der, but the diversity of Charges
distinguishes betwixt the soveraign Magistrate and the inferiour, as likewise betwixt them, and the rest of the people: and for the better harmony and motion of af∣fairs, a Chief is commonly chosen, upon whose shoulders they repose the whole care of the Publick; so in Field they take the same mea∣sures. The General is the first Mover which gives the swing and twirl to the rest of the great Offi∣cers, who convey it to the inferi∣our, and so it goes round. In this last military Order we have ob∣serv'd the most considerable ef∣fects, but honour not being al∣wayes the aim of all people, most part of the Souldiers having taken themselves to that course of life for their interest and profit, it falls out sometimes, that failing of their pay, and the rewards they expect∣ed, they complain, they threaten,
and at last run into an absolute de∣fection. The length of the War is the thing many times which pro∣duces these divisions, the exces∣sive expence they are at, disables them to keep their word with their Souldiers, and puts them upon a necessity of substracting themselves from their service. The conversa∣tion they have with the Women of the Countrey where they are, de∣bauches them, and prevails with them to marry, in hopes of having a Camarade, and fellow-sufferer in their sorrows, but they find them∣selves removed out of Gods bles∣sing into the warm Sun, and that they have but augmented their mi∣sery, by obliging themselves to provide for their Families, when they were not able to provide for themselves. Nevertheless among the Venetians there is no such un∣happiness, they pay their own
Souldiers exactly, and have by that means hitherto prevented such disorders. In the Garrisons upon the Terra∣firma they pay their Souldiers eve∣ry moneth, and they are so far from having any Debentures, they are alwayes in arrear to the Com∣monwealth. In Candia and Dal∣matia 'tis possible they are not so punctually pay'd, but at long run, if they do it not in money, they pay them in such Commodities as will pass in those Countreys at a certain rate. The Generals ears are open to the complaint of a Souldier against his Officer, and redresses him where he is injured, but it is with so admirable equity, that he maintains the rights of the one, without destroying the re∣spect and distance of the other. Their Armies consist principally of Foot, for having had experience of
how little importance their Caval∣ry was to them in such mountanous and unpassable places, they enter∣tain some few Companies, more for the name of having Horse, than for any great service they ex∣pect from them. CHAP. XVI. Of their Cavalry. THeir Cavalry is divided into two sorts, Their gross Caval∣ry, or Cuirassiers, which are like our Gens d' Armes, and their Cape∣lets á Cheval, like our light Horse, and the Commands of these two bodies are never sold. In the time when I was in their service, they had three Companies of these Gens
d' Armes, which were called Ul∣tramontani, and not one Italian al∣low'd to be amongst them. Com∣monly this Republick confers these Commands upon some of their Forreign Generals, in lieu of some considerable pay, or in recom∣pence of some remarkeable piece of service. These Governours of the Cuirassiers (for so it is they are called) have the nomination of their Captain-Lieutenants, their Cornets, and other inferiour Offi∣cers, but they first present them to the Senate for approbation, which method Monsieur le Chevalier Gre∣monville us'd, when he gave me my Command under him. The Italian Cuirassiers are re∣duc'd to four Companies, every one of them is oblig'd to keep his Horse and his arms fix'd and in good order, and such as are lazy and negligent are sure to be punish'd
at the next Muster, which for the most part is every forty dayes. They have alwayes a constant Guard about their Standard, where-ever they are quarter'd, and to speak truth, these are like Soul∣diers indeed, perpetually in the same posture, as if they were in the very face of their Enemy. Their Discipline is the same with the Ger∣mans, they march, wheel, and draw off very close and entire. Each Company consists of sixty men so brave and well order'd, there is scarce any attempt so diffi∣cult, but may be thought feasible by them. That Officer which a∣mong us is call'd a Marshal des Lo∣gis, is term'd by them a Quarter-Master, and every Brigade has its Corporal to overlook it. They are arm'd Cap-a-pied when they go to the Wars, their Carbines and Swords by their sides, and their
Pistols at their Saddle-Bow. The firmness and constancy of these Gens d'armes is sufficient to discom∣pose the most resolute of their ene∣mies; but the principal use of them is to keep their ground, and secure their Foot, not being able to keep pace with the light Horse in their inroads into the Countrey, by rea∣son of the weight of their arms, and the heaviness of their Horses. They are never sent all of them to the Army, but they go accor∣ding to their ranks, and are there more for shew than any thing else. The Turks are nevertheless very fearfull of engaging them, by rea∣son their close and firm way of fighting admits no impression, how furious soever their Charges be made. Being cover'd with good arms, the Turkish Sabre does but little execution, and their at∣tacks being short, they are quick∣ly
repell'd. They stand their ground, and receive the Enemy very steadily, never discharging their Carabines till they be within ten or twelve paces. When they fall in, the service grows bloody, for having fired their Pistols, they fall to it with their Swords, which being broad and long, does the mischief both of a Coutelas and a Tuck. That they might not nourish a plague in their bowels, which might be able at length to corrupt the whole body, they cashier all Souldiers which do not live honou∣rably, and in order. They use no other way of chastisement, lest they might irritate their old Cava∣liers by the ignominious spectacle, if they should hang one of their Ca∣marades. The old Generals have a great esteem for them, and use them very kindly, which tyes their
affections inseparably to them, and their pay being more than or∣dinary, it is not ordinarily known that any of these Souldiers forsakes his Company. For their conveniencies upon all long marches, the Towns, Bur∣roughs, and Villages where they pass, are oblig'd to furnish them with Waggons for their Baggage and Train, and they do it the more willingly, because their marchis so innocent, one would take it rather for a Religious Procession, than the motion of an Army, they ne∣ver deviating from the High-way, and where there is a necessity of passing thorow the Corn, they make the loss good to the Proprie∣tor immediately. The name of a Plunderer is so horrid amongst them, it is known only by hear∣say. They are very well accom∣modated where-ever they come,
and they behave themselves to their Landlods as to their particu∣lar friends. CHAP. XVII. Of their Light Horse. THeir Light Horse at present consist of Sclavonians, Dal∣matians, or Morlaicks, and are di∣vided by Companies, not by Re∣giments, as in other parts of Eu∣rope; all of them are Subjects of this Commonwealth, as well as their Officers. They are all very stout, but not so well disciplin'd, never keeping any ranks upon a charge, but falling on pell mell, after the manner of the Croats. True it is, they rally with great
dexterity, but in the heat of the charge they consider nothing but their passion, and advance or re∣treat according to their own hu∣mour and fancy. So many heads of the Turks as they bring home, so many Sequins are punctually pay'd them, and being naturally very covetous, they expose themselves desperately to catch them. They are a people will endure much hardship, and their Horses (though small) will endure as much as their Masters. The most usual way of their fight∣ing, is by making inroads upon the Enemy, and infesting those Countreys which lye nearest their borders. The Prisoners they take, belonging to the Republick, and the Souldier having no proprie∣ty in them, is the occasion they give no quarter, and the War is so inhumane.
Our Dragoons have borrow'd the fashion of their Caps from these Capelets, their ordinary arms are Carabines, and broad Swords, some of them have Pistols, but the generality two or three Coutelasses, one fasten'd under each of their thighs, and another by their sides. They never were acquainted with the use of Boots, and that which supplyes them is a sort of Trowses, button'd up close to their legs, which serves them with less incon∣venience. It is a policy of no little impor∣tance to the Venetian, to set this price upon the heads of the Turks: two considerable advantages accrew to them by it; by the hopes of a pittifull gain these Nations are ex∣cited to a continual pursuit of the Enemy, and by giving no quarter to them, brought to a condition of expecting none themselves, by
which means all the commerce that might be apprehended from such neighbouring Nations, is pre∣vented or broken. Nor is the o∣ther inferiour, this manner of pro∣ceeding rendring them desperate and formidable where-ever they come. This kind of War may seem barbarous at first, but if the difference in Religion be consider'd, that 'tis Empire they fight for, and that nothing is expected on ei∣ther side but utter destruction, no wonder if their measures be so rigid and pernicious. Not long since they made use of forreign Horse in Dalmatia and Candia, but to speak truth, be∣sides the excessive expence in which they involv'd themselves thereby, they receiv'd but little ef∣fects, for the Countreys being bar∣ren and mountainous, and by con∣sequence unfit to sustain them,
many of them perish'd betwixt the legs of their Horses, by the quality of a Climate to which they had ne∣ver been accustom'd. The incon∣venience of furnishing them both with Straw and Hay for their Hor∣ses by Sea, made the Venetian wea∣ry of so unprofitable a Squadron, especially when they found the ad∣vantages they receiv'd by their Capelets, more considerable than all the great noise of their Calvary; for knowing the Countrey, being brought up, and accustomed to the Mountains, and acquainted with all the turnings and by-wayes that belong to them, they are upon the backs of the Enemy, before the old Cavalry could be got to their Colours.
CHAP. XVIII. Of their Infantry. THe principal strength of the Venetian Army consists in their Foot, and the reason that makes them of greater esteem, is the same that makes them enter∣tain so few Horse. The Infantry have their Mestres de Camp, and distinguish'd Regimentally, as they are among us: it is made up of all Nations indifferently, but divided into two bodies, Italian, and Strangers, which is principally contrived, when they have a per∣son of more than ordinary merit which they would Create General. Their arms are Musket and Pike,
and each Regiment beats its March according to its own Countrey. These Forces are for the most part French, and Swisses; and 'tis not a little remarkeable, that notwith∣standing the fierceness and almost intemperate zeal which the Spani∣ard professes for the Catholick Re∣ligion, there has not been one of them seen in the late Wars, which has assisted this Commonwealth a∣gainst the Turks, or ventur'd the least drop of their blood in the de∣fence of Christianity. Under pretence of making new Levies continually, they keep most of their Colonels upon the Terra∣firma: I could not readily appre∣hend the reason of it, but at length (recollecting how jealous they were) me thought it was to take away or prevent the Regiments ha∣ving such Officers as they fancied themselves, and on the other side
to keep them in their hands, (as it were so many hostages) that they might not be able to act any thing contrary to Orders. It may be al∣so they were unwilling to disgust their Camp Masters, by drawing out too many of their men, and give them occasion to complain, that of their whole Regiment, they have not sometimes above thirty left. Generally-all their Souldiers are in Garrison, either in Candia, or Dalmatia, and they have no other Forces constantly in pay, besides their Army at Sea, which is re-en∣forc'd out of the said Garrisons as they have occasion. The Com∣mands amongst their Foot are most commonly sold, and yet they do not forbear rewarding any person who has serv'd them faithfully and long. Their pay is exact, and if they make thm attend sometimes
by accident, they have it faithfully at last. Besides a proportion of bread, and eight pence a day, they have a sufficient quantity of wine allowed to each man: but that which qualifies all, is, when-ever they are Listed, (unless they have very good fortune indeed, or more subtilty than ordinary) they many bid adien to the liberty of ever see∣ing their own Countrey again. In this particular I cannot ap∣prove their Politicks, for without doubt if they would give their Souldiers more liberty, though at first more of them might run away, than do at present, nevertheless it would extinguish the ill report they have all over Europe, of keeping their Souldiers in chains; and their good and punctual pay would invite them more strongly, than their freedom would encou∣rage them to escape. Nay, not∣withstanding
their vigilance and se∣verity, they lose good quantities of them sometimes, who choose ra∣ther to turn Renegadoes, and throw themselves into the arms of the Turks, than to see themselves under such violence and restraint, by the loss of their liberty, which perhaps (had the way been open) they would never have thought on: so ungovernable and ill-natured are the passions of Mankind, they de∣sire nothing with that vehement impatience so much, as what is most strictly forbidden. Lio is a place not far from Venice, where they put their Souldiers on Ship-board as soon as they arrive, and where they first begin to be sensible of their bondage. They put them all together in a large room, the windows fortified with∣out with great bars of Iron, and the Sea encompassing them quite,
gives them the first prospect of their imprisonment, and makes them (by its impossibility) not only apprehensive, but desperate of their liberty. If any mans rela∣tion or curiosity carries him to see them, he looks upon them (as they do upon the wilde beasts at Vincennes) thorow an iron Grate, and instead of finding them jocund and merry, he meets with nothing but sadness upon their faces, and lamentation upon their tongues. Nevertheless the receipt of some small advance-money, and the consideration of their Commons, (which is probably better than they have at home) renders these poor Creatures insensible of what they would otherwise abhor. The service of this Common∣wealth being under such a scandal, they are many times necessitated to put their invention upon the rack,
for wayes of supplying themselves when they want any men. They buy them very dear of their Colo∣nels, who (if it be no Solecism) are no better than Horse-coursers of men. The Princes their neigh∣bours furnish them also at their own rates, but they are fain to wheedle them in, and to perswade them they are to lye perpetually in Garrison, and never to be expos'd to the hardships of the Field. A∣mong the rest, the Dukes of Par∣ma and Modena drive the principal Trade: they embark them upon the Po, in their great close Boats they call Bourchij, clap good strong Guards upon them at both ends of the Vessel, and in this posture without any arms they are conduct∣ed to Lio, (as so many Criminals) to be distributed into Companies when they come there. They never put any of their
Souldiers to death, because they will not willingly lose one man they may have occasion to use: if they commit any crime considera∣ble, they are condemn'd to the Gallies, and if their offences are smaller, their punishments are pro∣portioned. Their Capelet Infan∣try is the only Foot they trust with the keeping of such Towns as are on the Coast of Italy, and if there be any Strangers to be seen there, it is only in such Towers as lye con∣veniently for their transportation to Lio. They make use of their own Subjects but very seldom, for a Levie in their own Countrey is rarely to be seen, perhaps they are apprehensive that enuring them to the Wars, or accustoming them to Arms, may sometime or other contribute to their ruine, and if at any time they imploy their Capelets, (under pretence of a particular con∣fidence
in them) they are sure to send them far enough for doing any misehief. To caress and cajole the Morla∣icks, (which is a resolute and active Nation) they give them leave in the winter time to retire into the Plains, and to quarter themselves as near the Towns as they think convenient, pretending to secure them against the Turks, but the truth of their design is no∣thing but to have them under their power, and to re-enforce their Garrisons with them upon any sud∣den irruption. These Morlaicks live generally after the mode of the Tartars, having no fix'd residence or retreat, they are perpetually up∣on service, and have little other subsistance but what they gain by the Wars. When they change their quarters, they carry all along with them, their Family, Bag∣gage,
and Cattel, which they de∣fend against the weather by little Huts or Cabbins which they set up immediately. Most of their Offi∣cers are Priests, which they obey very civilly, for people of their rudeness. They are very incon∣stant, and have often chang'd their sides, but the cruelty of a late Bassa of Bosnia, who brake his promises with them, has so exasperated them, as I am told, they are come over wholly to the Venetian, and given him no small corroboration: for though they are but as it were Voluntiers, they secure the Plains, open the passages of the Moun∣tains, make continual incursions into their Countrey, and keep the Enemy in a perpetual alarm. The Capelets (whom I have mentioned before) are more civi∣lized than these, and not at all in∣feriour in their courage. They
have alwayes been very faithfull to this Republick, and are imploy'd by them very frequently as Guards to the Magistrates, in the same manner as the Swisses are in France. They are born and brought up in an implacable antipathy against the Turks, (which may be compar'd to that betwixt the French and the Spaniard) for they cannot forget they are descended from those ex∣cellent Souldiers, who under the Command of the incomparable Scanderbeg, perform'd so many no∣ble exploits, routed so many of the Ottoman Armies, and fill'd the great Amurath both with indignati∣on and despair. There is little difference (un∣less in their Turban) betwixt their habit and the Turks, when they come to be of any considerable age they let their Beards grow: they are very curious in their hair, wear
it very long behind, but cut it and trim it before. And yet notwith∣standing the opinion the Venetian has of them, they are never al∣low'd to be in any considerable bo∣dy, but distinguish'd into free Companies, and kept alwayes a∣sunder, that by dividing the autho∣rity into several hands, (which would be united in one man, were it kept in a Regimental way) they might render them less dangerous. CHAP. XIX. Of their general Rules and Maximes in War. THey never create any enemies to themselves, and when they cannot avoid them, they will
never quarrel with above one at a time, choosing rather to accom∣modate with one, than to be driven to a division of their Army, when they are engaged in a War. They have a greater esteem for the Tra∣montani, or Northern Souldiers, than for the Italian, there being but very few of them either Offi∣cers or Regiments to be found a∣mong them, whereas they refuse not any price almost for the service of the other. Besides the bravery and courage, which is much more eminent and conspicuous among the Septentrio∣nal Souldiers, than those of the warmer and more effeminate Cli∣mates, without doubt they have a∣nother reason of no less weight and authority, for these people being so remote from their own Coun∣treys, and passing so many Moun∣tains and Seas, cannot hope for any
supplies from home, should they design any thing for themselves: whereas should they entertain any Forces from their neighbouring Princes, who knows what plots and conspiracies may be manag'd privately amongst a throng of Soul∣diers and Officers rais'd in their Territories, and how far they may prevail towards the subversion of the State. In their extremities indeed they throw themselves sometimes into the arms of their allies, yet it is with such caution, they never suffer them to be either so numerous, or well armed, as to give them appre∣hension. A great supply to them is no less dreadfull than an Enemy, for when-ever they be considerable, they begin to be jealous and afraid of them. If they have receiv'd any numbers extraordinary of late years our of France, 'tis more to terrifie
the Ottoman Officers with the name of the French, than any design they had to make use of them long, and this has been sufficiently demon∣strated by the success. Were they as well provided with them, as they are with all o∣ther necessaries for the War, it would be no great difficulty for them to over-power their enemies, for it is almost a prodigie to behold the vast Piles of Ammunition heap'd up in their Arsenal: in one single Gallery there are arms e∣nough for thirty thousand men, by which pattern one may guess at the rest. They have three thousand men continually at work there, and they have such multitudes of Canon, they are forc'd to pile them up three rowes high above one a∣nother, in a great large Hall they have built on purpose. Their Frontier Towns are as
well furnish'd as the Arsenal, and when they are in any apprehension of a siege, they take such excellent order, they have all things in the same plenty as in times of peace. Their greatest force being upon the Sea, and most of their Garrisons upon the Coasts, they put in what supplies they think good without interruption, and their Galleys re∣enforce what places they please. At the siege of Cataro they did the Enemy so much mischief with their Canon, that they secured the Town in spite of forty thousand men, and the Bassa of Bosnia at the head of them, and defended it, though they had made a considera∣ble breach, and assaulted it with eight thousand Janizaries and Spaihis, which were the flower of their Army, our Cuirassiers throw∣ing themselves into the Trenches, with their Pikes in their hands,
and making them good during the whole Leaguer: if Don Camilla Gonzague had acted alone, or the General Bernardo had answer'd his experience, our success had been much better, and they had not ad∣vanc'd upon us as they did; but o∣bedience must be given to the Commander in chief. To engage and retain the for∣reign Officers to their service, be∣sides their ordinary pay they give them certain Pensions, which they call Conduct-money, and proporti∣on it according to the time of their service, which sometimes amounts to a considerable summe; a thing that works much with such as are devoted to their interest: yet for all these advancements, their Souldiers are not very true to them, they treating them with so much pride and inequality, that unless they will utterly renounce their own
interest, and live as reclusely as in a Monastery, the Town is not secure where they are in Garrison. There are few persons of quality in their pay, which have not sufficient reason to complain of this usage, and amongst the rest, that honou∣rable Commander Monsieur Gre∣monville, who was (as a man may say) born in their Armies, and would have died there before he would have forsaken them, had they not been so insufferably in∣gratefull. I can tell very well how much he suffer'd by his modesty, and though he was so tender of their honour as never to complain, I am sure he was not insensible of the in∣justice he receiv'd. 'Tis one of their Maximes, not to make too much of any man of extraordinary experience or esteem. Gildas was the man for their turn, their prin∣cipal Caresses being for those who
have qualifications sufficient to execute their Orders, but not to pry too far into the intrigues of their State. Thus Sir have I presented you, with what a man of my small age and experience was able to collect, during my im∣ployment in forreign parts. Though the Style participates nothing of the Dialect of the Court, or the politeness of our Language, yet being writ∣ten like a Souldier, I made no scruple to direct it to a Prince, who is resolv'd to be so whilst his age will permit him. For such errors as have pass'd ei∣ther the Press, or my Pen, I humbly beg your excuse, as proceeding from a person more ambitious of doing, than speak∣ing well, my greatest aim and most passionate design being nothing
but to dedicate my life to your service, and that little experi∣ence I have been able to ac∣quire in the Wars of the Ve∣netian. FINIS.
