L2963 13659255 101057
A Compendious HISTORY Of all the POPISH & FANATICAL Plots and Conspiracies AGAINST The Established Government IN CHURCH & STATE, In England, Scotland, and Ireland: From the first year of Qu. Eliz. Reign, to this present year 1684. With Seasonable Remarks. By Tho. Long, one of the Prebendaries of Exon. Isai. 9.19, &c. Through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his brother.— They eat every man the flesh of his own arm: Ma∣nasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh: and they together shall be against Judah. Tunc inter se concordant mali, cùm in perniciem justi con∣spirant; non quia se amant, sed quia eum qui amandus erat simul oderint. S. Aug. in Psal. 36. Conc. 2. London: Printed for D. Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple-bar, and T. Goodwin at the Maidenhead against St. Dunstans Church. 1684.
TO The most Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM By Divine Providence Ld Archbishop of Canterbury HIS GRACE, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, and one of his Majesties most Honble Privy-Council, &c. May it please your Grace. I Have learned long since not to appear empty before the Lord, nor without an Offering be∣fore so immediate a Minister of God. This therefore (such as it is) I humbly devote to the ser∣vice of the Church of God as it is e∣stablished among us: which contains a Vindication as well of the Heal as Chief Members of Church and State from the scandalous imputation of Po∣pery, and charge of the sane upon their Accusers, in an impartial relati∣on of matters of fact.
It is I confess one of the meanest, yet a very necessary Work, to remove those Stumbling-blocks and heaps of Ʋncleanness which men of perverse minds have laid to obstruct the Peo∣ples entrance to our Church: among which, none hath given greater of∣fence than the clamour of Popery and Idolatry. Come to the Presbyterian Clergie (says the L. C. J. Hales in a Pamphlet lately published by R. B. p. 28.) and they will tell you that E∣piscopal Government is Romish and Su∣perstitious, and their Ceremonies and Ʋsages Antichristian. Yea they will come to the People, and tell them, (without asking) that the Royal Mar∣tyr was the Head of the Grotian Religi∣on, (i. e.) of Popery: That your Re∣nowned and Religious Predecessor Archbishop Laud laboured to introduce Popery (though he were in truth the greatest Scourge and Horrour to that Party.) The Great Earl of Strafford, and the Learned Dr.
Cousin, were proclaimed and persecuted as Papists, though living and dying they gave Demonstrations to the contrary. And evident it is, that these false Suggestions were really and purpose∣ly intended and fomented, to animate the people, and actually engage them in one of the most horrid Rebellions that ever was acted by any barbarous people. Yet is this Outcry renewed, and to the same mischievous intent, as is acknowledged by Holloway; That the general designe in which he enga∣ged, was to get off the King from his evil Counsel who had advised him to put a stop to the proceedings against the Popish Plotters: That it was reported in all parts that Arbitrary Government and Popery were coming in apace; which incensed the common people in all parts, and made such a grumbling, that we feared longer delays would make them mutiny. (This in his Paper to the
King.) And in that to the She∣riffs, He was fully perswaded that not onely Popery, but Arbitrary Government was intended, and that he believed ma∣ny thousands in the Nation would have appeared on these reasons. And in this he persisted at his Execution, telling the Sheriffs, That it was feared that Arbitrary Government and Popery was designed; and truly I think at this pre∣sent, by what I can understand, that there is little better designed. Thus the present Government is newly dressed up in the old Rags of Popery, as the Primitive Christians were in Beast skins, to expose them to the rage of the people. W. J. in his Celeusma accuseth ma∣ny of the Conforming Clergy to be specie duntaxat Protestantes, and that they do supparisitare Pelagio-Socino, sed imprimis Papae & Papismo; though it be no less than a contradiction, that they should be at the same time, So∣cinians and Papists. And still
the Cry is carried on, That our Hierarchy is Antichristian, and that we have scarce two or three Protestant Bishops in our Communion: That the Cler∣gy is Popishly affected, and are Pro∣ctors for Rome: That our Church hath made many steps to Popery: That our Liturgy is the Mass in English, and the Litany a Popish Conjuration. From these malevolent Suggestions it is, that the credulous people are not onely affrighted from our Com∣munion, as if our Temples (like those of the Egyptians) were filled with Serpents and Crocodiles; but are dri∣ven into Sedition, Conspiracies, and Rebellion, and into many inextricate Errours, and hurried from one Sect and Heresie to another, till they fall into that common Sink of Quakerism, which is a compound of the dregs of Popery and Fanaticism. There seems to be (and God be thanked for it) a general
abhorrence of Idolatry and Popery in the hearts of the people; but that the established Church is guilty of these Abominati∣ons, is the mischievous insinuation of unreasonable and malicious men, who seek to raise themselves upon its ru∣ine. And with such invincible preju∣dices are the minds of too many pos∣sest, that they are deaf to all Argu∣ments and Demonstrations to the con∣trary; they are as secure, as if they had been taught by an Oracle: since Mr. Calvin (as Grotius, p. 115. of his Votum pro Pace) observed, Illam mutationem quae Buceri consilio in An∣glia erat instituta Papismi accusavit: and T. C. taught, That they ought ra∣ther to conform themselves in Orders and Ceremonies to the fashion of the Turks than the Papists. (See p. 27. of the Confer. at Hampton-Court.) And the Popery which is now so vehement∣ly opposed, is that which our Dissen∣ters conceive to be practised in the established Church.
But the inconsiderate Multitude will not perceive, that while they are affrighted by such Shades and Appa∣ritions from the Communion of our Church, they do really embrace the most dangerous and distinguishing Articles and Principles of the Roma∣nists. They do as verily believe that the Presbytery or the People have a Supreme Power over the Chief Magi∣strate, as the Papists affirm the Pope to have. And as he challengeth the Keys and Sword of St. Peter, so do they the Crown and Scepter of Christ, (for so they stick not to call their Discipline) to which all Powers on Earth must bow or be broken. And their Practice hath been agreeable to these Principles: for from hence that damnable Doctrine (as St. Paul calls it) of resisting the lawful Powers, and the practices of open Rebellion and secret Conspiracies, have been of late days as frequent among Fanaticks as among the
Papists. And they presume to Ca∣nonize those that perish in Rebellion as Saints and Martyrs, as the Pope him∣self hath done by Thomas Becket and Father Garnet. Nor hath any Gene∣ral or Provincial of the Jesuits exa∣cted a more blind obedience, or usur∣ped a more uncontroulable power over the Consciences of their Proselytes and Emissaries, than some of these have done. So that indeed, many of their Principles and Practices are but old Popery in the new dress of Presby∣tery, as they have been formerly pa∣rallel'd by some of their Independent Brethren, out of their own Books of Discipline. Nor yet will their Leaders seem sensible of the pestilent effects of scan∣dalizing the established Government with the growth of Popery; when their own Disciples, having pluckt their Spectacles from their noses, can as plainly discern
Popery not onely in their Ministry, and Discipline, and in every thing that they retained for Or∣der and Decency, but in their Sabbaths and Sacraments, in their very Do∣ctrines of Repentance and good works, and in that of the blessed Trinity it self: all which have been ridicul'd as Popish by some that pass for true Pro∣testants. But in all their Calumnies our Adversaries meet with the same fate and infatuation as other false Ac∣cusers of innocent persons commonly do; their very Charge carrieth a Con∣futation with it; being laid against those who have given the plainest demonstrations of their detestation of Popery, and have acted most rational∣ly successfully against it; while the Informers are notoriously known to agree in the same Principles, and to conspire in the same Practices as the Papists do, for the destruction of that Church which hath been acknowled∣ged by all
sober Protestants, and dreaded by the Papists as their most formidable Enemy. The Jesuits and Dissenters have so long contrived and communicated politick Maximes and Counsels for the subversion of our Establishment, and confederated in practices tending to that end, that it is hard to determine whether there be now more Fanati∣cism among the Jesuits, or more Je∣suitism among the Fanaticks: As in the story of two famous Brothers, the one a Jesuit, the other a Calvinist; who disputed so plausibly and suc∣cessfully for their Opinions, that the Calvinist was perswaded to embrace Popery, and the Papist to espouse Calvinism: and yet they were Bre∣thren still. And if such persons as act to the same end, and use the same means, are equally criminal, I know not how to make a distinction where I see no real difference. Certain it
is, that as Fanaticism could never have grown to so great a bulk among us, if it had not been nourished by Popery; so Popery would have been extreamly weak and languishing, if it had not been encouraged and anima∣ted by Fanaticism. No other Arti∣fice could have made the Popish Plot to be suspected of a Sham (as some have called it) but that Conspiracy of some which call themselves true Protestants, but have served the Ro∣man Cause and Interest more advan∣tageously than all their own Consults and Confederacies have done. I should not have presumed to de∣dicate this Treatise to your Grace, had it been a Novel or Private Opi∣nion, and not the deliberate Sense and constant Judgment of the Govern∣ment, as well as the Practice of the Factions ever since the first concep∣tion of the Reformation. King Hen∣ry the Eighth observed, that the new Sumpsimus was as
busie to stifle it before it came to its birth, as the old Mumpsimus was. And in succeeding times, the Government had as watch∣ful and jealous an eye, and carried as strict a hand over the one Faction as over the other; restraining them by the same Laws, and executing the same Penalties on both; as appears by those wholsome Statutes made in Q. Eliz. to retain her Majesties Subjects in due Obedience; which have been ever interpreted by the wise Judges and common Practice of the Nation, equally to concern Dissenters of all sorts. It therefore seems an unaccountable Er∣rour in them who profess a detestation of Popery, to attempt the abrogation of those Laws (especially if (as the Dissenters affirm) they were intended chiefly against the Papists) as being a Grievance to his Majesties Protestant Subjects, and an incouragement to Po∣pery: when in all probability, the
Popish Conventicles would have been as frequent as those of the Dissen∣ters, had those Laws and Sanctions been anulled: and in such a juncture of time and circumstances, the wisest consult of the Jesuits could not have contrived a more probable means to gratifie their Party, and advance their Interest, than by such a designe. Nor hath this been the first joynt attempt of the two Factions to procure a To∣leration for each other; it being the readiest way to destroy the establish∣ed Church, as the Letters of Mr. Cole∣man and his endeavours did intimate. I fear I have transgressed the bounds of Modesty, as well as of an Epistle Dedicatory to a Person on whom the management of so many great and publick affairs is incumbent. But I held it my bounden duty to make a publick acknowledgment of your Graces unparallel'd favour to a person of such an inferiour Rank, of so mean capacities, and at such a re∣mote
distance from your Grace. And for this and my former rudenesses, I most humbly importune your Graces Pardon, as I do also for the mistakes of the following Treatise; which being intended to stop the mouths of such as maliciously accuse their Fathers and Brethren, and to open the eyes of such as are ignorantly seduc'd by them, that by plucking out (if it be possible) the beam that is in their own eyes, they may cleerly perceive that there is not a mote of what they falsly forged or fondly fancied to be in their Brothers eye. And I hope I have not hereby forfeited the reputation or priviledge of subscribing my self, Your Graces most humble and most obliged Servant, THO. LONG. Exon, May 16. 1684.
THE INTRODUCTION. THE Church of England may justly complain in the like words as Erasmus, Ad Episc. Roffensem: (Triplex sustineo certamen; cum Paganis illis Romanensibus, qui me miserè invident; cum Theologis quibusdam & Mona∣chis, qui nullum non movent lapidem ut me per∣dant; cum rabiosis quibusdam Lutheranis, qui in me fremunt quod unus (ut aiunt) remoror ipsorum triumphos. —Sic erat in fatis, ut hoc aetatis ex musico fierem gladiator.) I labour under a threefold conflict: 1. Against those Pagan-Romanists, who miserably en∣vy me: 2. With some Jesuits, Priests, and Monks, who move every stone to destroy me: 3. With those implacable Sectaries that think they can never rise but by my ruine. By these means, my Harmony is turn'd into Discord and Contention. What good Protestant will not passionate∣ly condole with
so indulgent a Mother, under such cruel and preternatural Agonies! That she, who first redeemed us from POPERY, resisting even to Bloud, and for a whole Age together (not without the immediate assi∣stance of Heaven in time of necessity) de∣feated all the powerful and politick attemps of our implacable Enemies, should now be branded as Popish, and under that notion be betrayed to those Romish Wolves that watch to make a Prey of her, is a sad consideration: but that some of her own Fold, who wear the Sheeps clothing, should be made the Instru∣ments of such Cruelty, is that which adds to the Affliction! We were told indeed long since, That England is a great Beast, that can∣not die but of her self: our own Divisions are the chief Stratagem by which our Adversa∣ries promise themselves success; and we are become so brutish, as to be acted by them (to bite and devour one another) who are ready to swallow us up all. It is to be wished, that as we deservedly abhor their Practices, so we would renounce their Principles; lest by e∣spousing these, we grow big with the like de∣signs, and give birth to that Icabod, which may shortly tell us, That the Ark of God is taken, and the glory departed from our Israel. This Confederacy against the Church, is not from any love that the Enemies thereof bear to each other, but from an
inveterate hatred of her, whom they ought to love. Thus Herod and Pontius Pilate, though Enemies to each other, acted both to the crucifying of our Saviour; though Pilate (when it was too late) would have washed his hands from that innocent Bloud. Though we did wantonly contend with one another about trifles, while our common Mother had some authority and power to pre∣vent the mischief of such contentions; yet now, when our all is at stake, and one Party insolently claims her Authority for the Pope, for the other to withdraw their obedience, and expose her to the tyranny of them, who would destroy both, is such an infatuation, as presageth no less than our common ruine. The Curse of Meroz cannot be forgotten, nor could it be ever more innocently applied than now.Deut. 25.17. O∣badiah, v. 10, &c. And if Amalek and the Edomites (professed Ene∣mies to Israel) were accursed for their cruelty to the people of God in their low estate; much more do they deserve a Curse, that under a profession of kindness, watch opportunities to do mischief. God makes mans extremity, his opportunity to shew mercy: it is the Devil that takes advantage of our age and distempers, to plunge us in despair and confusion. Say I this with∣out a cause? or do not the
present actings of too many, from whom we might justly ex∣pect better things, extort it from me? I ap∣peal to the impartial Reader to judge between us. For when all our united strength (as we may justly fear) is too little to withstand our common Enemy; instead of uniting, I find too ma∣ny endeavour to make the Breach wider, defa∣ming that Church as Popish, whose ruine was chiefly designed by the Papists, as the most formidable Enemy they have in the world: many Conformists are condemned as Socini∣ans, Pelagians, and Popishly affected; and now at length, there are so many hainous sins pre∣tended to be in our Conformity, that the Dis∣senters can by no means conform, because they fear God. And now also all those methods which prepared us for Confusion in 1642, are revived; our Governours in Church and State defamed as Papists, Fears and Jealousies in∣creased, seditious Petitions framed, Parties engaged, factious and rebellious Libels scat∣tered through the Nation, Money and Arms provided: They tell us in print, That there wants onely some Chieftain to head the Party, and then hands to work: And as it was in the beginning of the last War, so it will be now and ever. The Preface to the Covenant expresly said, That after other means of Supplication, Remon∣strance, Protestation, &c. now at last they en∣ter into a League and Covenant.
The rude people (saith the Royal Martyr, in his Chap. of Tumults) are taught first to petition, then to protest, then to dictate, then to command. Having made their Conspiracy strong, by pretending to sacrifice in Conven∣ticles at Hebron; reviving the old Covenant, and entring into new Associations, they were ready to execute secret Conspiracies, by a horrid Assassination of a most Religious and Gracious Prince, his Royal Brother, and chief Ministers in Church and State, and to overflow the Land with a second Deluge of Bloud, by open Rebellion. And because (as the Royal Martyr observed) the Devil of Rebellion can∣not succeed in his temptations, unless he be trans∣formed into an Angel of light; all this must be carried on under a pretence of zeal against Po∣pery; the Standard that is set up, bears this Motto, NO POPERY, NO TYRANNY; as if the Marian days were already re∣turned, and the number of Protestant Martyrs had far exceeded that in the Reign of Q. Mary. Whereas the cry of No Popery, no Tyranny, is in plain English, No Bishop, no King. They are now grown more politick, or more confi∣dent, than to declare that they fight against those Shadows which were raised by their own Reflections on the Liturgie and Ceremo∣nies; they contend for a more substantial Prize, the Crown and Mitre, Monarchy
and Episcopacy root and branch; that their Bram∣bles may be planted in that rich Soil, where the Royal Oak and the fruitful Vine have flou∣rished, and spread their Branches to the neighbouring Nations, and foreign Plantations. For since the time of the Reformation, from the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, there hath not been such a succession of Go∣vernours and religious Princes in all Chri∣stendom. Yet are the Subjects still amused with the clamour of Popery and Tyranny: which is improved by an opposite, but as dan∣gerous a Faction, for a more successful manage∣ment of their own mischievous designes; not unlike to some Beasts and Birds of Prey, who to prevent the discovery and destruction of their noxious brood, lead men into distant parts from the place where they have laid their young. What else is intended by the great noise of Tyranny and Oppression in the State, and Popery and Superstition in the Church, but to perswade the People of approaching danger, whence really there is no present fear, that they may with less suspicion bring their most dreadful Machinations to maturity? Hence it is, that all our Worthy men have been ac∣couted men Worthy of Death; all our Bi∣shops, two or three , to be
Popishly affected: the  Clergie, a Popish Clergie; and instead of uniting our forces a∣gainst Popish Conspirators, as if that were in∣deed but a Sham-plot, those that call them∣selves true Protestants, have even exceeded and justified them in more unnatural Associ∣ations and vile Confederacies. To stop the mouths of such loud Calumnia∣tors, or at least the ears of the People against their loud Obloquies, I have collected the en∣suing History; which, if well considered, will abundantly evidence the Sincerity and Constancy of our Princes and Governours in the Protestant Religion as by Law established, ever since the Reformation in Queen Elizabeth's days; their great care not onely to preserve it at home, but to defend and propagate it a∣broad; and to be a Refuge and Sanctuary to such as have been persecuted for it in foreign parts: As also, the Integrity and Ability of the Conforming Clergie to maintain it against all the Arguments of Papists and Fanaticks; whereby it will also appear, how impotent and malicious their Accusations have been, in that they have declaimed most vehemently a∣gainst those as Papists, that have most learn∣edly and successfully defended the established Church against Popery and Fanaticism, which have been equally pernicious to it. Inso∣much that if any loyal Clergie-man or other, hath in a time of need written
for Loyalty or Conformity, they have been marked out for Papists: which is a plain Argument that the Popery and Tyranny which they decry, is Christian Loyalty and Conformity. And to manifest to all sober men, how lit∣tle of good nature, as well as of Christian Pie∣ty and Charity these men have, I have given many undeniable instances of their acting on the same Principles, and in the like Practices as the most dangerous Papists, sometimes in actual confederacy with them, for the ruine of the Government: For however they seem op∣posite to each other, they are agreed to do the Government a mischief; and Duo quum fa∣ciunt idem, non sunt Duo: They that agree in Treason, are all Traytors. Facinus quos inqui∣nat, aequat. And of this, take the following instance. On October 3. 1643. there was a Letter sent from Dublin to a Member of the House of Com∣mons, which shews by what example they acted, as followeth. There was a Fryar taken the last Expediti∣on into Conaught, about whom was found a Col∣lection of all your Votes, Ordinances, and Decla∣rations, carefully marked with short marginal Notes out of which he composed a large Manu∣script intituled, An Apology of the Catho∣licks of Ireland, or a Justification of their de∣fensive Arms for the
preservation of their Re∣ligion, the maintenance of his Majesties Rights and Prerogatives, the natural and just defence of their Lives and Estates, and the Liberty of their Country, by the practice of the State of England, and the Judgment and Authority of both Houses of Parliament. It was penned with so little variation of Language, that the name of Ireland being changed for Eng∣land, and the chief Actors there, for those under the Parliament, your own Clerk would scarce know it from one of your own Declarations. All that they do, is for the good of the King and Kingdom; he is intrusted with all for the good of the People; if he dischargeth not his trust, but is advised by evil Counsellors, and persons they cannot confide in, 'tis their duty to see this Trust discharged according to the condition and true intent thereof: That they saw their Reli∣gion and Liberty in danger of extirpation, and therefore had reason to put themselves in a po∣sture of Defence; but are ready to lay down their Arms, as soon as the great Offices of the Kingdom are put into such hands as they can con∣fide in, &c. Mutato nomine, de te Anglia narratur. There is lately printed an excellent Trea∣tise, vindicating the Church of England from the imputation of Popery in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline; to which I refer my
Reader as to those points. That which I designe, is to vindicate our Governours in Church and State, principally those who have been most accused, from the like Aspersions; and to re∣tort the calumny of their Accusers, by shew∣ing their Harmony and Intrigues with the Papists both in Principles and Practices; that the mouth of such Slanderers may be stop∣ped. The following Collections may serve to convince all well-affected persons, that both the Papists and Fanaticks (how contrary so∣ever to each other) are well agreed to at∣tempt the Ruine of our Church as it is now e∣stablished; the Papists, under the pretence that we are Hereticks; and the Fanaticks, that we are Papists: but the true reason is, that the Papists may regain those Profits and Dignities which for a long time they usurped in this Nation, which was the most fruitful Garden that ever the Pope claimed as belong∣ing to his Palace; and the Fanaticks, that they may retrieve their former sacrilegious Pur∣chases of Crown and Church-lands, and divide them among themselves. Of the first we have this evidence, That the Pope fills up the places of our Bishops, Deans, and other Dig∣nitaries, to encourage his Emissaries: of which we have this Specimen in print.
BISHOPS. CANTERBURY: Cardinal Howard. YORK: Perrot, Superior of Secular Priests. LONDON: Corker, President of Benedictine Monks. WINCHESTER: White, alias Whitebread. DURHAM: Strange, late Provincial of Je∣suits. SALISBURY: Dr. Godden. NORWICH: Nappier, a Franciscan. ELI: Vincent, Provincial of Dominican Monks. EXETER: Wolfe, one of the Sorbone. PETERBOROUGH: Gifford, a Dominican Fryar. LINCOLN: Sir Jo. Warner, Baronet, a Je∣suit. CHICHESTER: Morgan, a Jesuit. BATH and WELLS: Dr. Armstrong, a Fran∣ciscan. CARLISLE: Wilmot, alias Quarterman. CHESTER: Thimbleby, a Secular Priest. HEREFORD: Sir Tho. Preston, a Jesuit. BRISTOL: Mundson, a Dominican. OXFORD: Williams, Rector of Watton in Flanders. St. DAVIDS: Belson, a Secular Priest. St. ASAPH: Jones, a Secular Priest.
BANGOR: Joseph David Kemash, a Domi∣nican. ABBOTS. WESTMINSTER: Dr. Seldon, a Benedi∣ctine Monk. SION-HOUSE: Skinner, a Benedictine Monk. DEANS. CANTERBURY: Belton, a Sorbonist. St. PAULS: Libourne, a Secular, Secretary to Cardinal Howard. WINDSOR: Howard, with twelve Bene∣dictine Canons. CHICHESTER: Morgan, a Secular. WINTON: Dr. Watkinson, President of the English Colledge at Lisbone. Many other Dignities are by the Popes Bull disposed of to Foreigners: but these, being of our Kings Dominions, have been many of them diligent Promoters of our Wars, that they might kill and take possession. Judge now what temptation our present Bi∣shops have to bring in Popery, when the co∣ming in of that, will turn them out of their Dignities and Livelihoods; if not out of the World too, as in the Marian days.
And that the Fanaticks aim at the same end, is demonstrable not onely from the unlimited power which some of their Ministers exercised over their Brethren, far beyond any of the Bishops; but their dividing the most profitable Benefices among themselves, sequestring those loyal Clergie-men that were legally possessed of them: As also from a late Proposal of Ba∣xter, Humfrys, and Lob, in the name of other Nonconformists; who would still retain the name of Bishops, so they might have the power and profit: for they would have some chosen out of the several Parties of Presby∣terians, Independents, and Anabaptists; onely they desire that the Bishops should be decla∣red Ecclesiastical Officers under the King, act∣ing Circa Sacra onely by vertue of his Com∣mission and Authority: upon which account, if any of the eminent among the Nonconfor∣mists were chosen Bishops, they could not re∣fuse it (as they say.) And indeed, at the time of making this Proposal, these wise men, like the wise Ladies of Sisera's Mother, had divided the Spoil, to every man a prey of two or three Dignities, besides the Garments of divers colours, Judg. 5.30. Now I desire all rational men to consider, that as it is a great folly and meer fascination in some, to serve the lusts of those that are the Slaves of him that stiles himself the Servum Servorum
Domini: so it is no less, to serve the lusts of such as are the Servi Servorum Diaboli, under what pre∣tence soever. It is well known how impetuously both these Factions have attempted to ruine the established Church; and despairing to do it by Reason and Argument, they endeavour to do it by wicked Arts and Arms, or bloudy Assas∣sinations. One Engine that hath had a perpe∣tual motion to this end, hath been the great Clamour against our Governours in Church and State, as being Antichristian and Popishly affected. Thus our martyred King and Arch∣bishop, and generally all the Bishops in those days, with other chief Ministers of State, were condemned as Papists; though the Lye were so gross, as to carry its confutation with it, they all dying in that Faith and Profession, both for Doctrine, Discipline, and worship, in which the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days died: which holy Faith also died with them. And now again, the Church is accused as having made many steps towards Popery; the King is accused as a Favourer of it; and all, except three or four Bishops, are declared to be Popishly affected: the Clergy are Popish Clergie-men; and Dr. Stilling fleet, among o∣thers, a Projector for Rome. Whereas those very men that have set this Engine on work, do improve the same methods as the
Papists have prescribed to ruine us; that is, by divi∣ding us, and seeking to raise Wars and Confu∣sions among us. In which how mutually and brotherly they have assisted each other, is the designe of this Collection to shew, and thereby to silence this Obloquy. And, 1. I shall shew their Harmony and Agree∣ment in such Principles as tend to War and Confusion. And, 2. Their joynt practices to effect the same. For unless the Popes Bull do plow with the Geneva Heifers, they can never turn up the foundations of Sion. Now to evince this, I shall not rake toge∣ther the unclean and poysonous Maximes of Mariana, Sayer, Bellarmine, Scribanius, Gret∣serus, Becanus, Suarez, &c. nor compare them with the dangerous Positions of Knox, Bucanan, Goodman, and others mentioned by Bishop Bancroft, the congratulatory Epistle of Lisymachus Nicanor to his Covenanting Bre∣thren in Scotland; but content my self, and I hope satisfie my Reader with the two follow∣ing Instances: The first is one Thomas White a Romish Emissary, who by many Books writ∣ten in the time of the Ʋsurpation, sought to debauch the Nation; especially by one prin∣ted in the year 1652, called The Grounds of Obedience and Government, with this abused Maxime in the
Title-page, Salus Populi Su∣prema lex esto; which was applied in a mi∣staken sence, to very ill purposes, by the Fana∣ticks. In this Book, like a Priest of Mars, he scatters these Fire-brands, enough to set any Kingdom on fire; and composed it in a small Tract, like so many hand-Granado's fitted for every mans fingers. These are his Posi∣tions: First, That the Magistrate by his miscarri∣ages abdicates himself from being a Magistrate, and proveth a Robber instead of a Defender; which last word he writes with a great D, to shew whom he meant. Secondly, That by the evil management or insufficiency of Governours, it is remitted to the force of nature to provide for our selves; and that we are not bound by any promise made to our Governours, p. 123, 124. Thirdly, if the Magistrate have truly de∣served to be dispossessed, or if it be rationally doubted that he hath deserved it, and be actu∣ally out of possession, a Subject hath no obliga∣tion to hazard for his restitution, but rather to hinder it: for since it is the common good that both the Magistrate and the Subject are to aim at, it is the common harm to admit again of such a Magistrate; and every one is bound to his power to resist him, p. 133. if he be innocent, and wrong-fully deposed, nay let us adde, one that hath governed
well, and deserved much of the Commonwealth, yet is he totally dispossessed; and in these circumstances, it were better for the common good to stay as they are, than to ven∣ture the restoring of him, because of the publick hazard. — And the dispossessed Prince is obli∣ged absolutely to renounce all right and claim to Government; and if he doth not, he is worse than an Infidel, p. 135, 136. If the People by any circumstance be devolved to the state of Anarchy, their Promise made to their expel∣led Governour binds no more, p. 122. Fourthly, That when the Peoples Good stands on the Possessors side, then clearly he be∣gins, and then the People think themselves well, and they manifestly consent to the present Go∣vernment: for who can assure they shall be better by return of the dispossessed Party? Surely by the common presumption, the Gainer is like to defend them better than the Loser. You may see by this leading man, how industrious the Papists were to hinder the Restauration of Charles the Second, as well as to procure the Destruction of Charles the First. Now that the Fanaticks ran parallel with the Papists in these Traiterous Positions, I shall shew, from a Book printed Anno 1658, by Mr. Richard Baxter, called The Holy Com∣monwealth; in which he sets down the three Qualifications, as of necessity to the being of Soveraign power. First, so much
understan∣ding; secondly, so much strength, or execu∣tive power, by his interest in the people or o∣thers, as are necessary to the ends of Govern∣ment. P. 130. From whence he deduceth three Corollaries: 1. When Providence depriveth a man of his understanding and intellectual capa∣city, and that statedly to his ordinary temper, it maketh him uncapable of Government, though not of the name, Thes. 135. 2. If God per∣mits Princes to turn so wicked, as to be uncapa∣ble of governing so as is consistent with the ends of Government, it makes him an uncapable Sub∣ject of the power, and so deposeth him. 3. If Providence statedly disable him that was a So∣veraign from the executing of the Law, it makes him an uncapable Subject of the power, and so deposeth him, Thes. 137. To which he adds: Though it is possible and likely that the guilt is or may be theirs who have disabled the Ruler by deserting him, yet he is dismissed from the charge of Government, and particular innocent Members are disobliged from being governed by him, if the Governour be justly dispossessed, as by a lawful War (which Mr. Baxter declares the War against King Charles the First was) in which he loseth his right; especially if he violate the Constitution, and enter into a Military state against the People, and by
them be conquered, they are not obliged to restore him, unless there be some special obligation upon them besides their Alle∣giance, Thes. 145. If the person dispossessed, though it were unjustly, do afterwards become incapable of Government, it is not the duty of his Subjects to seek his Restitution. Thes. 146. If an Army of Neighbours, Inhabitants (or who∣ever) do, though injuriously, expel the Sove∣raign, and resolve to ruine the Commonwealth, rather than he shall be restored; and if the Commonwealth may prosper without his restora∣tion, it is the duty of such an injured Prince, for the common good, to resigne his Government; and if he will not, the People ought to judge him as made uncapable by Providence, and not to seek his restitution, to the apparent ruine of the Commonwealth, Thes. 147. If therefore the rightful Governour be so long dispossessed, that the Commonwealth can be no longer with∣out, but to the apparent hazard of its ruine, we (i. e.) the people that dispossessed him, are to judge that Providence hath dispossessed the for∣mer, and presently consent to another, Thes. 149. If a People that by Oath and Duty are obliged to a Soveraign, shall sinfully dispossess him, and contrary to their Covenants chuse and covenant with another, they may be obliged by their later Covenant, notwithstanding their former, Thes. 181. If a Nation injuriously deprive them∣selves of a worthy
Prince, the hurt will be their own, and they punish themselves; but if it necessary to their welfare, it is no injury to him but a King that by War will seek Reparation from the Body of the People, doth put himself into a Hostile state, and tells them actually that he looks to his own good more than theirs and bids them take him for their Enemy, and defend themselves if they can, p. 424. Though a Nation wrong their King and so quoad men tum Cauiae, they are on the worse side, yet ma he not lawfully war against the common good o that account; nor any help him in such a War because, propter finem, he hath the worse Cause, Thes. 352. And p. 476. we were to believe the Parliaments Declarations and Pro∣fessions, that the War which they raised was n against the King either in respect of his Authori∣ty or his Person, but onely against Delinquent Subjects. (And yet they actually fought a∣gainst the King's Person and Authority. And, We are to believe (saith Mr. Baxter p. 422.) That men would kill them whom the fight against. Quam bene conveniunt! Mr. Baxter never followed any Text that he preached on, so closely as he hath done the Text of this Jesuit in the Commentary of his Holy Commonwealth. John Milton printed a Book very well like this of Mr. White, called The Tenure of King and Magistrates; driving
on this Maxime That it is lawful for any that have power, to call to account, depose, and put to death wicked Kings and Tyrants, after due conviction, if the ordinary Magistrate neglect it. We have lately had a Fanatical Lawyer following the Divine Mr. Baxter, transcri∣bing out of the same Book of Mr. White, to the same end. I shall observe onely this Note among others in Mr. White, p. 158. where he answers some Objections of Di∣vines concerning the Authority of Princes and Non-resistance. Ʋp steps the Divine (saith he) to preach us out of Scripture the Duty we owe to Kings, no less than Death and Damnation being the Guerdons of Disobedience and Rebellion. And p. 159. They will speak reason too, telling us that God by nature is high Lord and Master of all: That whoever is in power, receiveth his right from him: That O∣bedience consists in doing the Will of him that commandeth; and concludes that his Will ought to be obeyed till God taketh away the obligati∣on. (i. e.) till he who is to be obeyed himself releaseth the right. And p. 160. They al∣leadge that God by his special command trans∣ferred the Kingdom from Saul to David, from Rehoboam to Jeroboam: so that, in fine, all that is brought out of Scripture falleth short of proving that no time can make void the right of a King, once given him by the hand of God.
Now mark what Mr. White says to overthrow the sence of Scripture: The reason (saith he)  this weak way of alleadging Scripture is, that when they read that God commandeth or doth this, they look not into Nature to know what this commanding or doing is, but presently imagine God commands it by express and direct words and doth it by an immediate Position of the things said to be done: whereas in Nature the commands are nothing but the natural light God hath bestowed on mankind, and which is there∣fore frequently called the Law of Nature Likewise Gods doing a thing is many times one∣ly the course of natural second causes, to which because God gives the direction and motion, he both doth, and is said to do all that is done by them. These things are transcribed by Mr. Hunt to the same ends that Mr. White urged them. p. 144. of his Postscript. The nature of Go∣vernment, and its Original (saith he) hath been prejudiced by men, that understanding no∣thing but words, and Grammar-Divines, with∣out contemplating Gods Attributes, or the nature of man, or the reasonableness of moral Precepts, have undertaken to declare the sence of Scri∣pture, and infer that Soveraign power is not of humane institution, but of divine appoint∣ment, because they find it there
written, that by him Kings raign; imagining that when the Scripture saith God commands or doth this, that God commanded it by express words, or doth it by an immediate position of the thing done: whereas in Nature his commands are nothing but the natural light God hath bestowed on man∣kind; likewise Gods doing a thing is onely the course of natural and second causes, to which be∣cause God gives direction and motion, he doth both, and is said to do all that is done. After this, Mr. Hunt rails against our Di∣vines in the Jesuits (Mr. White's) Language also. White calls them Grammar-Divines, verbal and wind-blown Divines, p. 162. and Mr. Hunt calls them men that understand no∣thing but words, and Grammar-Divines: who (saith Mr. White) without Logick, Philoso∣phy or Morality, undertake to be Interpreters of the sacred Bible. Who (saith Mr. Hunt) without contemplating Gods Attributes, or the nature of man, or the reasonableness of moral Precepts, have undertaken to declare the sence of Scripture. From the Premises we may draw this Con∣clusion, That the Papists and Fanaticks do a∣gree, and mutually lend and borrow Argu∣ments to resist Kings, elude the Scriptures, defame the English Clergie, and overthrow the Government in Church and State. As, 1. That to conclude from the sence of Scripture, is a weak way of arguing.
2. That Non obstante what the Scripture says of Divine right of Soveraign power, it is not of Divine, but Humane institution. 3. That Providence and the effects of se∣cond causes being influenced by God, are of equal authority with the Precepts injoyned by the Word of God. 4. That the Soveraign power being but of humane institution, may be resisted, and is al∣terable. 5. That having cast off their Loyalty to the King and his Laws, they are in a fair way to cast off God and his Laws. 6. That the worst of Papists, and their A∣theistical Arguments, are made use of by some that call themselves true Protestants, against the express commands of God for Obedience to the Higher Powers. There was printed, 1650, an Answer to Dr. Ferne's Exercitation concerning usurped Powers; in which the Answerer endeavoured to prove, 1. That the present was no Ʋsurpa∣tion: 2. That former Oaths obliged not against Obedience to present Powers: 3. That Obedi∣ence is due to Powers in possession, though un∣lawfully entred. And for his Authority, he is not ashamed to quote these words of the Je∣suit Moline de Justitiâ, Tract. 3. Disput. 6. to this purpose: Two ways one may be a Ty∣rant: 1. Because though he be the true Sove∣raign
of the Commonwealth, he doth unjustly go∣vern it; in this case it is a sin for private men to kill him; but for his own defence it is law∣ful, and the Commonwealth assembled by their Chieftains may depose him, and being deposed, kill him, unless greater mischief would accrue to the Commonwealth by his murther, for then he should offend against the love of the Common∣wealth in killing of him. Shortly after he quotes Sayr's Case Consc. l. 7. c. 10. n. 4. Id curare debet Occisor, ita caute & consulto face∣re, ut non pejores exitus & scandala ex tali Occisione sperentur: which I forbear to En∣glish. You see how firmly the Jesuit and Presbyter are yoked, to plow up the Field of the English Church and Government. They must needs be their Disciples, whose Princi∣ples and Practices they so zealously follow. I go on to shew in the second place their a∣greement in practice: for by their fruits also you may know them.
THE INTRIGUES OF THE Papists and Fanaticks Against the Government and Religion Established Historically related. WHen the Church of England was established under Queen Elizabeth, there was no con∣siderable Separation from it by Papists or Fanaticks, until some of the new Society of Jesus invented a method to divide and destroy the Church of Christ a∣mong us. Which they endeavoured, first, by opposing those who were Parish-Priests in the days of Queen Mary, but allowed of our Church-Communion; and having prevaile a∣gainst them, they rested not there, but en∣deavoured by new Artifices to draw off some zealous Protestants into separate Congregations, under a pretence of greater
purity of Ordi∣nances and Worship than were practised in our Church. And to this end, they imploy some subtil and Eloquent men, in the disguise of zealous Protestant-Ministers, to exercise their gifts of Extemporary prayer, which they reported to be by an extraordinary assistance and gift of the Spirit. Their preaching also was designed to bring the Order of Bishops into contempt, to which they were known enemies; to lay aside the Liturgie, as a stinting of their gifts of the Spirit; and run down those few Ceremonies that were retained, that we might not have the face of a Church, or any decency among us. They opposed al∣so the Supremacy of the Queen over things and persons in Religious Administrations; which they contended to belong to Ministers of their rank and order. And although some of the Popish Priests at that time and afterward, (such as Wid∣drington, Preston, Watson, and the Authors of the Jesuites Catechisme) opposed them in these things, as tending to provoke her Majesty to greater severity against them, and wrote ve∣ry learnedly against those Jesuits, discovering their designs to be not only against the Pro∣testants, but the more moderate Papists; yet were there some troublesome Ministers, (Good∣man, Gilby, Whittingham, &c.) and others, that had been at Geneva
and other Presbyte∣rian Towns, and submitted to that Discipline, which took all those hints from the Jesuits, and made such improvements, that the Disci∣ples in a short time exceeded their Masters. Doctor Cox, Horne, and others, who ad∣hered to the Church of England, and had known their turbulent behaviour at Geneva, Frankfort, and other places, opposed their ad∣mission to the publick Ministry; and so they and the Jesuits creep first into houses, and lead captive silly women, and beguile the hearts of simple men; and afterward gather distinct and separate Congregations, under pretence of pu∣rer Worship, and a more holy Discipline. Of which practice, we have these undeniable in∣stances. In the Ninth year of Queen Elizabeth, one Faithful Commin, of the Order of St. Do∣minick, got the reputation of a zealous Prote∣stant Minister, by railing against Pius Quin∣tus the Pope, and defaming the Liturgie, as being the Mass in English; in opposition to which, the first set up the use of Extempore prayers, as a gift of the Spirit, which ought not to be stinted by Forms and Liturgies: but one Mr. Clerkson, Chaplain to the Archbi∣shop, discovered him to be a Popish Priest; which was evidently proved before the Queen and Archbishop. So that he being dis∣missed upon Bail to appear at a certain day,
and it hapning that on that day the Spanish Ambassador having publick Audience of the Queen, he could not be admitted, though he attended with his Bail; he boasted to his fol∣lowers, that the Queen and Council had dis∣missed him. But finding how uneasie it would be for him in England, he told his Pro∣selytes, he was resolved to go beyond the Seas, to preach the Gospel there: and having ac∣quainted his Disciples how poor he was, and commended to them the Cause of God, he got 130l. which was collected among the Bro∣therhood, besides what his compassionate Sisters bestowed on him: and there was no farther news of this godly man, until one John Baker, Master of a Ship, gave this account of him to the Queen, That he had seen this Faithful Commin in the Low-Countries, and that one Martin van Duval, a Merchant of :Amsterdam, told him that Commin had been lately at Rome, and there imprisoned by the Pope; but upon his Letter to the Pope, he was sent for the next day, and being accused for revi∣ling the Pope, and railing against his Church among the Hereticks of England, he confes∣sed that his lips had uttered what his heart ne∣ver thought, and pleaded what considerable service he had done the Pope, by preaching a∣gainst set Forms of prayer, and calling the English prayer, English
Mass, perswading the people to pray Spiritually and Extempore: by which means the Church of England was become as odious to them to whom he preached, as the Mass was to the Church of England; which would prove a stumbling-block to that Church, while it was a Church. Upon which the Pope commended him, and dismissed him with a gratuity of 2000 Du∣cats for his good service. The next Instance is of one Thomas Heath a Jesuite, in the Eleventh year of Queen Eli∣zabeth, whose Brother Nic. Heath had been Bishop of Rochester in H. 8. days. He comes to the Dean of Rochester, desiring him to present him to the Bishop for some Prefer∣ment. In order to which, he pretending himself to be a poor Minister, the Dean or∣ders him to preach in the Cathedral; which he did on that Text, Acts 12.6. Peter there∣fore was kept in prison, but prayers were made without ceasing in the Church to God for him; on which he told the people, that it was not those of the Church of England, but Spiritu∣al prayers, that brought Peter out of prison: and where (said he) have we Scripture for any set form in the Church? But it so hapned, that drawing out his Handkerchief in the Pulpit, he let fall a Letter, which the Sexton found, and brought to the Dean; which was as fol∣lows:
Brother, THe Council of our Fraternity have thought fit to send you David George, Theo∣dorns Sartor, and John Huts, their Collections, which you may distribute as you see fit for your purpose, according to the peoples inclinations. These mixtures with your own, will not only a little puzzle the Ʋnderstandings of the Audi∣tors, but make your self famous. We suppose your wants are not considerable at present, by what we have heard, how your flock do admire you every day more and more. Be not over∣zealous in your proceedings in the beginning, but gradually win on them as you visit them; and according as you find their inclinations to your design, let us hear how you have proceeded; for it will satisfie your Brethren much, and inable them the better to instruct you for the future. Hallinghan, Benson, and Coleman, have set a Faction among the German Hereticks, so that several who have turned from us, have now de∣nied their Baptism: which we hope will soon turn the scale, and bring them back to their old principles. This we have certified to the Coun∣cil and Cardinals, That there is no other way to prevent people from turning Hereticks, and for recalling of others back again to the Mother-Church, than by the diversities of Doctrines. We all wish you to prosper. Sam. Malt. Madrid, Oct. 26. 1568.
This Letter was directed under the name of Thomas Finne; and Malt was known to be an English Jesuite at Madrid in Spain; and Hallingham, Coleman, and Benson, with one Button, and some others that went un∣der the notion of zealous Preachers, are no∣ted by our Historians as active instruments of Separation among us; whom the Letter calls German Hereticks, (i. e.) Lutherans: which Dr. Stillingfleet notes out of Mr. Camb∣den, A. D. 1568. agreeing with the date of this Letter; who says, that while Harding, Sanders, and others, attacked our Church on one side, Coleman, Button, Hillingham, Ben∣son, and others, were busie on the other; who under a pretence of purer Reformation, oppo∣sed the Discipline, Liturgie, and Calling of our Bishops, as approaching too near to the Church of Rome. And these he notes to be the beginners of those Controversies, which after broke out with so great violence. Nec dum finitus Orestes. So that while the Pope held the hot-Iron of Dissention on the Anvil, the open Jesuite and the Masquerade Presbyter on each side, beat with their Sledges to form the Project after his mind. But upon the receipt of the Letter, the Dean carried it to Edmond Gest then Bishop of Rochester, who
instantly caused the said Heath to be apprehended and examined; and urging against him what he had said in his Sermon against the Liturgie, and for Spiritu∣al Prayers, he confessed that he was not whol∣ly of the Episcopal party of England, but that he had laboured to refine the Protestants, and to take off all Smacks of Ceremonies, that in the least do tend to the Romish Faith. He confessed also, that he knew the said Sam. Malt, but objected, that the Letter was not directed to him, but to one Thomas Finne; which (as the Bishop observed) was usual a∣mong the Jesuites. And to put the matter out of controversie, the Bishop sent to Heaths Lodgings, where in one of his Boots were found his Beads, and a License from the Fra∣ternity of the Jesuits, and a Bull dated the first of Pius Quintus, to preach what Do∣ctrine that Society pleased, for dividing of Protestants, particularly naming the English as Hereticks. In his Trunk were also seve∣ral Books for denying Baptism to Infants, and containing several blasphemies. Heath being Convicted of these things in open Court, the Bishop offered him, that if he would discover for what causes he ran in∣to those Schisms, and reform his course of life, he and the whole Court would intercede for his pardon, and provide for
his future maintenance. To which he answered, My Lord, I know not what I might have done had I not been so publickly examined; but seeing my vocation is so publickly known, I shall not ac∣knowledge my self to be guilty of any Misde∣meanour: for I have fought a good fight for Christ, whose cause I have taken in hand. This Experiment I tryed among my Country-men, that the world may see, that all those who term themselves Protestants are not of the Church of England, though they speak against Rome. The Bishop hearing him speak so obstinately, said, Behold, my Brethren a Jesuits Confession, how he hath declared he had set up a certain Form of Religion, purposely to withdraw you from the Church of England: but woe be to those deluders, and to those that will be deluded by them: we have a good Law, and the light of the Holy Gospel now flourishing among us, which hath for many years past been absconded: there∣fore, my Brethren, consider the condition of your Souls; if you start aside once from your Princi∣ples, having the right way so plainly set be∣fore you, you will not only run into Popish sla∣very again, but be in peril of a total confusion of Soul and body. And if Rome get once her foot on these dominions again, not only your selves and your Children, but your Princes and No∣bles shall become slaves to her Idolatry. Then was he remanded to prison, and for three days brought to
the Market-place at Rochester, where he stood by the High-cross with a paper before his breast, in which was written his Crimes: then he was Pillo∣red; and on the last day his Ears cut off, his Nose slit, and his Forehead branded with the Letter R, and was condemned to endure per∣petual imprisonment. But it lasted not long; for a few Months after he dyed suddenly, not without the suspition of having poysoned himself. How many other Romish Emissaries did act after this manner, is not known; but certain it is, that they had prevailed with too many to walk in their steps, and to carry on the work in the same method that they had be∣gun, to make a Separation among us: for the Authors of the Admonition, in the 14 of Queen Elizabeth, declared they would have neither Papists nor others constrained to Com∣municate: which although (as A.B. Whitgift saith) they intended as a plea for their own Separation from the Church, yet (saith he) the Papists could not have met with better Pro∣ctors: and elsewhere he tells them, that they did the Pope very good service; and that he would not miss them for any thing: for what is his desire, but to have the Church of England, which he hath accused, utterly de∣faced and discredited, by any means over∣thrown, if not by Forreign Enemies, yet by
domestical Dissentions? and what fitter and apter instruments could he have had for that purpose, than you, who under pretence of zeal, overthrow that which other men have buil∣ded; under colour of purity seeking to bring in deformity; and under the cloak of equa∣lity and humility, would usurp as great tyran∣ny and lofty Lordliness over your Parishes, as ever the Pope did over the whole Church? And in another place, he saith, they were made the Engines of the Popish Conclave, where∣by they intended to overthrow this Church by our own folly, which they cannot compass by all their policy. And Archbishop Grindal in a Letter of his, called Fair warning, part the second, expressed his great fear of two things, Atheism and Popery, and both arising out of our needless Divisions and Dissentions, fo∣mented by Satan the enemy of Mankind, and the Pope the enemy of Christendome. By these differences the enemies of our Religion gain this, that nothing can be established by Law in the Protestant Religion, whose every part is not opposed by one or other of our own Professors. So that things continuing loose and confused, the Papists have their oportu∣nity to urge their Way, which is attended with Order and Government, and our Religion continuing thus distracted and divided, some vile wretches lay
hold of the Arguments on one side, to confute the other, and so hope at last to destroy all. In these practices our Dissenters have for many years followed the directions of the Jesuite Contzen, for inducing Popery into a Country; as 1. That it be done under a pre∣tence of ease to tender Consciences. 2. That when liberty is granted, then the parties be for∣bid to contend with each other. 3. That those who suspect the design, and preach against it, be traduced as men that preach very unseasonable Doctrine; that they are proud, and self-opinia∣tors, and enemies to peace and union. 4. That the Prince make as much use of the divisions of his enemies, as of the agreement of his friends. All which Rules have been obser∣ved by the Enemies of our Church, as well Dissenters as Romish Recusants. In the year 1588. the King of Spain, be∣ing thereto incouraged by an information of the great divisions and animosities among us, by reason whereof he expected either a grea∣ter Party to joyn with him, or the less oppo∣sition, sent his Invincible Armado upon our Coasts; at which time, the Protestant Dissenters, instead of Arming in defence of the Queen and themselves, did with greater importunity and confidence assault her with Pe∣tions and Libels; taking advantage of the times, as if they were more ready to
assist the Spaniards than her Majesty, in case their unreasonable requests were not granted. Of which see Mr. Cambden in his Annals, Anno 1588. Notwithstanding all the service that Bi∣shop Jewel had done against the Papists, upon his preaching a Sermon at St. Pauls Cross in defence of the Orders of this Church, and obe∣dience to them; he was so ungratefully and spitefully used by the then Dissenters, that for his own vindication, he made a solemn Pro∣testation on his death-bed, that what he then said, was neither to please some, nor to displease others, but to promote peace and unity among Brethren. Of which Archbishop Whitgift in his Defence, p. 423. saith: It is the manner, except you please their humour in all things. though you otherwise deserve never so well, all is nothing with them, but they will deprave you, rail on you, back-bite you, invent lies of you, and spread false rumors; as though you were the vilest persons on earth. This humour Mr. Baxter observes in those that came from Geneva, &c. No sooner were they called home. saith he, (p. 150. of his Gildas) but some of them were so intemperate, impatient, and un∣peaceable, that some turned to flat Separation, and flew in the faces of the Prelates with revi∣lings, (Quere, Whether Mr. B. doth not do what he condemned in them)
and some of them (saith he) fled to New-England, and o∣ther Countries in America. Thither went Hooker, Davenport, Shephard, Allen, Cobber Noyes, Parker, &c. p. 157. And some were so hot at home, that they were put to death; a Hacket, Coppinger, &c. who fell to Blasphe∣my and Treason. And that Ainsworth, Ro∣binson, and Johnson fled beyond Sea, and there gathered Churches, and broke by divisions a∣mong themselves. The Queen also is reported by these Secta∣ries, to be a greater friend to the Papists than to her Protestant Subjects, though her design was only to keep up the Church in some decency and splendour, the better to re∣tain the Papists in due obedience. For by her Instructions to Secretary Walsingham, Aug. 11. 1570. she affirms, That the heads of the Romish party did ordinarily resort from the be∣ginning of her Reign to Divine Service in the Church, without shew of mis-liking. And Sir Ed. Cook in his Charge at Norwich 1605. says, they did so during the ten first years of her Reign: and it is acknowledged by some late Dissenters, p. 64. of their Reply to Doctor Stillingfleet, That the great propension in the Queen to gain the Popish party to her Commu∣nion by the alterations made in the Liturgie, making the Sacramental bread round like the wafers, placing the Table
where the Altar stood, &c. was attended with the Conformity of many who were cordially addicted to the Church of Rome. So that the Papists seemed to have a better opinion of the Reformation, than some Protestants then or now have; and though the present Church hath laid aside ma∣ny of those things, which were then enjoy∣ned and practised, retaining only three Ce∣remonies for decency, yet the implacable ma∣lice of their Successors, still reviles the Church, as making nearer approches to Popery. By these insolent proceedings, both of Po∣pish and other Separatists, the Queen was necessitated to pass both those Acts, of the 23 and 35 of her Raign, to retain her Subjects in due Obedience, which equally respect all the dissenting Parties; and by a just executi∣on of those and other good Laws upon some principal Offenders of all sides, the storms which they had raised were prevented: which is well observed by Dr Burnet, in his Preface to his Second Volume, That her strict en∣joyning Ʋniformity, making some turbulent per∣sons examples, countenancing the Clergie, e∣specially the Archbishop Whitgift, and the sin∣cerity and watchfulness of the Council and infe∣riour Officers, preserved the Nation in peace all her days. (And he adds) If her Successors had held the reins of Government with like steadi∣ness of hand, the Nation, how
headstrong soe∣ver, could never have run into those desperate confusions, from which nothing but the hand of God could have redeemed us. N. B. But to bring home my discourse to our times, and to the intended design, which is to shew, that the Rise of those Wars which have been lately among us, was from a con∣federacy between the Papists and other Dis∣senters; I shall only mention what dstast was taken by several Scottish Lords, upon the Kings revocation of those Crown-lands, which during the minority of his Father King James they had seized; and upon the Act for Surrendries of the Tythes, &c. whereup∣on they suggested, that their Religion was in danger, and that these things were done in favour of Episcopacy: And so they enter in∣to a Covenant for defence of their Religion. And doubting of their own strength, they consult of ingaging the King of France a∣gainst their own King; to which end they a∣greed on the following Letter, directed, Au Roy; which Title is not wont to be given to any but their Liege Lord from his Subjects: of which his Majesty in his lesser Declarati∣on 1640. took special notice, and complained that they courted a Forreign power against him.
SIR, YOur Majesty being the Sanctuary of af∣flicted Princes and States, we have found it necessary to send this Gentleman Mr. Colvil to represent to your Majesty the candor and ingenuity as well of our actions and inten∣tions, which we desire to be written with the beam of the Sun, as well as to your Majesty. We therefore humbly beseech you, Sir, to give faith and credit to him to what he shall say on our part touching us and our affairs; being as∣sured of an assistance equal to your wonted Cle∣mency heretofare, and so often shewn to our Na∣tion, which will not yield the glory to any other whatsoever, to be eternally, SIR, Your Majesties most humble, most obedient, and most affectionate Servants, Rothes, Montross, Lesly, Marr, Montgomery, Loudon, Forester. This Letter was discovered, and brought to the King, and was proved to be the hand∣writing of Loudon, who, being in London, was committed to the Tower; and on examina∣tion confessed it to be his hand: but excused the matter, because it was written before the Pacification. However, they had really en∣gaged Cardinal
Richlien, who governed the affairs of France. He sent one Chamberline his Chaplain, a Scot by birth, to assist the Co∣venanters, and to attempt all ways for exaspe∣rating the first heats; with order not to de∣part till he might return with good news. He appointed one of his Secretaries also to reside in Scotland, and to march with them into England, to be present at the Council of War, and direct their business. Hamilton's Chaplain also had free access unto Con the Popes Nuncio, and a Scotch-man, then in Eng∣land on the same designe. And if Mr. Rushworth the Parliaments Historian may be credited, there were also at that time some Applications made to the King of Spain, who was then the most potent Monarch. For, p. 970, & 971. he says. That in the year 1639, when the Spanish Armado came on the Coasts of England, Scotland be∣ing then in a great ferment by the Covenanters, some of them thus argued: That there could be no Fleet strong enough to attempt them by Sea, except all the Kingdom did contribute to it; which, say they, cannot be done, except all the States joyn; of which we of the Confederacy shall be the greater part: and so the Enemy shall be forthwith forced to give liberty of Con∣science to the Catholicks, or put themselves in danger of losing all. From whence it is col∣lected, 1. That the Scots
thought no Enemies so great, as the King and his Party. 2. That liberty of Conscience was desired for the Pa∣pists as well as themselves. 3. That the Co∣venanters thought themselves the greater part of the States. And 4. That there was a secret Confederacy between them and the Papists; and this Armado was designed for their assistance. And as for the King of Great Britain, the Relator says, If he will not give liberty of Conscience, he shall be reduced to it with no little damage. As for Argyle, whose Father was a known Papist, I suppose he was as much of that as of any Religion, though he were the Head of the Covenanters: his interest was his Religion, as this Action of his doth demonstrate. His Father left a second Wife, by whose last Will there was given to the Daughters 12000l. sterling; and Argyle prevailed to be admit∣ted Administrator, he giving security to per∣form the Will: but shortly after he caused the eldest, whose Portion was 5000l. to marry a Gentleman who accepted onely 1000l. with her; which was paid by Ar∣gyle's Surety, and not repayed to this day, saith my Author. As to the other Daugh∣ters, there was a clause in the Will, That if a∣ny of them should enter into Nunneries, (for it seems they were inclinable to the Popish Re∣ligion) they should have onely
300l. And being defrauded of their due Maintenance, two of them did enter into Nunneries; and the third, through his neglect, was ready to do the like. But the Covenanter cared for none of these things. See the History of Inde∣pendency, Appendix, p. 7. Nor was Hamil∣ton, whom the King intrusted as his Commis∣sioner in that Kingdom, free from a shrewd suspicion of corresponding with the Papists his Chaplain making frequent Applications to Con the Popes Nuntio, by whom he was commended as a man fit for his purpose; as shall appear in the discovery made by Sir Will. Boswell; of which hereafter. The King, during the interval of Parlia∣ments, which was for thirteen years, resolved on a Journy to Scotland, to be there crowned He had requested that the Crown might be sent into England, to save that Journy; but the Covenanters and Papists sent word they durst not do it. Marquess Huntly, who ob∣tained a Toleration of Popery there, told the Council there, When his Majesty shall come and be crowned here, he will no doubt be sworn to our Laws: mean while, seeing he hath intru∣sted us with them, we will look they shall be ob∣served. And both Papist and Covenanter a∣greed to tell the King, that should he long de∣fer that duty, they might perhaps be inclined to make choice of another King. The King
therefore goes into Scotland, and is crowned with great solemnity. But being there, he makes a revocation of such Lands as had been taken from the Crown in his Fathers mino∣rity. And by the foresaid Commission of Sur∣rendries (upon a Petition of many of the Gentry, Ministry, and Commons) he frees the Ministers and People from the Vassalage of some great men that had ingrossed the Tythes of the Nation, allowing the Ministers onely an inconsiderable Pension, keeping the gene∣rality of the People in dependance on them, and so oppressing them, that no one durst car∣ry home his nine parts until the Lay-Impro∣priator had housed his Tenth. For this the King received great Honour and Thanks from the greatest part of the Nation; but the Lords that were concerned, caused it to be re∣ported abroad, that this was done to the pre∣judice of their Religion, and to make greater provision for the power and splendour of Bi∣shops: and from this time they confederate against the King, and provide for a Rebelli∣on: Et hinc illoe Lachrymoe. But to look back a little into England. In the last Parliament called by King James, Feb. 19. there was, as the King called it, a stinging Petition presented against the Papists; on which the King spake thus: It
hath been talked of my remisness in Religion, and a suspicion of a Toleration; but as God shall judge me, I never thought, or in word expressed any thing that savoured of it. It is true, that for reasons best known to my self, I did at times forbear the execution of the Laws, which might have hindred more weighty affairs, &c. The King therefore consented, 1. That all Jesuits and Seminary Priests, having taken Orders from the See of Rome, be forthwith commanded to depart out of his Majesties Dominions. and not to return under the penalty of the Laws now in force; and that none harbour or conceal them. 2. That all Armour and Ammunition be taken from them. 3. That all Papists be confined within five miles of their Dwelling-houses, and come not within ten miles of London, or the Kings or Princes Court. 4. That all Subjects be restrained from hearing Mass, or other Ex∣ercises of Romish Religion, in the houses of for∣reign Embassadours. 5. That none be intru∣sted as Justices of the Peace, Lord-Lieutenants, Deputies, Captains, &c. who resort not to Di∣vine-Service. 6. That the Laws made against Recusants be put in execution, and not slacken them on any Treaty of Marriage, or otherwise with any forreign Princes. To these the King answered, I cannot but commend your Zeal in offering this Petition; yet I hold my self unfortunate, that I am thought
to need a Spur to do that which my Conscience and Duty bind me to. What Religion I am of, my Books, my Profession and Behaviour declare: and I wish it may be written in Marble, and re∣main as a Mark on me to posterity, when I shall swerve from my Religion: for he that doth dissemble with God, is not to be trusted by men. The increase of Popery hath been my grief; and my endeavour hath been to prevent it: and if I have not been a Martyr, I have been a Con∣fessor, though I have been far from prosecution— I therefore grant your Petition, That all Priests and Jesuits depart at a day; and will com∣mand my Judges to put the Laws in execution against them; I will restrain the resort to Em∣bassadours houses, and provide for the educa∣tion of Popish Children: for it is a shame they should be brought up here, as if they were at Rome. And assure your selves, I shall never hearken to the intercession of foreign Princes a∣gainst the Laws. Hereupon many Noblemen and others that were in places of trust, were put out. So that King James could not be suspected of Popery. In the first year of King Charles, a Parlia∣ment being called, June 18. a Petition of the like nature is presented; to which the King answered, That he was glad of their forward∣ness in Religion, and assures them of his readi∣ness to comply
with them. The particulars be∣ing like those in the former, and the Answer agreeable, I here omit: but the King grant∣ing all, added, That he would have done th same things, had he not been desired; and wh he now did, was from his Conscience, and hi Duty to his Father, who in his last Spee commended to him the person, but not the Re∣ligion of the Queen. Accordingly the King by Proclamation recals the Children of PA∣PISTS from beyond the Seas, commands JESUITS, &c. to depart his Dominion to disarm all Recusants, and forbid the meeting of Papists; injoyns the Judges to put the La in execution against them. And many Lord and others suspected of Popery, were put o of Commission. But King Charles being left intangled many expensive affairs by his Father Kin James, for the discharge of which his Reve∣nues were insufficient; was resolved to ca to the Parliament for a Supply; which takin advantage of his necessities, would not gran him any thing considerable, unless he woul part with what was of greater value than th Crown. And the Priviledge of Parliame was made a Rival to the Kings Prerogative for several years together. The particula are too large to be here repeated: but, Si Edward Cooke told the Parliament, That th
French Embassadour told his Master what had done during this last Parliament in sowing Divisions between the King and his People; and he was well rewarded for it. And at a Con∣ference with the Lords, Sir Edward told them, That the Jesuits did vaunt at home, and sent Letters abroad, that all would be well, and doubted not to win ground upon us by our Di∣visions. Which Divisions were then visibly made by some leading men in the Parliament, such as Sir John Elliot, Mr. Pym, and others: but by whom they were acted, it doth not appear, though the mischievous effects of them brought the three Nations into Confu∣sion. What sport the Jesuits made of these tran∣sactions, appears by a Letter taken among some other Papers at Clerkenwel. Father Rector, LEt not a damp of Astonishment seize on your ardent soul, in apprehending the sud∣den and unexpected calling of a Parliament: we have not opposed, but rather further it; so that we hope as much in this Parliament, as e∣ver we feared any in Queen Elizabeth's days. You must know, the Council is engaged to assist the King by way of Prerogative, in case the Par∣liamentary way should fail. You shall see this Parliament will resemble the Pelican, which takes a pleasure to dig
out with its beak her own Bowels. The elections of Knights and Bur∣gesses have been in such confusion of apparent Faction, as that which we were wont to procure heretofore with much Art and Industry, when the Spanish Match was in treaty. Now it breaks out as naturally as a Botch or Boil, and spits and spews out its own rancour and venome. You re∣member how that famous and immortal States∣man Count Gundamor fed King James's fancy, and rock'd him asleep with the soft and sweet sound of Peace, to keep up the Spanish Treaty: he had but one principal means to further the great designe, which was, to set on King James that none but the Puritan Faction, which plot∣ted Anarchy and his Confusion, were averse to this most happy Ʋnion. We steered on the same course, and have made great use of this Anar∣chical Election, and have prejudicated and an∣ticipated the Great One, that none but the Kings Enemies and his are chosen of this Parliament, &c. We have now many Strings to our Bow, and have strongly fortified our Faction, and have added two Bulworks more. For when King James lived, you know he was very vio∣lent against Arminianism, and interrupted with his pestilent Wit and deep Learning our strong designes in Holland, and was a great friend to that old Rebel and Heretick the Prince of Orange. Now we have planted the Soveraign Drug Arminianism,
which we hope will purge the Protestants from their Heresie; and it flourisheth, and bears fruit in due sea∣son. The Materials which build up our Bul∣work, are the Projectors and Beggars of all ranks and qualities; to destroy the Parlia∣ment, and to introduce a new species and form of Government, which is Oligarchy: These serve as direct Mediums and Instruments to our end, which is the universal Catholick Mo∣narchy. Our foundation must be Mutation, and Mutation will cause a Relaxation; which will serve as so many violent Diseases (as the Stone, Gout, &c.) to the speedy destruction of our per∣petual and insufferable anguish of body, which is worse than death it self. We proceed now with counsel, and mature deliberation, how and when to work on the Dukes jealousie and revenge; and in this we give the honour to those which merit it, which are the Church-Catholicks. There is another matter of consequence which we take much into our consideration and tender care, which is, to stave off the Puritans, that they hang not on the Dukes ears: they are impudent subtile people, and it is to be feared lest they should negotiate a Reconciliation between the Duke and the Parliament. It is certain the Duke would gladly have reconciled himself to the Parliament at Oxford and Westminster; but now we assure our selves we have so handled the matter, that both Duke and Parliament are ir∣reconcilable.
For the better prevention of the Puritans, the Arminians have already lock'd up the Dukes ears; and we have those of our own Religion, which stand continually at the Dukes Chamber-door, to see who goes in and out. We cannot be too careful and circumspect in this regard. I cannot chuse but laugh, to see how some of our Coat have accoutred themselves; you would scarce know them, if you saw them; and 'tis admirable how in speech and gesture they act the Puritans. The Cambridge-Scho∣lars, to their woful experience, shall see we can act the Puritans a little better than they have done the Jesuits. They have abused our sacred Patron Ignatius in jest; but we will make them smart in earnest. I hope you will excuse my merry digression: for I confess to you, I am at this time transported with joy, to see how hap∣pily all instruments and means, as well great as less, cooperate to our purposes, &c. After the dissolution of the Parliament, Anno 1628, some refractory Members were sent for to the Council-Table; Mr. Hollis, Sir John Elliot, Sir Miles Hobart, Sir Peter Hay∣man, Sir Jo. Barrington, Mr Selden, Mr. Stroud another of the five Members, Mr. Correton, Mr. Valentine, Mr. Long, Mr. Kirton. Hol∣lis was questioned, Why on the day the Parlia∣ment was
dissolved, he placed himself next the Speakers Chair. He answered, That he had seated himself there formerly, and took it his due to be there, as in any place whatsoever, (un∣less at the Council-Table, to sit above those Privy-Counsellors): That he came into the House with as good intention to serve his Maje∣sty as any other; yet finding his Majesty offen∣ded, he humbly desired to be the Subject rather of his Majesties mercy than his power. The Lord Treasurer replied, You mean, rather of his Majesties mercy than his justice. I say (an∣swered Hollis) of his Majesties power, my Lord. Hobart's offence was for locking the Parliaments doors, and putting the Key in his pocket. Which (he said) was the command of the House. The rest were questioned for reproving the Speaker when he came to do the Kings command. To which they pleaded Priviledge of Parliament. But they were all imprisoned, and fined at the Kings-bench-bar, and gave 2000l. security for good behavi∣our. But this was the first Seed which took root in Parliament, and brought forth bitter Fruits. And these things manent altâ mente reposta. For, Before the calling of the long Parliament in 41, the factious Party, who were disappointed in the former Parliament, and had been que∣stioned for their insolencies, kept together in a secret Committee in London; foreseeing
that the necessity of his Majesties affairs would re∣quire another Parliament. For they had ani∣mated the Scots to an Insurrection, with whom they had constant correspondence; for which his Majesty charged the five Members at the beginning of that Parliament, having suffici∣ent evidence against them, if the iniquity the times had not obstructed the course o Justice. This Committee made it their busi∣ness, not onely by Letters and Correspondents but by riding into several Counties, to pro∣mote the Election of such persons as were disaffected both to the Church and Government and upon promises of reforming the Church and redressing Grievances in the State, they prevailed in most places to chuse such Mem∣bers as were of their own Perswasion. That which added both fuel and fire to that flame which in time caused a general Conflagration of the three Nations, was the zeal of some popular and factious Preachers, whose Pulpit were as so many Trumpets sounding an Alar to War: the pretences were then, as they are now, the fears of Popery, and Arbitrary Go∣vernment. By these means they obtained a prevalent Party in that Parliament, who were no sooner met, but they made it their busi∣ness to purge the Houses of disaffected and malignant Lords and Commons. Mr. Hol∣li was sent to the House of Lords to
demand the names of the dissenting Lords; whom they posted up, to expose them to the fury of the Rabble, which in great tumults they drew from the City to the Kings Palace and the Parliament-doors, to hinder the access of the Loyal Party: and when any such came, the Rabble cried, Make Rome, Rome for such or such a person: and in a short time they had driven the King from his Palace, and all the Loyal Party from both Houses. And now the Pulpits sound with Prayers for their mortal Gods and Saviours, and for the Parliament of their prayers. The Religious and Loyal Clergie were ejected; about forty Doctors of Divinity, and many hundreds of learned and grave Divines, for no other crime but their Loyalty and good Benefices; of which a Treatise called Persecutio Ʋndecima, gives a particular account: against whom the chief Articles were, for preaching Obedience to the King, against Sacriledge and Rebellion, and for keeping their Parish-Churches; for rea∣ding the Liturgie, and bowing at the Name of Jesus; for having Popish Books, or being seen in the company of Papists. Insomuch as Mr. Selden, one of their Members, said to a Per∣son of Honour, That Learning and Honesty were sins enough in a Clergie-man, to undo him. The reputation of being Popish Priests, or but Caesar's Friends, was crime
e∣nough. One Mr. White published his Cen∣turies of sequestred and ejected Ministers, lay∣ing to their charge such things as were never attempted to be proved against them. And it was observed at that time, that he was greatly troubled in Conscience for abusing and ruining so many Clergy-men, and died in a distracted condition: which hitherto I have not seen or heard to be contradicted. Certain it is, that none of them had any one point of Popery proved against them. The Lord Fairfax accused Dr. Cosens, then Vice-chancellor of Cambridge, that he had perver∣ted a young man to Popery: but upon exa∣mination, it was found that he had expelled the person that perverted him from the Uni∣versity; and some who were then Members of the Parliament, testified as much in behalf of the Doctor. Whereupon, after some weeks imprisonment, he was set free; and no man gave better proof of his aversion to Po∣pery, both in the time of his exile, and after his return, than that eminent Doctor did. So unhappy have the Fanatick Party always been, to impeach them most as being Popishly inclined, who have given the greatest demon∣stration of their opposition to it. But to re∣turn: If they wanted any numbers to petition for what
they had in designe, or any money to begin the Wars; Mr. Pym and some other of the five Members, were sent into the City; who in conjunction with some eminent Prea∣chers, such as Mr. Marshal, Calamy, &c. by their long Speeches and fair pretences, decei∣ved the hearts, and opened the purses of the deluded people. From hence came those Tu∣mults that petitioned against the Bishops and Popish Lords, and for the bringing the Earl of Strafford and the Archbishop to their Try∣als. The good Lord of Essex said, He never knew but one Bishop, (viz. Bishop Williams, who betrayed his Lord and Master) that stood for the good of the Commonwealth. As for the rest, Mr. Nathaniel Fiennes made a large Speech, to shew that Episcopacy was an Enemy to Monarchy: whereas his Father spoke and printed to the contrary, That the Bishops were too much devoted to the King. And the young Gentleman was (not long after) condemed by Martial Law. Now that the Papists had a great hand in our Troubles at home (as well as in Scotland) doth clearly appear from the Testimony of Sir Edward Cooke, and other Transactions al∣ready mentioned. But it will yet more evi∣dently appear, that the Popish Party were chief Agents in animating the English Re∣bels, with whom they held correspon∣dence to that end, by the discovery made to
Sir W. Boswel by one Andreas ab Habernfield, and communicated to the Archbishop, Sep∣tember 6. 1640. Which Relation Mr. Prynne found among the Archbishops Papers, and caused it to be printed by Order of a Com∣mittee of the House of Commons. Mr. Prynne urgeth many Arguments to evince the truth of that Plot, and says, That not onely he, but the Parliament, as well as the King and Archbishop, did believe it; and that he must be a Monster of incredulity that doth not believe it. The particulars of the discovery that are most to our purpose, are as follow: 1. That the Discoverer was bred a Papist, and an Ecclesiastick, and judged a fit person to be Coadjutor to Con the Popes Nuntio, by Cardinal Barbarino, who under the Pope was made President of the Congregation of Jesuits in England, for propagation of Religion. But the horrour of this Plot, which was to de∣stroy the King and the Archbishop, and in∣volve three Nations in Bloud, so troubled his Conscience, that he not onely discovered the Plot, but forsook the Religion that allowed of such bloudy practices. 2. That from Con he received and dispat∣ched all the intelligence concerning the Plot, which was communicated to Con from a Consult of political Jesuits which met private∣ly in the Province of Wales.
3. That there were at least fifty Scotish Jesuits at that time in and about London. That one Maxwell a Scotish Earl and Papist, was sent into Scotland by the Popish Party, with whom two other Scotish Earls were Correspondents; whose business it was to ex∣cite the Scots to a Rebellion, by aggravating the Actions of the English Court, particularly the punishment of Prynne, Burton, and Bast∣wick, and the imposing of the English Litur∣gie on them. 4. That a Chaplain of Hamiltons (the Kings Commissioner) had often secret con∣ference with Con: concerning whom, the In∣former asking merrily whether the Jews also agreed with the Samaritans, Con replied, I would to God all Ministers were like him. 5. That Cardinal Richlieu sent Mr. Tho. Chamberlain his Chaplain and Almoner, to whom a Bishoprick was promised, into Scot∣land; who tarried there four months, and was not to return till he brought good news. 6. That Sir Toby Matthews a politick Je∣suit, did diligently enquire, and transmit In∣telligence to Rome. 7. That in the house of one Capt. Read was a constant meeting of the Jesuits every Post-day, where they received Letters from Rome, and made returns in feigned names.
8. That Mr. Porter and Windebank, the Lord Arundel and his Countess, the Coun∣tess of Buckingham, and others, were privy to the Plot, and betrayed the Kings Counsels. Upon the whole, Mr. Prynne makes these remarks: That the Conspirators have almost brought their designe to maturity. to our shame and grief, by new-raised Civil Wars, both in England and Ireland, (but he adds not a word of Scotland): That Secretary Winde∣bank, and Captain Read, with some others, went secretly into Ireland to raise a Rebellion there; who assured them that there would be such Broils in England, that no Force could be sent thence. But not a word yet of what was done in Scotland, where they were in a∣ctual Arms against the King, and ceased not till they had effected the death of the Arch∣bishop and the King, as this discovery had fore∣told. I shall adde an Observation of Hammond L'Estrange. The Presbyterian Party (saith he) were not the onely men in the Conspiracy  for in case of general disturbances, nothing i more familiar than for several Factions of con∣trary inclinations and interests to unite, aiming at their own several ends. And a foul blemish it would have been to the Society of Jesus, should they have sate still in a work so pro∣per to
their Employment, as these Scotish Broils: Though they did not reach at the external glory of the Enterprize, which they rendred to the Presbyterians; yet were they as diligent in their Machinations as possibly they could be, hoping to be greatest gainers at last. But the Jesuits had done their busi∣ness, having set their Journey-men at work both in England and Scotland; and they were ready as Auxiliaries to assist them: to which end they mix themselves with the Councils and Armies both of England and Scotland, obstructing all Overtures and Trea∣ties of Peace. It was not for any love to the King or his Cause, that some few of them en∣gaged with his Party, but to help on the pub∣lick Calamity of the two Nations, and to keep on the Wars, that they might raise themselves on the ruines of both Parties. For, that there were more Papists engaged with the Parlia∣ment-Armies than the King's, appears by his Majesties Declaration after the Fight at Edg∣hill, Oct. 1643. All men know the great num∣ber of Papists Commanders and others that serve in their Armies, the great industry they used to corrupt the Loyalty and affection of Our loving Subjests of that Religion, the private promises and undertakings that they made if they would assist them against Ʋs; all the Laws made in their prejudice should be repealed; when nothing could prevail with Ʋs to invite
them to Our Succour, or recal Our Proclamation which forbad them so to do. We know that a far greater number of Papists are in their Army than Our own. And one Robert de Sal∣monet a Popish Priest and Scotish man, who wrote a History of our Wars in French, saith of this Fight, That which most surprised every one, was, that they found among the dead at Edge-hill several Popish Priests: For although in their Declarations they called the Kings Army a Popish Army, to render it odious; yet they had in their Army two Companies of Walloons, and other Roman Catholicks. And they omitted no endeavours to ingage Sir Arthur Ashton, an eminent Roman Catho∣lick, to their party. In Mr. Prynnes Relation of the Tryal of the Archbishop, one Mr. Chaloner was produced, who deposed, that he being at Bruxels, and discoursing with an English Traveller, heard him to affirm, that Popery would be brought into England, and the Introducers should be the Protestants themselves: whereat when he wondred, the Gentleman told him, that the War should be so disguised under false notions and pretences, as that the Protestants should ignorantly become the Jesuits servants, and by the effusion of their own blood set up Popery, p. 415. And because Mr. Prynne mentioned some per∣sons sent into
Ireland, to stir up the Rebellion there, I shall mention also that which the King says of it in his Chapter of that Rebel∣lion: I believe (saith he) it will at last appear, that they who first began to embroil my other Kingdoms, are in great part guilty if not of the first letting out, yet of the not timely stopping those horrid effusions of blood in Ireland. And it was observed, that when the Design against the Earl of Strafford, as also against the King, was managing, there was a great cor∣respondence between the Leaders of both par∣ties in Ireland; of which the Author of the History of Independencie gives so large an ac∣count, that I shall only select some passages, and refer the Reader to see the whole Trans∣action at his leasure, in the History of Indepen∣dency, p. 150, 198, p. 230. &c. 245. But I shall first insert that which the Royal Martyr hath said in his own vindication con∣cerning the Irish Rebellion. That Sea of Blood, which hath there been cruelly and barbarously shed, is enough to drown any man in eternal both infamy and misery whom God shall find the malicious Author or instigator of its effusion. Some men take it very ill not to be believed, when they affirmed that what the I∣rish Rebels did, was done with my privity, at least, if not by my Commission. But these knew too well, that it is no news for some of my Sub∣jects to fight not only without my Commission;
but against my Command and Person too; ye all the while to pretend they fight by my autho∣rity, and for my safety. I would to God th Irish had nothing to alleadge for their imitati∣on against those whose blame must needs be th greater, by how much Protestant principles ar more against all Rebellion than those of Papists Nor will the goodness of mens intentions excus the scaudal and contagion of their example It is thought by many wise men, that the pre∣posterous rigour and unreasonable severity, which some men carried before them in England, w not the least incentive that kindled and blew into those horrid flames, which wanted not pre∣disposed fuel for Rebellion in Ireland, whe despair being added to their former discontent and their fears of utter extirpation to the wonted oppressions, it was easie to provoke to  open Rebellion, a people prone enough to brea out to all exorbitant violence, both by some principles of their Religion, and the natur desires of liberty. I would to God no man h been less affected with Irelands sad estate th my self. I offered to go in person on that expe∣dition: but some men were afraid I should ha any one Kingdom quieted; or loath they were to shoot at any mark here less than my self, that any should have the glory of my destruct on but themselves. Had my many offers been accepted, I am confident neither the
ruine had been so great, nor the calamity so long, nor the remedy so desperate. So that next to the sin of those that began that Rebellion, theirs must needs be, who either hindred the speedy sup∣pression of it by domestick Dissentions, or di∣verted the Aids,Sir William Par∣sons said at a pub∣lick meeting, That within 12 months, no Catholick should be seen in Ireland. or exaspera∣ted the Rebels to the most de∣sperate resolutions and actions, by threatning extremities not only to the known Heads and chief Incendiaries, but to the whole Community of that Nation. When at the earnest intreaty of the chief of the Prote∣stant party there, I effected a Cessation in the best sort that the necessary difficulty of affairs would permit, I was then to suffer again in my reputation and honour, because I suffered not the Rebels utterly to devour the remaining handfuls of the Protestants there. I believe it will at last appear, that they who first began to embroil my other Kingdoms, are in great part guilty, if not of the first letting out, yet of the not time∣ly stopping those horrid effusions of blood in Ireland. Thus far the Royal Martyr. And whether the examples of England and Scotland imbroyling those two King∣doms, and proceeding successfully in the Wars against the King, did not animate the I∣rish to those horrid proceedings, as in the I∣rish Letter mentioned in the
Introduction, is sub Judice. The following transactions, un∣der the Parliament and Cromwel, are a more clear evidence of an actual conjunction with the Irish Rebels against the King. Sir John Temple was of the Privy Coun∣cil in Ireland, at the Insurrection and after; a person that thought himself disobliged by the King, a Parliament-man here in England, and one that too much adhered to the Facti∣on. He is confident that the chief aim of the Irish was to shake off the English yoke, and settle the power in the Natives. One Cooke deposed, that Tirlogh Brady said, That the Irish would within a fortnight have a King of their own, p. 83. & 66. p. 50, 51. The same was deposed by others. As was also, That they took the Scots for a president: they would have the Kingdom in their own hands, Laws of their own, a Deputy of their own, without molestation from another Nation, p. 19. That they cared not for King Charles, having a King of their own. In the Remonstrance, p. 54. they called Tyrone their King; and his Commission, the Kings Commission. They af∣firmed the Scots to be of their side, p. 37. That they had the Earl of Argyles hand, and most of the Nobility of Scotland. Macguire, a chief contriver of the Rebel∣lion, falling into the Parliaments power, was much importun'd by promises
and threats to discover whether the King were privy to the Rebellion: but he did still acquit the King and all other English from being guilty as much as of knowing it. And it is very re∣markable, that he did this not only while he was under a sentence of Condemnation; but when he had been turned off the Cart, and recovered again after a most barbarous man∣ner, yet still he acquitted the King to his death, and denied that ever he saw any Com∣mission from him. And whereas the King was accused of granting them a Toleration: it is true, that he was necessitated to offer that, which they had forced from him before; but it was with such restrictions, that they liked it not, but took it on their own terms. And indeed the King told them by one of his Secretaries; You insist on something in Religion more than for∣merly you were contented with: I am therefore commanded to let you know, that were His Ma∣jesties condition much lower, you shall never force him to any further Concessions, to the pre∣judice of his Conscience, and of the Protestant Religion, in which he is resolved to live, and for which he is ready to dye: and that he will joyn with any Protestant Prince; nay, with his Rebels at home, rather than yield the least to you in this particular. And this was the joynt opinion of the Papists in England and
Ire∣land, that the King would give them all up as a Sacrifice, to compass a Peace with his Parliament, though they had been Loyal to him in his extremity. The Marquess of Ormond, and those that acted for the King under his Lieutenancy in Ireland, was so prosperous in his endeavours to reduce that Kingdom to the obedience of the Crown, that a Peace was made with the most considerable of the Confederate Irish. But they being otherwise tampered with by the Parliament-party, contrary to their Faith and promise, the Popes Nuntio, and some I∣rish Clergy prevailed with the Ʋlster-Irish un∣der Owen Roe Oneale, to refuse to come under the Kings Authority. Of which the Author of the History of Independency, p. 150. of the Second part, tells us in the Margent, that the Council of Offi∣cers endeavour to joyn interests with the Pa∣pists in England and Ireland: And then says, The King had offended the Papists in the last Treaty, in granting so much to the Parliament for their suppression. The Independents per∣ceiving it, and willing to joyn with any interest to make good their design, it was proposed at the Council of Officers, that the Papists should raise and pay Ten thousand additional Forces for the Army; in recompence whereof, all
pe∣nal Laws concerning them should be repealed, all Taxes and Contributions taken off, and they to have the protection of the Parliament and Ar∣my. Ʋnder the same notion they endeavoured to joyn interests with Owen Roe Oneale, who commanded that bloody party of Massacring I∣rish, with which they had formerly taxed the King. They supplyed him with Ammunition, and admitted O Rely the Popes Irish Nuntio to a Treaty here in England. Sir John Win∣ter was taken into imployment, and the arrears of his Rent gathered for him by Souldiers, to the regret of the Country; Sir Kenelme Dig∣by had a Pass to come into England, and came, as he was foretold by a Letter, by an Indepen∣dent Agent for the Army from Paris, to an In∣dependent Member of the House of Commons, a creature of the Army, dated 28 November, 1648 and printed at the later end of The true and full relation of the Officers and Armies forcible seizing of divers eminent Members. Walter Mountague was let forth on bail. What becomes of this Negotiation, & whe∣ther those that played fast and loose with all interests in the Kingdom, have not done the like with the Papists, this Author shews in the following relation: for p. 198. he says, the under-hand combination between the Indepen∣dent party and Owen Roe Oncale, is now o∣penly declared and avowed by their own licensed News books: Owen Roe, and
Colonel M. are joyned, says the modest Narrative. Our par∣ty have permitted Three hundred of Oneal own Regiment to quarter in our parts among the Creats, within two miles of Dundalk, saith the Scout. Owen Roe and Berne are come toward Colonel Jones and Colonel M.'s quarters he is so fair as to pay Contribution: his quar∣ters are to the Scots side of Dublin, to prevent their giving aid to Ormond in his attempt up on Dublin. Who can blame necessity? Nor d our Grandees now deny this Confederacy with the bloody Popish Massacring Rebels, although they had the impudence to make the only supposition thereof, one of the principal charges against the late King, and to raise a great outcry against the Marquess of Ormond, and Lord Inchi∣quine, for their cessation with Preston; which was to prevent the Cromwellists, who offered to associate with him on conditions much more prejudicial to the Protestant Religion and Eng∣lish interest, than the Marquess gave them: they offered Oneale all the Lands in Ulster for∣feited by his Grandfather Tyrone, Shan Oneale, and others attainted, thereby destroying the British Planters there, &c. P. 2. He re∣fers to a paper called The Association between Oneale, &c. And another called The true state of the Transactions with Owen Roe O∣neale, as it was reported to the Parliament by the Council of State; printed by Edw. Hus∣bands,
15 Aug. 1649. This was so abhorred by the English Souldiery, that many there took occasion to forsake the English Parlia∣ment, and many here disbanded rather than they would accompany Cromwel in so wick∣ed an Expedition; and I doubt not but the imposing on some of the Independent Offi∣cers such a vile drudgery, did so much dissa∣tisfie them, as to make them, after they had extricated themselves from their toyls, to bethink themselves how they might serve a better Master. I shall therefore beg par∣don for transcribing the progress of this af∣fair, referring the Reader to the former Quo∣tations. Cromwel writes Letters to his Creatures of the Council of State, complaining how much the miscarriage of that agreement had re∣tarded his voyage; desiring them, for satis∣faction of the Souldiery and people, to treat with some body to take the whole business on himself, and to clear the Council of State, the Parliament, and Cromwel himself, from ha∣ving any hand in it. And to carry on the Scene, this Agreement was with much heat of zeal complained of in the House of Com∣mons by a Brother, who had his Cue before∣hand, and by the Juncto was referred to the Council of State, as was forelaid; where after some private
conference with him whom they had intrusted to accommodate the bu∣siness, they publickly voted their dislike of it; Bradshaw reprehending him for it; and at last they ordered that the whole business, with the reasons for his justification, should be reported by Tho Scot to the House of Com∣mons: which was done on Friday Aug. 10. whereupon their Commissioner was called to the Bar, where the Speaker asked him What persons he meant in his Letter to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, wherein he saith, he made the agreement with Oneale with the ad∣vice of some others. He answered, That he did it on his own score, (for so he was in∣structed and cautioned before; and his life had been in danger, if he had done otherwise without advice of any; only having discourse with Colonel Jones, he told him if he could keep Owen Roe and Ormond from joyning, i would be a good Service. This Answer was taken for satisfactory. The next demand was, Whether he had any advice or directions from the Parliament, Council of State, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, or any other person do the same; which he expresly denyed, say∣ing, He did it on his own score. Whereupon the House Voted, Resolved, &c. That the House doth utterly disapprove of the proceed∣ings of Colonel M. in the Treaty and Cessation (as they called it) made between him and O∣wen
Roe Oneale; and that this House doth detest thoughts of any closing with any Party of Popish Rebels there, who have had their hands in shedding English Bloud. Nevertheless, the House being satisfied that what the said Colonel did therein was in his apprehension necessary for the preservation of the Parliaments interest, the House is content that the farther considera∣tion thereof, as to him, be laid aside, and shall not at any time hereafter be called in questi∣on. Upon these proceedings the Author notes, 1. The Armies Doctrine and Ʋse of appre∣hended necessity and good intentions, to justifie evil actions, approved of by this Parliament. 2. This Agreement, though it were twelve weeks before publickly known in England, and divulged in licensed News-books, was ne∣ver scrupled, until that first the said Agree∣ment was expired. And, 3. That Oneale was so beaten by the Lord Inchiquine, that (as their News-books said) he was inconsi∣derable, and must suddenly joyn with Or∣mond, or be destroyed. 4. That these Votes call this Agreement but a Treaty and Cessa∣tion, which was a League offensive and de∣fensive against Ormond, Inchiquine, and all that upheld Monarchy. For which the Author gives these Rea∣sons: Because the
second Article says, That on all occasions both Parties be ready to assist one another, till a more absolute Agreement be made by the Parliament of England. And the third Article saith, That the Creats of Ul∣ster residing in the Quarters of the Parliaments Army, shall pay Contribution to General Owen Oneale, (which is a granting of Taxes a∣gainst Law) and it seems Oneale became a Mercenary, being taken into pay. Article the fourth saith, That if Oneale shall happen to fight against the Forces under Ormond, In∣chiquine, or other Enemies of the Parliament, and thereby spend his Ammunition; if he be near to their Quarters, and want Ammunition, they shall then furnish him. This was actu∣ally performed, when Inchiquine besieged Dundalk. The fifth Article allowed Oneale the use of any Harbours within their liber∣ty. By which Premises we may rationally conclude, that the Factions are not so averse from the most bloudy Papists, but if occasion require, they are ready to joyn interest with them, to maintain their Good Old Cause a∣gainst the Crown and Church of England; which will farther appear, by the Correspon∣dency and Agents which the successive Parties that were uppermost maintained in foreign parts, to betray the present Kings Counsels while
he was in banishment; for which Man∣ning a Papist was executed: for whom ma∣ny Dirgies were sung in several Churches. And when his Majesty was invited into Scotland, the Marquess of Huntly, and other Lords and Heads of the Popish Faction, made a great Party to oppose his Reception, unless he would grant a Toleration of their Religi∣on. But the Presbyterian Party having then the greatest power, admitted him on such terms as they thought fit; and served him no longer than they could serve their own de∣signes. For the clearer manifestation of the ASSO∣CIATION between Oneale and the Par∣liament, there are lately come to the Council of State (saith the Author of the Hist. of In∣depend. p. 245.) two Letters out of Conaught from Sir Charles Coote, dated the 14th and 15th of August (49) informing them with how much zeal to the Parliaments interest O∣wen Oneale had freely raised the Siege of Lon∣don-derry. On which Letters, and the Votes and Proceedings of Pride's Parliament, I com∣mend to the Readers observation these particu∣lars: First, the 15th of August the Letters inform them that Oneale freely offered his as∣sistance to Coote, professing much affection to the Parliament of England, and an earnest de∣sire to maintain their interest. He had for∣merly stiled the Parliament,
Monstrosum Par∣liamentum; but now the case is altered,  calls them the Honourable Parliament, as dri∣ving his interest against Monarchy and Pro∣testancy. In the Letter of the 14th, he in∣forms the Parliament that he hath found O∣neale and his Army very punctual and faithful in all their promises and ingagements, and make no doubt but they will continue so to the end The 16th of August, he says that Oneale i his Express to Coote inclosed some Letters re∣ceived from Col. M. and among the rest  Copy of a Letter in answer to a Letter of the Lord Inchiquine, charging the Colonel for joyn∣ing with Oneale and his party; wherein the Co∣lonel insinuated as if Oneale's submission to use the Parliaments power, were already accepted by them. In that of the 15th, Coote hath this expression in his Letter:—Calling to mind that it is no new thing for the most wise God to make use of wicked Instruments to bring about a good designe. Aug. 15. the Letter says that Coote called a Council of War, and resolved it was better to accept of the Assistance of those who proclaimed themselves Friends to us, and our interest we fight for. The same Letter says, that we added to the Article this proviso, Not use their Assistance longer than the approbation of the State of England should go along with us therein. In that of the 14th, Coote says Oneale was pleased to
communicate to him certain proposals, which were long since transmitted to the Parliament; and though for his part, and the prime Officers with him, they do not doubt but the proposals are already yielded to by the State; yet in regard their Army and party in all other parts of the Kingdom cannot be satisfied therewith till the Parliament declare more publickly therein, he hath therefore desired me humbly to intreat your Lordships to declare your Resolutions there∣in with as much speed as may be. And in a Vote of Parliament, it's said, The House is well satisfied of the diligence, faithfulness, and integrity of Sir Charles Coote, in preserving the Garison of London-derry. Which (says my Author) was preserved by the conjunction of Oneale, who raised the Siege. But to return to England, where, though the Jesuits and Priests did not appear so vi∣sibly as in the Wars of Ireland, yet that they had great influence on the Councils and Ar∣mies of the Fanaticks, from the beginning to the end of the War, is industriously proved by Mr. Prynne in several books, especially in his Introduction to the Archbishop's Tryal, and in Romes Master-piece; Works of Darkness brought to light; The Royal Favourite, &c. The first War begun with the clamour of Popery: That it was admitted not onely at the Court, but into the
Church; particularly that the King was a great favourer of Papists; and the House of Commons instance in one Goodman a Romish Priest, who was condem∣ned at the Sessions in the Old-baily. Where∣upon the House remonstrates, That it was more necessary to put the Laws in execution at that time, than in any before: That at that time divers Petitions from several parts of the Kingdom, complained of the great increase of Popery and Superstition; and the people call earnestly to have the Laws put in execution. (When these Petitions were promoted by their own Members; and that Decency which was used in the Church, the Superstition and Popery which they remonstrated against: but not one word of putting the Laws in execution against the Separatists.) 2. That Priests and Jesuits swarmed in great numbers: That of late years about the City of London, Priests and Jesuits have been discharged out of prison: That the Pope had then a Nuntio in the City: The great resort to Mass at Demark-house: That on the reprieve of Goodman, the City of London refused the advance of Money for sup∣ply of his Majesties Army, for that reason. Therefore they desire that Goodman may be left to Justice. To this the King answered: Concerning Goodman, that he being found guilty onely as being a Priest, on which account neither
King James nor Queen Elizabeth put any to death, be did reprieve him; desiring them to consider the inconvenience that may fall on his Subjects and other Protestants abroad, by executing of such severity. That he will put the Laws in execution against Popery and Superstition, the increase whereof was much against his mind: That he would speedily issue out a Proclamation for all Priests and Jesuits to depart the King∣dom within one month, or to be proceeded a∣gainst according to Law. As for Rosetti the Popes Nuntio, that he had no commission, but was onely to correspond between the Queen and the Pope; which was warranted by Articles of Marriage: yet he had perswaded her to dis∣miss him within a time, to take away the offence. That he would restrain the resort of Papists to Denmark-house, and the Chappels of Embas∣sadours. But instead of being satisfied with these Answers, four Members of Parliament ac∣quaint the Lords of a monstrous designe of the Papists; an Army of fifteen thousand in Lancashire, eight thousand Irish Papists under the Earl of Strafford, and many thousands in divers other places, well armed, and payed by the Earl of Worcester. Of which, Sander∣son in the Life of King Charles, says, p. 360. After-Ages will think these Hyperboles; there being no such Armies possible by
them, nor no such fears in others. Yet this Message was carried from the Lower to the Ʋpper House and gave occasion to a multitude of people to frame Petitions sutable to Plots, Fears, and Jealousies, for the Parliaments purpose. And Alderman Pennington, with some hundred of the Rabble, presents a Petition in the name of fifteen thousand Citizens, against Bishops and their Jurisdiction. How little they cared for Religion, though their actions sufficiently declared, yet their expressions were not wanting. A Great Crea∣ture of theirs said modestly, That they ha power enough to take the Crown from the King if the Gospel did not hinder them: but the did it with a Non Obstante. Mr. Hambde being asked by a Minister in the beginning of the War, Why Religion was made a cause it: answered, Because the people would not st else. But H. Martyn told them in the House They need not lye for a good Cause; it was n Religion, but Liberty they fought for. And so little did some of them value their Religi∣on, that as Col. Morley and others with hi said, They would cast themselves upon any Na∣tion, even the Turk, rather than let the King subdue them. Mr. B.'s Key for Catholicks mentioneth se∣veral of the Popish designes; which (saith he are grounded
on this Maxime, That their foundation must be Mutation, which will cause a Relaxation, and serve as so many violent Di∣seases, as Stone or Gout, to a speedy Destruction, p. 318. Upon which he adds this Consulta∣tion of the Jesuits: We shall necessitate the Pu∣ritan Protestants to keep the King as Prisoner, or else to put him to death. If they keep him as a Prisoner, his diligence and friends, and their own divisions, will either work his deliverance, and give him the day again by our help, or at least will keep the State in a perpetual unset∣ledness, and will bring an odium on them: or if they cut him off, which we will rather pro∣mote, lest they should make use of his extremi∣ties to any advantage; then first we shall pro∣cure the odium of King killing to fall on them, which they are wont to cast upon us, and so shall be able to disburthen our selves. Secondly, And we shall have them all to pieces in Distra∣ctions: for they will either set up a new King, or the Parliament will keep the power, chang∣ing the Government into a Democracy. The first cannot be done without great Concussi∣ons, and new Wars; and we shall have an opportunity to have a hand in all: and if it be done, it may be much to our advantage. The second will apparently, by Factions and Distra∣ctions, give us footing for continual attempts. But to make all sure, we will have our footing a∣mong the Puritans too, that we may
be sure to maintain our interest, which way soever the world goes. This was the Frame of the Papists Plot. In the next page, he tells us of the Letters of the Agents of the Agitators in France, published in the weekly News-books, commen∣ding the Jesuits for good men, and how a∣greeable they were to them in their Princi∣ples for a Democracy; and what meet Mate∣rials for such a Commonwealth the Jesuits would be. The Agencies of particular men with Jesuits (he says) I purposely omit, p. 321. Mr. Baxter doubtless knew more than mentions; he had an Idea of all their Plots and Principles in's own brain. And, p. 329 saith, It is opened by many in print, how far th Jesuits crept into all Societies under the name of Independents. He tells us a story of on that came from Scotland, pretending himself a Jew, who gave the Anabaptists the glory o his Conversion, and was rebaptized at He∣ham; but was discovered at Newcastle to be Jesuit. The whole story is in print. And p. 321. he acquaints us that Sexby and other of the Army, did confederate with Spain t murther Cromwel, when they found that h attempted to make himself a King. And hereupon it was that Cromwel took distaste a the Papists, and prevailed to make an Ac
with this Preamble, Anno 1656. Forasmu as there is a great increase of Popish Recusants within this Commonwealth, by reason whereof great danger may follow to the Commonwealth, they being persons very active in mischievous Plots and Conspiracies, &c. This doubtless was well known by Cromwel, who had made great use of them to effect his mischievous designes. Peter du Moulin in his Answer to Phila∣nax Anglicus, p. 59. observes, that a year be∣fore the Kings death, a select number of En∣glish Jesuits were sent from their Party in England, first to Paris, to consult with the Faculty of Sorbone, who were then wholly Jesuited, about this Question: Whether see∣ing the State of England was in a likely posture to change Government, it was lawful for the Ca∣tholicks to work that change, for the advancing and securing the Catholick Cause in England, by making away the King, whom there was no hope to turn from his Heresie. This was an∣swered affirmatively; after which, the same persons went to Rome, where the same Que∣stion being propounded and debated, it was concluded by the Pope, That it was both law∣ful and expedient for the Catholicks to promote that alteration of State, &c. When that hor∣rid Parricide had taken effect, the Pope com∣manded all the Papers about that Question to be
gathered, and burnt: In obedience to which Order, a Roman Catholick in Paris was demanded a Copy which he had of these Papers: but the Gentleman, who had time to consider and detest the wickedness of that Project, refused to give it, and shewed it to a Protestant friend of his, relating to him the whole carriage of this Negotiation, with great abhorrency of the Practices of the Jesuits. And when these Jesuits returned from Rome, they brought many more after them, to help on the same Work; which at last they ef∣fected, to their great joy. The Roman Priest and Confessor is known, who when he saw the fatal stroak given to our holy King and Martyr, flourished with his Sword, and said, Now the greatest Enemy that we had in the world is gone. A Protestant Lady living in Paris, was perswaded by a Jesuit to turn Catholick: when the dismal news of the King's Murther came to Paris, this Lady, as all other good Subjects, was deeply afflicted with it; and when this Jesu∣ite came to see her, and found her melted in Tears for that Disaster, he told her with a smiling countenance, That she had no reason to lament, but rejoyce rather, seeing the Catho∣licks were rid of their greatest Enemy, and that Cause was much furthered by his death. Upon which the Lady in great anger put him down the stairs, saying, If that be your Religion,
I have done with you for ever: and God hath given her grace to make her words good hi∣therto. Many intelligent Travellers can tell of the great joy among the English Convents and Seminaries about the Kings death, as ha∣ving overcome their Enemy, and done their main work for their settlement in England: of which they made themselves so sure, that the Benedictines were in great care, that the Jesuits should not get their Land: and the English Nuns were contending who should be Abbasses in England. An understanding Gentleman visiting the Fryars in Dunkirk, put them on the discourse of the King's death; and to pump out their sence about it, said, That the Jesuits had laboured very much to compass that work. To which they answered, That the Jesuits would ingross to themselves the glory of all great and good works, and of this a∣mong others; whereas they had laboured as di∣ligently and effectually for it as they. So that both the Jesuits and Seculars had laboured to bring the King to death: and the Army of Fanaticks were their Instruments to put it in execution. Monsieur de Bourdeaux the French Em∣bassadour, being resident in London when General Monk had gotten the power of the City, and the affections of the People, earnest∣ly desired to interest the King of France and
Cardinal Mazarine in the Revolution of Go∣vernment; and made way for an Address to the General, by his Brother-in-law Clergis; to whom he imparted, that Cardinal Mazarine would be glad to have the honour of his friendship, and assist him faithfully in all his Enterprizes: and that the General might be more confident of the Cardinal, he assured him that Oliver Cromwel kept so strict a League with him, that he did not assume the Government without his privity, and was directed step by step by him in the progress of that action: and therefore if he resolved on that course, he should not onely have the Cardinals friendship and counsel in the attempt, but a safe Retreat and honourable Support in France, if he sailed in it. But Mr. Clergis as∣sured him, that the General did not intend to take the Government upon him, but to sub∣mit all to the determination of the next Par∣liament. The King being in the Territories of the King of Spain, when the General was minded to declare for him, Sir Jo. Greenvil was dis∣patched by the General to his Majesty, to de∣sire him to depart out of the King of Spain's Dominions, to Breda, or some other place under the Government of the States of the Ʋnited Provinces; for that he had certain in∣telligence he
would be detained by the King of Spain's Ministers, if he stayed in his Do∣minions. Upon which Advice, within two or three days he went to Breda, where he continued till he was invited to his King∣doms. There was found in the Study of Francis Young, after his death, a Paper containing Ad∣vices given to him by Seignior Bellarini con∣cerning the best way of managing the Popish interest in England upon the Kings Restaura∣tion. The first Advice is, to make the ob∣struction of Settlement their great designe, e∣specially upon the fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom; whereunto if things should fall, they would be more firm than ever. Se∣condly, To remove the Jealousies raised by Prynne, Baxter, &c. of their designe upon the late Factions, and to set up the prosperous way of fears and jealousies of the King and Bishops. Thirdly, To make it appear under-hand, how neer the Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline of the Church of England comes to us; at how little distance their Common-prayer is from our Mass; and that the wisest and ablest men of that Way, are so moderate, that they would willingly come over to us, or at least meet us half way: hereby the most stayed men will become more odious, and others will run out of all Religion, for fear of Popery. Fourthly, That
there be an Indulgence promoted by the Factious, and seconded by You. Fifthly, That the Trade and Treasure of the Nation may be engrossed between themselves and o∣ther discontented Parties. Sixthly, That the Bishops and Ministers of the Church of Eng∣land be aspersed, as either worldly and careless on one hand; or so factious; that it were well they were removed. All these Directions will appear to have been followed precisely by both Parties. The Grandees of the Committee at Derby-house, and the Army, sollicite the detaining of the Prince in France, and delaying his Journy for England, lest he should trouble the yet-unsetled Kingdom of the Saints. To negoti∣ate which, they have an Agent lying Lieger with Cardinal Mazarine, who is so well sup∣plied with Money, and so open-handed, that it hath been heard from Mazarine's own mouth, that all the Money the Queen and Prince had cost the Crown of France, came out of the Par∣liaments Purse, with a good advantage. It is likewise said, Mazarine had an Agent here, to drive on the interest of France in England, Hist. of Independ. 2 part, p. 112. And it is known that Cromwel's interest with France, when the present King fled thither, after Wor∣cester-fight, was so great, that he prevailed to have the King driven thence, to seek his safe∣ty in other Countries.
And it is credibly reported, that Cromwel maintained or encouraged a company of Benedictine Monks to betray the Kings Coun∣sels: That Manning, who was executed be∣yong the Seas for disclosing the Kings Coun∣sels, was a Papist, and had Masses sung for him after his death: That Lambert, who had been suspected as a Papist thirty years, with the help of a Popish Priest, contrived Crom∣wels new Government. And the Jesuits per∣ceiving, that if the Scotish and English Pres∣byterians should cleerly and entirely grasp the power of the Nation, it would be a diffi∣cult task to take it out of their hands; they abetted the Independent party, and other growing Sects; they mixed themselves with their Counsels and Armies; as Mr. Prynne affirmed. And a good Author says, that a Protestant Gentleman met with about thirty of them at one time, between Roan and Diep; who enquiring their design, and they taking him for one of their party, was in∣formed by them, that they were going into England, and would take Arms in the Inde∣pendant Army, and endeavour to be Agita∣tors: and what work those creatures made, is too well known! Nor is it less notorious, who they were that pleaded so strenuously for Liberty of Con∣science. Such Tracts as directly
urged the Toleration of Popery, as well as of other Sects, were penned and dispersed by the Jesuits: and the Indulgence granted to them by Cromwel, who was never known to punish any of them for their Recusancy, as long as they served his interest, argues his connivance, if not his approbation of them. By these was that Treatise of Father Parsons concern∣ing the Succession, under the Title of Doleman, Reprinted, and dispersed, to keep us in confu∣sion. Then it was that White wrote his Je∣suitical books, and Milton seconded him. And the Pamphlets written to justifie the Proceed∣ings of the Army, were dictated or written by the Jesuits. In the year 1652. William Birchly publi∣shed a Treatise, called The Moderator: or, Persecution for Religion condemned. In a Postscript to which, he says, that he subscribed his name according to an Order of Parliament; yet is not ashamed to say, that he had his Ar∣guments from some of the Romish Priests; for a Toleration of whom he pleads as passio∣nately, as if a whole Consult of them had penned the Pamphlet. And a good Author saith, he hath been credibly informed, that a Jesuit of St. Omers declared, that they were Twenty years in hammering out the Sect of the Quakers. And whoever considers
the Tenets of that Sect, will easily see whose off-spring they are. They refuse all Oaths; which serves the Jesuits to evade the Tests of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy: they despite the Scriptures, as the Jesuits do: they contemn our Sacra∣ments, especially the Eucharist, as the Papists do; vilifie the Ministers; and in matters of Doctrine have a great analogie with the Papists. Dr. Oates his Narrative and Depositions, Para∣graph 34. speaks of the Jesuits and one Green, with eight other Fifth Monarchy-men, who clubbed together for firing the City of Lon∣don. I have told you what White the Jesuit did, and that wretched Milton, Cromwel's Secreta∣ry, who had been at Rome, and in his wri∣tings speaks of great kindness received there; and holding correspondence with some Ita∣lians, could have no other design in printing those books of Divorce, against Tythes and Clergy-men, and to justifie the Regicides, but to bring us to Atheism first, and then to Confusion. He was by very many suspected to be a Papist; and if Dr. Oates may be be∣lieved, was a known frequenter of the Po∣pish Club, though he were Cromwel's Latine Secretary. The same Dr. tells us, that a Party of the Jesuits at Putney, were the Pro∣jectors of our troubles, and the Kings ruine: That they broke up the
Treaty at Ʋxbridge: That a Popish Lord brought a Petition to the Regicides, signed by above 500 Papists, pro∣mising, That on condition of a Toleration, they would exclude the Family of the Stuarts from the Crown. Having said so much to prove the agree∣ment of Papists and Fanaticks for the de∣struction of the Government of Church and State, I shall add a few lines, to vindicate the Chief Governours from those accusations of Popery which were charged on them. In the year 1658. ten years after the death of the Royal Martyr, Mr. Baxter prints his Grotian Religion, and through Groti∣us's sides strikes at the heads and members of the Church of Eng∣land with the same blow.One reason of condemning Grotius as a Papist, may be, the Character which he gives of such men in his Book de Antichristo: Circumferamus oculos per omnem Historiam, quod un∣quam seculum vidit tot subditorum in Principes bella sub religionis titu∣lo? & horum concitatores ubique re∣periuntur Ministri Evangelici, ut qui∣dam se vocant: Quod genus homi∣num, in quae pericula etiam nunc opti∣mos Civitatis Amstelodamensis Magi∣siratus conjicerit, videat si cui libet, de Presbyterorum in Reges audacia, li∣brum Jacobi Britanniarum Regis cui nomen Donum Regium: videbit eum ut erat magni judicii ea praedixisse, quae nunc cum dolore & horrore conspici∣mus. For the Grotian de∣sign, i. e. Popery, (saith he) was carrying on in the Church of Eng∣land: and this was the cause of all our Wars and changes, p. 105. where he thus talks of the Royal
Martyr, beyond any thing that his barbarous Judges could accuse him of. How far the King was inclined to a reconci∣liation with the Church of Rome (saith Mr. Baxter) I onely desire you to judge, First, by the Articles of the Spanish and French Match sworn to. Secondly, by his Letter to the Pope written in Spain. Thirdly, by his choice of A∣gents in Church and State. Fourthly, by the residence of the Popes Nuntio here, and the Col∣ledge of the Jesuits, &c. Fifthly, by the ille∣gal Innovations in Worship so resolvedly gra∣datim introduced. All which I speak, not with the least desire to perswade men that he was a Papist, but onely to shew, that while he as a moderate Protestant, (i. e. a Papist in Masque∣rade, as they are now termed) took hands with the Queen a moderate Papist, the Grotian Design had great advantage in England, which he himself boasted of, p. 106. Of this indignity to that Religious Prince, the learned Bishop Bramhal, p. 617. of his Works, took notice, and vindicated him. Of which Mr. B. being informed, he says. p. 100. of his Defence, that he printed the contrary in times of Ʋsurpation, and that the Informer could not prove it, and that Bishop Bramhal was a Calumniator. The Book he refers to, was, (I suppose) dedicated to Richard Crom∣well, whom he did not call
an Ʋsurper, but one who piously, prudently, and faithfully, to his immortal honour, exercised the Government, 1659. Where, p. 327. having accused the Now Episcopal party for following Grotius, he says: As for the King himself, that was their Head, if any conjecture that he was a flat Pa∣pist, I believe him not: but he was the head of the Grotian Papists, and he himself boasted of it, (ubi supra.) Now if any would know how far Grotius, and consequently the King was a Papist, he says, He (i. e. Grotius) was a more arrant Papist than Cassander, (who dy∣ed in that Communion, and was one that own∣ed the Council of Trent) and such I think are flat Papists. But if Mr. B. did not believe the King to be a flat Papist, then his iniquity was the grea∣ter, to give so many (though frivolous) in∣stances by way of proof, that others might believe what Mr. B. did not. Did not Mr. B. know, that the fear of introducing Popery was made a chief ground of the War against the King? And may he not as well make it a ground of another War against the pre∣sent King, because he adheres to his Bishops, whom Mr. B. calls Popish Clergie-men? And he says, that the Parliament, whom they were bound to believe, made it their great argument and advantage against the King, that he favou∣red the Papists: and
on this supposition (saith he) thousands came in to fight for their Cause. And they made one Article against the Archbishop of Canterbury, that he endeavou∣red to introduce Popery: whose life on that account they took away; though he were in∣deed one of their greatest adversaries: which, as it appears by the discovery of the Plot of the Jesuits to take away his life, mentioned in the relation of Andreas ab Habernfield, and printed by Mr. Prynne; wherein, because of his constancy to the Established Religion, from which he could not be tempted by the offer of a Cardinals Cap made to him from the then Pope, by Con his Nuncio, they plotted his death: so it will appear to be a gross slander, by that which followeth. And first, it shall not be denied, that his promoting of decent Ceremonies, and some Executions on Seditious persons, procured him that ill report among the Fanaticks. But he refuted it sufficiently, by declaring openly at the Council-Table a∣gainst the great resort of Papists to Denmark-house; of which also he complained to the King with passion, as a thing of dangerous consequence; and particularly against Sir To∣by Matthews and Walter Mountague, two active Papists mentioned in Habernfields Dis∣covery. And before that time, he published his Conference with Fisher the Jesuit; one of the best
discourses yet extant against them. After which time, though he could not wipe off the aspersion among the Fanaticks, yet he was lookt on by the Papists as their grea∣test enemy. He prevailed to banish both Matthews and Mountague from the Court whereat the Queen shewed some displeasure against him: but knowing how able and faithful a Minister he was for the Kings ser∣vice, He reconciled the Queen to him again. His Conference with Fisher was for the sa∣tisfaction of some persons of Quality, on whom the Jesuits had practised. Sir Edward Dee∣ing, his professed Adversary, says, That by  the Bishop had muzled the Jesuit, and struck the Papist under the fifth Rib. In his Preface  King Charles, he says, God forbid your Majesty should let the Laws and Discipline sleep, for fe of the name of Persecution, and suffer Mr. Fish∣er and his fellows to angle in all parts of your Dominions for your Subjects. Let us have  dissolving of Oaths of Allegiance, no depos of Kings, and blowing up of States: for their Religion were as good as they pretend, they cannot compass it by good means, I am they ought not to attempt it by bad: for if the will do evil that good may come of it, the damnation is just. He complains there, tha the Church was between two Factions as between two Milstones; wherefore he thought it his du to
deliver her from both: for he tells the King, that no one thing did make conscientious men to waver more in their minds, and to be drawn from the sincerity of Religion professed in the Church of England, than the want of uni∣form and decent Order; the Romanist being apt to say, the Houses of God could not be suffered to lye so nastily, were the true Worship of God observed in them; the external worship of God in his Church, being the great witness to the world that our hearts stand right in that Ser∣vice. And to deal clearly with your Majesty, these thoughts, and no other, made me labour so much for decency, and an orderly settlement of the external Worship of God. To this I add, that the Archbishop did no other than what was practised with good success upon the Pa∣pists in Queen Elizabeths days; of which I have taken notice before, to be acknowledged by our present Dissenters. This most Reverend Archbishop was not more averse from the Doctrine of the Papists, than from any acquaintance or correspondence with them. Panzani and Con, two of the Popes Nuncio's often endeavoured some Con∣ference with him; but he still put them off, though some persons of Quality sollicited it. He suppressed Socinian and Popish Books espe∣cially that called An Introduction to a devout life, written by Francis Sales Bishop of Gene∣va. And to omit many other arguments,
his Protestation at his death (of which hereaf∣ter) is enough to satisfie all but Infidels. Bishop Beadle, Anno 1633. certifyed Bi∣shop Laud (then of London) of the dange∣rous condition of Ireland, by the growth of Popery; and informed the Earl of Strafford, who was newly made Lord Deputy, that the Pope had a greater power in that Kingdom than the King; governing there by a Con∣gregation de propaganda fide, established not long before at Rome: That the Popes Clergie there, was double in number to the Kings; and they were bound by Oath to maintain the Popes power and greatness against all per∣sons: That the Pope had erected a Colledge in Dublin, to affront the Kings Colledge. One Harris, Dean of the New Colledge, printed a Treatise against Bishop Ʋshers Sermon at Wansteed: and after the dissolving of the new Frieries in Dublin, they erected others in the Country, where the people flocked in great multitudes to hear Mass, forgetting the Principles of Religion: That a Synodical meeting of their Clergy had been held in Drogheda, in which they decreed, That it was not lawful to take the Oath of Allegiance; and therefore it was thought necessary to re∣strain them by a standing Army. Where∣upon the Lord Deputy was advised to sum∣mon a
Parliament; and so ordered his affairs, as to raise an Army of Twenty thousand men, which was maintained mostly out of the Estates of the Papists; by which means he kept the Irish in awe; and had he been con∣tinued there, that Hellish Massacre on the English Protestants, which followed on the withdrawing of that Great man, might in all probability have been prevented. But these two Great men, the one of which made it his business to prevent Rebellion in the State, the other to suppress Faction and Confusion in the Church, were made the chief marks at which all the Plots and Darts, both of Jesuits and Fanaticks, were aimed; that by their fall, they might more easily destroy the King, as it afterward hapned: and not∣withstanding their serious and succesful endea∣vours to suppress Popery in Ireland, they are reputed and accused for Papists in England; but the true reason was, the Earl of Straf∣ford and the Archbishop being two of the most faithful Ministers of State that the King had, the Scots endeavour in the first place to take them out of the way. For, A Parliament being called on Novemb. 3. 1640. the Scots, under pretence of Religion, got a considerable Party in both Houses, to help on their designe. To which end, at their entrance into England, they made a Remon∣strance, That their just desires so necessary for
the good of both Kingdoms, could find no access to the ears of their gracious King, by reason of the powerful diversion of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Deputy of Ireland; who being strengthened with a mighty Faction of Papists near the King, did rule in all matters both Temporal and Ecclesiastical, making the ne∣cessity of their service to his Majesty to appear, in being the onely fit Instruments, under a pre∣text of vindicating his Majesties Honour, is oppress the Liberties of his free Subjects, and the true reformed Religion. And this Remon∣strance they seconded with another Libel, cal∣led, The Intention of the Army: signifying to the People of England, That they had no de∣signe to waste their Goods, or spoil their Coun∣try, but onely to petition his Majesty to call a Parliament, and to bring the Archbishop and Deputy to condign punishment. At this time they set forth a Book against the Archbishop, called Laudensium Autocatacrisis, endeavour∣ing to prove out of the Archbishop's Wri∣tings, that he designed to bring in Supersti∣tion, Popery, and Arminianism. There comes also a Petition from some Lords, complain∣ing of the great increase of Popery, and of many inconveniencies drawn on the Kingdom by engaging against the Scots. This was signed by the Earls of Essex, Hartford, Rutland, Bedford, Exeter, Warwick,
Mulgrave, and Bullingbrooke; the Lords Say, Mandevil, Brook, and Howard. And this was seconded by another from London. The day for the sitting of the Parliament being appointed on the third of November, the Archbishop was advised that the Parlia∣ment in the 20 of Hen. 8. which began in the fall of Cardinal Wolsey and the diminution of the power and priviledges of the Clergie, and ended in the dissolution of Religious houses, was begun on the same day; and therefore he should move the King to respite their sitting for a day or two. The event proved too sadly ominous: for this begun with the fall of the Archbishop, the Rites and Priviledges of the English Clergie, Bishops, Deans and Chapters; and the Cathedrals left without any means to repair them. But there were other strange accidents ob∣served by Dr. Heylen, in the Life of the Arch∣shop, p. 450. On Friday-night, Jan. 24. 1639. he dreamt that his Father came to him, and askt him what he did there: and he asked his Father how long he would stay there: who replied, He would stay till he had him a∣long with him. This Dream he noted in his Breviate. In December that year, the Boats that were drawn on land neer Lambeth, were by a violent tempest dasht against one another and broken in pieces. And the tops of
two Chimneys were blown down, and beat through the Lead and Rafters on the Bed in which he was wont to lie; but the roughness of the water kept him that night at his Cham∣ber in White-hall. The same night, at Croy∣den, one of the Pinacles fell from the Steeple, and beat down the Lead and Roof of the Church twenty foot square. The same night, at the Metropolitical Church in Canter∣bury, one of the Pinacles which carried a Vane with the Archbishop's Arms upon it, was blown down, and carried a good distance off; falling on the Roof of a Cloyster, where the Arms of the See of Canterbury were ingraven in Stone, which by the fall of the Pinacle were broken in pieces: whereat some did conje∣cture, that he should not onely fall himself, but the Archiepiscopal Dignity should fall with him. But the Archbishop took most notice of anotheer Accident on St. Simon and Jude's Eve, a week before the sitting of the Parlia∣ment; when going into his upper Study where his Picture in full length was wont to hang, he found it fallen on the ground, and lying flat on its face. On Saturday, May 9. 1640. a Paper was posted on the Exchange, animating the Ap∣prentices to sack his House at Lambeth: the Munday following, he therefore so fortified his Palace, that though five hundred persons
at∣tempted it, they could do nothing: but they broke open the Prisons in Southwark, and freed their Comrades; for which actions one Ben∣steed a Leader of the Rabble was condemned and executed. The great cry was, That he endeavoured to bring in Popery. Mr. Prynne says, he was at least a Cassandrian Papist, and endeavoured a reconciliation between us and Rome. A Book written against him, called The English Pope, printed 1643. tells us how far the King and Pope had agreed. The King (saith he) requi∣red a Dispensation from the Pope that the En∣glish Catholicks might resort to the Protestant Churches, & take the Oaths of Allegiance and Su∣premacy; and that the Popes Supremacy was to be changed into a Priority; and that marriage should be permitted to the Priests, the Commu∣nion administred under both kinds, and the Li∣turgie in the English Tongue. But though these Concessions were more than the Pope would grant, yet another Libel says, There were general Propositions made for this agree∣ment; and that the Archbishop had made some Innovations in order thereto, Popes Nuncio, p. 11. But what the Archbishop did, was not with a respect to peace with Rome, but to the setling of the Church of England on the first Principles of Reformation, and to make it more amiable even to the Papists, whom he
aimed to win over first by Conferences, and then by an external Decency in the publick Service; the Catholicks being much offended at the slovenly keeping of our Churches, and the irreverence of the People at their Devo∣tion. And though some accounted the Arch∣bishop's actions in renewing ancient Rites to give advantage to Popery, yet others more knowing said, that it would tend to the ho∣nour and advantage of the Church of England: for Dr. Heylin reports, that he heard from a person of known Nobility, that being with a Father of the English Colledge at Rome, one of the Novices told him with great joy, that the English were about to set up Altars, and offici∣ate in Copes, to adorn their Churches, and paint their Windows; and were returning to the Church of Rome. To whom the Father replied with some indignation, That he talked like an ignorant Novice, and that these proceedings ra∣ther tended to the ruine than advancement of the Catholick Cause, because the Church of Eng∣land coming nearer to the ancient Ʋsages, the Catholicks there would be sooner drawn off from them, than any of that Nation would fall off to Rome. Some things are objected against him in relation to the Doctrine and Devotion of the Church: as, That the Church of Rome was held to be a true Church: That the
Pope hath a primacy over other Bishops: That it apper∣tains to him to call General Councils: That Altars might be erected: That he was not wil∣ling the Pope should be called Antichrist; or that every raw Preacher should trouble his peo∣ple with Popish Controversies. Some of which were false Insinuations, and others vain and frivolous. In the Liturgies of Henry the 8th, and Edward the 6th, was this Expression: From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable Enormi∣ties, Good Lord, &c. Which words were expunged in the first of Queen Elizabeth, lest they should affright the Catholicks from co∣ming to our Churches: on which ground the Archbishop finding in a Book of Prayer for the fifth of November (not confirmed by Law) these passages: Root out the Babylo∣nish and Antichristian Sect, which say of Jeru∣salem, Down with it, &c. And again, Cut off those workers of iniquity, whose Religion is Re∣bellion, and whose Faith is Faction: He made these small alterations. In the first, thus: Root out the Babylonish and Antichristian Sect [of them] which say, &c. In the second, thus: Cut off those workers of iniquity who turn Religion into Rebellion, &c. Against which, some being conscious it was intended against them, made Objections. Which the Archbi∣shop did, onely to avoid the giving of cause∣less
offences to the Romish Party. Which doubtless he endeavoured with all his skill to suppress. And besides his learned Disputati∣ons against them, he procured a Canon to be pass'd in the Convocation, For suppressing the further growth of Popery, and reducing Papists to Church: and issued very strict and effectual Orders for the execution thereof. But it was the method, whether of the Jesuits, or Puri∣tans, or both, to defame them most for Pa∣pists, who acted most successfully against them; as did this Bishop, and Bishop Bramhall. A passage or two in the Archbishop's Speech at his death, may satisfie all sober Rea∣ders. I pray God (says he) the clamours of venient Romani (of which I have given no cause) help not to bring them in. Concerning the King. I shall be bold to say, He hath been much traduced for bringing in of Popery: but on my Conscience (of which I shall give God a very present account) I know him to be as free from this charge as any man living: and I hold him to be as sound a Protestant (according to the Religion by Law established) as any man in this Kingdom; and that he will venture his life as far and as freely for it: And I think I do or should know both his affection to Religion, and his grounds for it, as fully as any man in Eng∣land. For my self, I was born and baptized in the Church of England, and the Religion by
Law established: in that I have ever since li∣ved, and in that I come now to die. This is no time to dissemble with God, least of all in mat∣ters of Religion; and therefore I desire it may be remembred, I have always lived in the Pro∣testant Religion established in England, and in that I come now to die. What clamours and slanders I have endured for labouring a Ʋni∣formity in the external Service of God, accor∣ding to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, all men know, and I have abundantly felt. We have observed the Principles of Jesuits and Fanaticks, wherein they agree, and have joyntly acted against the Government in Church and State, for the ruine of both; and how, like Janus his head, they did not onely look backward, to the Justification of the Mur∣ther of the old King, but forward, to prevent the Restauration of his present Majesty. And hitherto their Practices have been according. It remains now that we consider, what these Factions have practised to hinder that happy Restauration, by Gods miraculous providence, and the wise conduct of the noble General Monk, now established. What the Popish Party did to hinder him from coming to his Fathers Throne, hath been partly discovered
already; I shall now shew what the Fana∣ticks did. And will begin with the Scots, who called him home first, to vex and tor∣ment him with their unrighteous dealings, and temptations between hopes and fears, and af∣fronted him with unsufferable Reproaches for the sins of his Father and Grandfather, as well as his own: insomuch that he often attempted to leave them, fearing, as it came to pass, that they would at last betray him. What provocations he met with in private, may be guessed at by their publick actions The Thursday before the Coronation, was se apart as a Solemn day of Humiliation for the sins of the Royal Family; and Robert Douglas in the Coronation-Sermon told the King, That his Grandfather King James remembred not the kindness of them who had held the Crown upon his head; yea, he persecuted faithful Ministers; he never rested till he had undone Presbyterial Government and Kirk-Assemblies, setting up Bishops, and bringing in Ceremonies, and laid the foundation whereon his Son our late King di build much mischief in Religion all the days of his life, p. 73. And p. 52. he tells our Sove∣raign to his face, That a King abusing his power to the overthrow of Religion, Laws, and Liber∣ties, which are the Fundamentals of that Cove∣nant, may be controuled and opposed: and if he set himself to overthrow all these by Arms, they who have the power, as
the Estates of the Land, may and ought to resist by Arms; because he doth by that opposition break the very Bonds, and overthrow the Essentials of this Contract and Covenant. This may serve (says he) to justifie the proceedings of this Kingdom against the late King, who in a hostile way set himself to overthrow Religion, Parliaments, Laws, and Liberties. Thus was the Scotish Crown lined with Thorns; and the King had Gall and Vine∣gar given him to drink, instead of the Royal Ʋn∣ction; of which he says, p. 34. The Bishops be∣hoved to perform this Right, and the King be∣hoved to be sworn to them: but now, by the blessing of God, Popery and Prelacy are removed, let the anointing of Kings with Oyl go to the door with them, and let them never come in a∣gain. So that although the Scots Army were overthrown at Worcester, yet his Majesty e∣scaping with safety and liberty (by a won∣derful Providence) he was (as the event now shews) a very great Gainer by that Loss. And as to his Majesties return into England, it is very evident that they had not forgot∣ten their old Doctrine of binding their Kings in Chains; and therefore they endeavoured to lay such Conditions and Fetters on the King, as neither his Father could, nor He would be able to bear. As soon as ever the General's intent to bring home the King was
known, there were frequent and zealous Ap∣plications made, That the godly Ministers of the Land might be provided for, and the King might be a Covenanting King. And he was dehorted from calling him home, by one Mr. Baxter, Because (as he said) Profaneness was so inseparable from the Royal Party, that if e∣ver the King returned, the power of Godliness would be lost. The same person being admitted to preach before that remainder of the House of Com∣mons when they were consulting to call home the King, he delivered not one word that might promote that Noble Designe, but many things that might hinder, or clog it with very dishonourable terms. He intimates the Su∣preme Power to be still in the two Houses, ac∣cording to his Holy Commonwealth's Maximes. He says indeed, That Rom. 13. is part of the Rule of his Religion; but adds, There hath un∣happily been a difference amongst us which is the Higher Power: but he was fully of the mind as he had formerly declared, That it was in the two Houses: and therefore he adds, It was not the intent of St. Peter or St. Paul to determine whether the Emperour or the Senate were Supreme. In the same Humiliation-Sermon, he mag∣nifies the Loyalty of the Presbyterians; ad∣jures the Commons
to oppose Episcopacy (though the King in his Message commended it to be as ancient as the Monarchy in this Island) and under the titles of sound Doctrine and Church-Government, pleads for Presbytery; and that the Church-Revenues might be setled on them. p. 46. saying, Give first to God the things that are Gods. For them he pleads, as being the godly, peaceable, and prudent people of the Land, in opposition to Profaness. And to insinuate new fears and jealousies, cries out, O what happy times did we once see! He did not mean the peaceable time of King Charles the First; those were, in his account, days of Profaness and Persecution: He must mean either under the Long Parliament, or some o∣ther of the Revolutions of Government, when he was a Souldier, or enjoyed a Sequestrati∣on, and Plunder, &c. And yet this man boa∣steth that the King was voted home the next day after that Sermon of his; as if that had not been done, if he had not preached: where∣as he seems to me to be of the same mind that he was of a year before, when he decla∣red, p. 486. of Holy Com. That having often searched into his heart whether he did lawfully engage in the (first) War or not, and encoura∣ged so many thousands, he could not see that he was mistaken in the main Cause; nor dares he repent of it, nor forbear doing the same, if it were to do again, in the same state of things.
There is one mysterious transaction of the Fanatick Party, whereby they endeavoured to impose upon the King before his return: they had (it seems) drawn up some Heads in favour of Presbytery, and to the prejudice of the Episcopal Government; which they de∣sired the King to publish in a Declaration: and the King, in compliance with the exigen∣cy of the times, and the necessity of his own affairs, did publish in a Declaration from Bre∣da; but with a Reservation expressed there∣in, That he would leave the particulars therein mentioned to be considered and established by a free Parliament. To this Declaration (saith Mr. Baxter, p. 87. of part 2. of his third Plea) they would have conformed, on this Supposi∣tion, that the Species of Prelacy was altered by it. And Mr. B. foreseeing that the Epis∣copal Party would be grieved by it, makes this Objection (against those that extorted that Declaration) in the name of the Bi∣shops. Object. You did but obtrude on us your own Opinions: for when you had drawn up most of those words, his Majesty was forced to seem for the present to grant them to you. To this Mr. B. answers: If we did offer such things (which is a confession) let the world judge what we sought by them (viz. by your own confession, to change the Species of Episco∣pal Government).
2. He says, There is most of that about ru∣ral Deans put in, I suppose by the Bishops con∣sent, after it went FROM US. So that it is evident, that they did what they could to bring the King under their Chains, before he came to his Crown; and had not a superiour power, by the conduct of the ever-renowned General, otherwise deter∣mined, he should have been a King and no King to this day. But in a free and full Par∣liament, the Ancient Government was establi∣shed in its full splendour, to the great regret of these unpeaceable men. And whereas his Majesty desired them to read so much of the Common-Prayer as they had no just exceptions against, we heard not of any compliance to that just desire, though they confessed they could use the greatest part of it. But instead thereof, they clamour for a Reformation of Doctrie, Discipline, and Wor∣ship; and petition his Majesty that some Di∣vines of both Parties might be employed to compile such a new Form as they there descri∣bed; or at least to revise and reform the old, &c. The King denies the first part (viz.) of making a new Liturgie, having in his Decla∣ration of Octob. 5. expressed his esteem of the Old; but grants the second, and issues out his Commission to that end, impowering them to compare it with the
most ancient Liturgies, and to make such reasonable and necessary alterations and amendments as should be thought fit, avoiding all unnecessary abbrevia∣tions of the Forms wherewith the people were acquainted. But instead of this, they draw up another Liturgie, or rather Directory, which was pen∣ned by Mr. Baxter (as he says) in eight days; and against the consent of the greatest part, offers that, in opposition to the established Li∣turgie. And in a threatning Petition for Peace, p. 5. he thus speaks: Take heed how you drive men by penalties on that which they judge doth tend to their damnation. And p 14. The denial of their desires would renew all our troubles. And they also desire the King to leave out of his Declaration these words: We do not in our judgments believe the practice of those particular Ceremonies we except against to be in it self unlawful, (i. e. we do account them sinful.) And in the close of the second Paper, they tell the King, if he grant those favours, It would revive their hearts to pray for his prosperity: but (p. 12.) should we lose the opportunity of our desired Reconciliati∣on, it astonisheth us to foresee what doleful ef∣fects our Divisions would produce; which we will not mention in particular, lest our words should be misunderstood. Mr. Baxter made a Prognostication, dated
1661. When by the Kings Commission (says he) we in vain treated for Concord, to tell the Bi∣shops what they are, and what they must expect: That they are worldly, proud, covetous, domi∣neering, malignant, and lazy; the plague of the world, troublers of Princes, and dividers of Churches, p. 32. & p. 9. 12, 13. and animates the people to revile, p. 14. 20. 22. and, which is notorious, p. 28. n. 105. That where PA∣PISTS OR HERETICKS are shut out by Law, they will secretly contribute the utmost of their endeavours to make the sufferings of dissenting Protestants as grievous as possibly they can; that in despite of them, their own necessities may compel them to cry out for Li∣berty, till they procured a common Toleration for all, and opened the door for Papists and He∣reticks, as well as for themselves. And he hath lived to make good his Prognostick, like Nostredamus his Son, who having pro∣phesied that on such a day the City should be burnt, he set it on fire himself. As to the Toleration, by which Papists were indulged as well as other Dissenters, it is evi∣dent that it was obtained by the mutual en∣deavours of both Parties. Coleman confesseth it in behalf of the Papists, who thereby in∣tended the ruine of our Church, to which they thought it a most probable means. And for the other Dissenters, Mr.
Humfrys in his peaceable Designe, p. 71. speaks, in the name of his Brethren, to this effect: What shall we say then to the Papist? Answ. The Papist in our account is but one sort of Recusants, and the con∣scientious and peaceable among them must be held in the same predicament with those among our selves, that likewise refuse to come to Common-Prayer. And, p. 72. As for the common Pa∣pist who lives innocently in his way, he is to us as other Separatists, and so comes under the like Toleration. And I (saith Mr. Baxter) so lit∣tle fear the noise of the censorious, that even now while the Plot doth render them most odious, say freely, 1. That I would have Papists used like men. 2. I would have no man put to death for being a Priest. 3. I would have no Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, or any Law compel them to our Communion and Sacra∣ments, p. 19. of second Defence. And p. 235. of his first Plea, he says, It is but reasonable, if on such necessity (i. e. the Penalties for Non∣conformity) they should accept of favour from any Papist that should save them, &c. So that they are resolved to live in compliance with the Papists, rather than in conformity with the established Church. And here it appears, whether the Conformist or Nonconformist is the greater Friend to Popery. Dr. Stillingfleet's Defence, penned by an ingenious person, says, p. 68. I will tell Mr. B.
a Secret which I have heard, but hope he will not put me to prove it: That the Parliament made good Laws; the Papist out of a pretended reverence to tender Consciences, hindred the execution of them; and some leading Fana∣ticks had a private encouragement (to say no more) to set up a mighty cry of Persecution, to cast all the odium on a persecuting Church, and Diocesan Canoneers. Dr. Owen takes this hint. Some have re∣ported (says he) that some of the Noncon∣formists do or have received money from the Pa∣pists to act their affairs, and promote their in∣terests; which he calls a putrid Calumny, &c. and avows, That never any person in Authori∣ty, Dignity, or Power in the Nation, or that had any relation to pullick affairs, nor any from them, Papist or Protestant, did once speak one word to him, or advise with him about any In∣dulgence or Toleration to be granted to the Pa∣pists. He says not, That he never received a∣ny Moneys or Message to promote a general To∣leration; which, he thinking himself particu∣larly reflected on, might have done in few words. And my Author desires Dr. O. to resolve him why a Fast was appointed by a certain Independent Pastor at that time, on the fifth of November, which (as he notes) is no Popish Festival. Mr. Hunt (one of their
Confederates) says, It is well known several of them (i. e. the Nonconformists) were in Pension to the D. And no men have been bet∣ter received of the D. than J. J. J. O. E. B. and W. P. &c. Ringleaders of the Separation. And p. 98. Consider how the Church of England is used, which is truly the Bulwark of the Prote∣stant Religion. If one Party, saith Mr. Baxter, (viz. the Authority of the Nation) would bring them to such a pass, that they must be hanged, imprison∣ed, ruined, or worse, (as if they were in the hands of Canibals) unless the favour of the Papists deliver them; and the other Party (viz. the Nonconformists) had rather be sa∣ved by the Papists, than be hanged or ruined by Protestants; they ought not to be suspected of Popery. This is not onely to open a door to let the Papists in, but upon meer Fears and Jealousies to flee out to them. Now judge who is a greater friend to Po∣pery; the old Protestants, who have made Law to keep it out; or the Dissenters, who would destroy those Laws to let it in. And that their obstinate separation from the Church-Communion is an effectual means thereunto, I shall give the judgment of Mr. Phil. Nye, a great Covenanter, who, not long before his death, foreseeing the mischievous consequence of those extravagant heats the people were running into, wrote a
Discourse on purpose to prove it lawful to hear the conforming Mini∣sters; and answers all the common Objections against it; and wonders how the different Parties came to be so agreed, in thinking it unlawful to hear us preach. But he saith he is perswaded, it is one constant designe of Sa∣tan, in the variety of ways of Religion he hath set on foot by Jesuits among us: Let us therefore be more aware of whatsoever tends that way. So that Mr. Nye plainly acknow∣ledgeth that the Jesuits were very busie a∣mong them; and that they and the Devil joyned together in setting them at the grea∣test distance possible from the Church of Eng∣land; and that those who would countermine the Devil and the Jesuits, must avoid what∣ever tends to that height of Separation. Mr. Baxter seemed to be of the same judgment, p. 17. of his Preface to the Defence of the Cure of Church-divisions, where he saith, Our Divisions gratifie the Papists, and greatly hazard the Protestant Religion more than most of you seem to believe or regard. And had Mr. B. regarded as he ought, he would not have hardened the People in that Separation, as he hath since done. For he says again, That among the many inconveniencies of Sepa∣ration, this is one, that Popery will get by it so great advantage, as may hazard us all; and we may lose that which the
several Parties do con∣tend about. Yet, as you have heard, these men joyned interest with the Papists to pro∣cure this mischievous Toleration. Coleman at his Tryal owned that he was of opinion, That Popery might come in, if liberty of Conscience had been granted. And the Author of the two Conferences between Le Chese and the four Jesuits, owns that the Declaration of Indul∣gence was procured by help of the Papists, who were included in it; but saith, The Pres∣byterians presently suspected the kindness, and like wise men closed with the Conformists; when on the contrary, they wrote in defence of it, and so increased the Schism, that we feel the effects of it to this day. And I my self have observed, how much a Popish Lord of these Western parts, was caressed by the Dissen∣ters in these parts, upon the Indulgence; and how kind he was to them. One thing more I cannot ot in Mr. B's Prognostick, p. 200. speaking to the Bishops and Clergie, he says, It may be your great Pa∣trons may die, or FALL, or forsake you; and then your hearts are broken: it may be death may enter into your Families, and make you think what bloud-thirstiness doth tend to. Now what manner of Fall and Death he means, he explains, p. 204. One Felton may end the great Duke of Buckingham, p. 205. Or they may
meet with such Executioners as Cardinal Beton. Nor was Mr. Baxter a false Prophet, though perhaps a bloudy one in this Progno∣stick; witness that horrid Assassination of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, one of his Maje∣sties Privy Counsellors, May 3. 1679; who coming from Edinburg in his Coach with one Daughter, was assaulted by twelve men well armed. The Coachman perceiving it, drove as fast as six good horses could run. But they pursued, shooting into the Coach. And one Balfour rid up to the Postilion, woun∣ded him with a Sword on his face, shot one of the forehorses, hamstring'd another, and so stopt the Coach; and the rest of the Mur∣therers being come up, one of them fired a Pistol so near his breast, that his Daughter rubbed off the burning from his Gown. Then calling him Dog, Villain, Apostate, and Persecutor of the Godly, Decrier of Jesus Christ and his Church, bid him come out of his Coach to receive what he deserved for his wickedness against the Kirk of Scotland. Upon which his Daughter got out of the Coach, and fell on her knees, begging her Fathers life: but they regarding not her Prayers or Tears, threw her on the ground, trampling on her, and wounding her: which her tender-hear∣ted Father seeing, after many threatnings came meekly out of the Coach, and calmly said to them, I know not that I ever injured
any of you; or if I did, I am ready to make you reparation; and therefore I beseech you to spare my life, and I promise I will never pursue you for this violence. And I pray you consider, be∣fore you bring the guilt of innocent bloud upon your selves. This made them stand a while, and one of them relenting, cried, Spare these gray hairs; but the rest replied, He must die, he must die: and then repeating their re∣proachful words, said, Thou shalt now receive the reward of thy Apostacy, and Enmity to the people of God. At which the Archbishop beg∣ged a little time to pray, telling them he would pray for them: but they scornfully told him, They cared not for his Prayers, being sure that God would not hear so base a Dog as he was. Then looking stedfastly on one of the Assassines whom he seemed to know, he kneeled before him, saying, Sir, you are a Gentleman, and I must beg my last favour from you: Since you are resolved that I must die, have pity on my poor Child, and spare her life; and for this, Sir, give me your hand. And stretching out his hand, he had for a return a very great blow with a Shable, which almost cut off his hand. And the Villain redoub∣ling his stroak, gave him another violent wound on the lest eye, which cut him two inches above it, and one below it. This stroak knocked him
down: but getting on his knees again, he said, Gentlemen, it is now enough, you have done your work: and holding up his hands to Heaven as well as he could, he fervently cried out, Lord Jesus, have mer∣cy on my Soul, and receive my Spirit. While he was in this posture of Devotion, they wounded him in his hands which he held up to Heaven, and in other parts of his body, till in a kind of composure he laid down his head on his arm, saying, God forgive you, and I forgive you all. These were his last words: after which, they gave him about sixteen wounds in his head, so that it seemed to be but one wound; and pieces of his Skull and Brains were found on the ground. And ha∣ving left him, some fancied that they heard him groan; which made them go back, and to make sure work, stirred his Brains with the points of their Swords. Then they made his Servants swear not to discover them; and bad them in derision take up their Priest; and rode back to Magus. And one of them, John Balfour of Kinlock, passing by that Town, was heard to say, that Now Judas was killed. These things were testified before the Privy-Council by the Oaths of his Daughter and Servants; and the Wounds given him were particularly mentioned in a Certificate of a Doctor of Physick and
three Chirurgeons, who by Order of the Council did view and em∣balm his body. The Assassines were notori∣ous Fanaticks, Frequenters of Field-Conventi∣cles, and Followers of Mr. Welsh and other trai∣terous and rebellious Preachers. Nine of the Actors were discovered by their names. The Depositions of the Witnesses against them lie on record, to satisfie all men particularly. One James Anderson, Farmour, says, that George Balfour came to his Brothers house after the Murther, at Gilston, and told him it was done; and that the rest of the Murther∣ers waited for him on Tace's Moore; and that he returning to them, they possessed them∣selves of a Barn at Toukits about three in the afternoon, and parted thence about seven; when all of them spake with the said Ander∣son, who knew them all particularly, and thus named them; John Balfour of Kinlock, David Hacston of Rathillet, George Balfour of Gilston, James Russel of Kingscattle, Robert Dingwall a Farmer's Son in Cadham, Andrew Guillan a Weaver in Balmerinock, Alexander Henderson, and Andrew Henderson Son of Sir John Henderson in Kilbrackmont, George Flem∣ming Son to George Flemming in Balbathy. This discovery being made, the late Re∣bellion on the 29th of May broke out; which forced the Privy-Council to desist from the pursuit of the Murtherers, that they might
suppress that Insurrection; which would have shaken the Government, if the Rebels had got the first Victory, or kept their ground. In which Army the Murtherers sheltred them∣selves with the Conventiclers, who called themselves the Covenanting Army: which be∣ing beaten, the Murtherers fled the King∣dom: but while the Army lay at Glascow, one of the Balfours openly boasted of the Murther as a glorious fact; and said, holding up his Arm, This hand helped to kill the Fox. And five of their Confederates chose to die and hang in Chains on the place, rather than to confess the sinfulness of the Action, or ac∣knowledge it to be a Murther or a Sin. One Mitchel, who attempted the Murder of this Archbishop eleven years before, was applauded for it by some Covenanters. My Author quotes the Principles on which these Murtherers acted. Goodman, p. 27. of Pope∣ry and Tyranny, says, That all men are bound to see the Laws of God kept, and to suppress and resist Idolatry by force: nor is it sufficient for Subjects not to obey the wicked commands of Princes, but they must resist them, and deliver the children of God out of the hands of their ene∣mies, as we would deliver a Sheep in danger to be devoured by a Wolf: and if the Magistrate shall refuse to put Mass-mongers and false Prea∣chers to
death, the people in seeing it performed shew that zeal of God which was commended in Phinees. Gilby says, That Kings, Princes, and Gover∣nours have their Authority from the People, and on occasion the People may take it away again, as men may revoke their Proxies. It is lawful (saith he) to kill wicked Kings and Tyrants. The Subjects did kill the Queens Highness A∣thaliah; John killed the Queens Majesty Je∣zabel; Elias, being no Magistrate, killed the Queens Majesties Chaplains, Baal's Priests. Knox in his Debate with Lithinton, (Hist. of Reformat. p. 390.) justifies the killing of Ty∣rannical Princes, and men in publick places, by private persons, from the Example of Phinees, who, he says, was a private person, whose fact was approved and rewarded; and affirms that it ought to be imitated by those who prefer the true Worship and Glory of God, to the af∣fection of fleshly and wicked Princes: and says, that this Example approved by God, stands instead of a Command: for as God is im∣mutable, so he cannot condemn that which he hath approved in his Servants before us. The Book called Naphtali, justifieth the Rebellion at Pentland-Hills, Anno 1666, from the same Example, ascribing it to the Holy Spirit of God; asserting, that the Rebels were no more Traytors, than Phinees was a
Murder∣er; being led by the same Spirit, and had as good warrant, p. 21, &c. The same Doctrine as defended by a Book called Jus populi vin∣dicatum, ch. 20. p. 409, &c. On this Prin∣ciple Mr. Mitchel attempted to murther the Archbishop, Anno 1668. and did mortally wound the Bishop of Orkney; for which he was executed: (See Ravilliack Redivivus:) but died impenitently, believing he was led to this heroical act by the Spirit of God. These and such Books, are used by the Field-Conventiclers more than the Practice of Piety. One of them being taken and search∣ed, had Naphtali in one Pocket, and a Pistol charged with two Bullets in the other; i. e. (as a Gentleman said) The Doctrine for one hand, and the Application for the other. Ma∣ny other Pamphlets, such as was the Apologie, and Apologetical Narration, The poor mans Cup, The History of the Indulgence, were printed in Scotland; and many to the like purpose in England, under the Titles of Pleas for Peace, the Celeusma, &c. defaming the Bishops, as Apostate perjured Prelates, Traytors to Christ, Enemies to his People, Thorns and Thistles, bloudy Persecutors, Popish Clergie-men, &c. to prepare the people to another Rebellion, and Assassinations. It would be too large to repeat the Tu∣mults, Wars, and malicious Murthers com∣mitted in Scotland by the
Conventiclers upon such as according to the Laws sought to sup∣press them; and how they justified them all in several Pamphlets, which are in the hand of almost all that can read them. How ob∣stinately they died, justifying themselves in those horrid Actions: chusing rather to die, than confess the sinfulness of them, and to beg pardon, or to pray for the King, and promise o∣bedience. Mitchel at his death said, That he laid down his life willingly, in opposition to the perfidious Prelates, and in testimony of the Cause of Christ; and in his Speech, saith, Blessed are all they that take the proud Prelates and dash their brains against the stones. And yet we have had some at home, who have not onely pitied these men, but promoted their Practices there, and frequently attempted the same in England. Since his Majesties return, who can but wonder at the Enthusiastick madness of Ven∣ner and the Fifth-monarchy-men, who with less than half an hundred of men, attempted the whole City of London! And the Plot in December 1662, to cut off Root and Branch, King. Queen, Duke, Bishops, and Gentry, that none of them might run beyond Sea; for which Tong, Philips, Stubbs, Hinde, Sallers, and Gibbs, were executed at Tyburn: which Plot was to be carried on upon the fear and jealousie of a Popish
Massacre. And seditious Letters were dispersed to that purpose; a copy of which was read in the Court: and the Fifth-monarchy-men, Quakers, Anabaptists, and all sorts of Fanaticks were invited to joyn in the Plot. The next year, March 21. 1663. another Plot was discovered in the North, of which the King says in his Speech, That it was of a large extent, and very near execution, had he not by Gods goodness come to the knowledge of the principal Contrivers, and secured them from executing their intended mischief. In the year 1666. there was another Plot to murther his Majesty, and overthrow the Go∣vernment; to kill the General, surprize the Tower, fire the City; and a Junto setled in London, and Money provided to carry on this designe: for which Rathbone, Sanders, Tuc∣ker, Flint, Evans, Miles, Westcot, and Coles, were executed. And whether such bloudy practices as these have not been encouraged by those Principles which the Jesuits and Fanaticks, especially Mr. White and Mr. Baxter have published in print, is so evident, that it can admit of no dispute or contradiction; especially if it be considered of what a cruel disposition that man who hath published so many Pleas for Peace (but such a Peace as the Historian speaks of; Desolationem volunt, & Pacem vocant,
cannot be had but by the ruine of Church and State) was, who kept the Field against the King from the beginning of the Wars, till he became a Prisoner, as hath been collected out of his own boasting Confessions, in a little Tract called The second part of the History of Separation; to which I shall adde the following Relation. Mr. Vernon in his Life of Dr. Heylin (Pre∣face ad finem:) Mr. Baxter (says he) may be pleased to call to mind what was done to old Major Jennings in the last War, in the Fight that was between Linsel and Longford in Sa∣lop; where the Kings Party being worsted, the Major was stript almost naked, and left for dead in the Field: but Mr. Baxter and one Lieute∣nant Hurdman walking among the wounded and dead bodies, perceived some life left in the Ma∣jor; and Hurdman run him through the body in cold bloud, Mr. Baxter all the while looking on, and taking off with his own hand the Kings Pi∣cture from about his neck; telling him, as he was swimming in his Gore, that he was a Popish Rogue, and that was his Crucifix: which Pi∣cture was kept by Mr. Baxter for many years, till it was got from him, but not without much difficulty, by one Mr. Summerfield, who then lived with Sir Tho. Rous, and generously resto∣red it to the poor man, now alive at Wiche near Parshore in Worcestershire, although at the
Fight supposed to be dead, being, after the wounds given him, dragged up and down the Field by the merciless Souldiers; Mr. Baxter approving of the inhumanity, by feeding his eyes with so bloudy and barbarous a Spectacle. For the truth of which, we have this Subscripti∣on: I Thomas Jennings subscribe to the truth of this Narrative above-mentioned, and have hereunto put my Hand and Seal, the second day of March 1681/2. Signed and sealed in the presence of John Clerk Minister of Wiche, Tho. Darke. But to return. That which I desire the Reader chiefly to observe, is, that all the de∣signes of the Dissenting Parties ever since Q. Elizabeth's time, have been ushered in with Remonstances and Intelligences of Popish Plots, and Massacres, and the change of our Religion, and loss of Liberties. This is the common Prologue to all their intended Tragedies; as in the Plot of Tong and his Confederates, Sir Jo. Maynard observed, About five thousand Let∣ters were to be dispersed through the Nation. to possess the people that the Papists would about that time massacre the Protestants; which was done (says he) to raise a fear and discontent in the Nation, to induce them to joyn in the de∣signe, which was to kill the King, and alter the Government. The Letter then read in Court, was to this effect.
SIR, OƲt of the respect which I bear to you in particular, and to the Protestant party in general, I give you notice of this passage. About a fortnight since a woman, which you must be ignorant where, who had it from a correspon∣dent of the Papists, that they intend to make use of their Army, (which all the world sees they have provided) against All-Hallow's Eve next. It was thought good therefore, in as prudent a way as may be, to give notice to our friends in remote parts, that they may do what Piety to God, Loyalty to their Prince, Love to their Country, and self-preservation should di∣rect them. Sir, I call the Eternal God to wit∣ness, that 'tis not to trepan, to put a trick upon you, but a sober truth, and also communicated to a Justice of Peace, and by him to the Pri∣vy-Council, &c. Another Intrigue of the two Factions, was to effect the dissolution of the late long Par∣liament; of whose Loyalty and love to the Church, the King had such signal proofs, that he kept them between fourteen and fifteen years together, notwithstanding many at∣tempts to have them dissolved. They found all things in confusion, and met with great dif∣ficulties and opposition; the Revenues of the Crown were exhausted, the Church was razed
to the very foundations, and the Three King∣doms turn'd into that which the Factions cal∣led a Common-wealth, but indeed was a Com∣mon woe: but by their Conduct, the Kings Revenues were increased to such a competen∣cy as might support the Royal Crown and dig∣nity, and freed Him from that precarious and necessitous condition which was the occasion of his Royal Fathers ruine: the Church also was by good and wholsome Laws so well esta∣blished for holiness and beauty too, as that it was once more the envy of the Factions. The Laws made for conformity to the Publick Wor∣ship were so full, that there needed nothing but a due execution of them, to destroy the Se∣paration. And as to Popery, the old Laws were not only revived, but a new Test con∣trived, to discover and disable those of that Perswasion from doing mischief. There was a Bill prepared by the House of Lords for se∣curing the Protestant Religion as it was then established, especially against Popery; which was so contrived by a select Committee of the most Religious and Loyal Lords Spiritual and Temporal, that the Popish Party said, If that past into an Act, they must expect fire and fag∣got. These things exasperated both Par∣ties. The Earl of Shaftsbury, who had been of all
parties, but never true to the interest of any, had serew'd himself into the quality of a Chief Minister of State; but not content therewith, he aspired to ingross the whole conduct of Affairs both at home and abroad; which the King and his Royal Brother not per∣mitting, he became an enemy to both, and made it his business to perplex and embroil the affairs of the Three Nations. And the better to effect it, made himself the Head of the Fanatick Party; who thinking them∣selves oppressed for want of liberty to ruine themselves and others, and finding no hopes of such a liberty from that Parliament, used all possible arts to bring it into contempt, in order to its dissolution; being confident, that if that could be effected, they should be able to make such a choice of Parliament-men a∣gainst another Session, as would espouse their interest. And indeed they were not deceived: for in the succeeding Parliaments, they had retrieved the Good old Cause, if the great prudence of His Majesty, and the Religious Loyalty of the House of Peers, had not pre∣vented it. And herein they might be assured of the mutual assistance of the Popish party, who had conceived as great a prejudice against this Par∣liament, as the other; and whose hopes were grounded on our Divisions which they also, in conjunction with the Fanaticks, thought
would most probably be effected, by the new Election of Parliament-men. Coleman is made chief Agent of the Popish party; upon whom though Shaftsbury looked asquint, yet they both acted the same thing, (viz.) the dissolution of the Parliament. Some said they were a company of young raw States-men, that gran∣ted whatever the King desired, without any deliberation. To this the King answered, that if they were young and beardless now, he would keep them till their beards were grown, and they had got more experience. Then comes forth in print a Narrator, which tells the people, that the House of Commons are a company of indigent and out-lawed persons, The Court-Favourites, or the Dukes Creatures, and Pensioners to the King of France; and as such, the Names of the most Loyal Members were posted up in the City, and published in the Country, to render them odious, and uncapa∣ble of another Election. The Bishops also are reviled, as in 41, as being Popishly af∣fected. At length, the King having, for reasons best known to himself, Prorogued this Parliament for fifteen Months, being to meet again on the fifteenth of February, 1675. they were no sooner met, but the Earl of Shaftsbury had got a small Party in the House of Lords to question the legality of their
sitting as a Parliament. And first, the Duke of Buck∣ingham insists,4 Edw. 3. c. 14. & 36 Edw. 3. o. 10. that there being divers Acts of Parliament is force for Annual Parliaments, this Prorogation for fifteen Months, made those Acts impracticable, and so in effect the Parliament was dissolved. This Motion and Argument was followed by the Earls of Shaftsbury, Salisbury, and the Lord Wharton; but so ill resented by the House of Lords, that they were all four sent to the Tower. Yet the dispute ended not here; for several Pam∣phlets are written and dispersed, to perswade the people that the Parliament was actually dissolved, and they were now only a Conver∣tion, and no Parliament; and that no Taxt imposed by them, ought to be paid, nor any of their Orders obligatory. One Pamphlet intituled, The Long Parliament dissolved Another called, A seasonable Question, and useful Answer. The Question is put, in a Let∣ter from a person pretending to be chosen fit in that Parliament, to a Bencher, desiring to be resolved before he took his Journey, Whether the Parliament were not dissolved the Prorogation of fifteen Months: which th Bencher resolved in the Affirmative. But th artifice was quite ruined, by the Submission of the Lords in the Tower,
before they could obtain their liberty. But both this and th other Faction were so restless, that they pur∣sued their designs till they brought them to the desired end, the dissolution of that Loyal Parliament. During this interval of Parliaments, the two Factions are very industrious to provide or the choice of such men as were known e∣nemies to the Church and Government establi∣shed; and several such were chosen, who had been actually engaged against the King in the ate Wars, or were the Children and next re∣lations of such. And in the next Parliament, the ld leaven began to ferment; the methods of Sedition in 41 are renewed, fears and jea∣lousies of Popery and Arbitrary Government a∣muse the whole Nation; Supplies for necessa∣rily occasions are denyed; Comprehension and Toleration pleaded for; and in one of the sub∣sequent Parliaments, the Act of 35 of Queen Eliz. is voted a grievance, and thought fit to be abrogated: whereat all that knew the o∣pinion of the Dissenters, (viz.) that that Act was principally, if not solely intended a∣gainst the Papists) did greatly wonder; for most certainly that Act laid a restraint on the Papists, under very severe penalties; from which though the Dissenters pleaded that they were exempted, yet it was the judgment is well of the Judges that then were, as of all those that have been in the succeeding times
ever since, that they were as abnoxious to it a the Papists. And indeed, the occasion which procured that Act, and the preamble there do plainly evince that it equally respected th Recusants and Non-conformists of both parties for the end of it was to retein her Majesties Subjects in due obedience. And doubtless the Popish party would have purchased the abroga∣tion of that Act with a great sum of money but the other Dissenters were ready to grati∣fie them in the disannulling of it; to which the House of Commons had agreed by a plurality of voices: but it proved abortive for want of that Authority which gives lif to all Laws. And so the Factions remain statu quo to this day. How violent and unjustifiable the Action and Speeches of divers persons in the follow∣ing Parliaments were, and of what evil con∣sequences, the ensuing particulars will demon∣strate. It is credibly reported, that the late Scot∣tish Stirs (as some are pleased to call them were fomented not only by several Jesuitical persons that acted secretly among them, and preached in some of their Conventicles; but by some correspondence and intelligence from England, particularly by an Harangue of great Lord, who (as himself says) spake by the Dictates of the Spirit within him, to this purpose.
—We have a little Sister, and she hath no breasts: what shall we do for our Sister in the ay when she shall be spoken for? —Popery and Slavery, like two Sisters, go hand in hand: sometime One goes first, sometime the other in t doors; but the other is alway following close t hand. In England, Popery was to have brought in Slavery; in Scotland, Slavery went before, and Popery was to follow—They have n Illustrious Nobility, a gallant Gentry, a Learned Clergie, and an understanding worthy people—They are under the same Prince, and the influence of the same Favourites and Coun∣sels. When they are hardly dealt with, can we that are the richer, expect better usage? for it is certain, that in all absolute Governments, the oorest Countries are always most favourably dealt with. When the Ancient Nobility and Gentry there, cannot enjoy their Royalties, Shri∣aldoms, and Stewardies, which the, and their Ancestors have possessed for several hundreds of years, but that nou they are enjoyned by the Lords of the Council to make Deputations of their Authorities to such as are their known enemies; an we expect to enjoy our Magna Charta long, under the same persons and administration of Affairs? If the Council-Table there can im∣prison any Nobleman or Gentleman for several years, without bringing him to Tryal, or giving the least reason for what they , can
we expect the same men will preserve the Liberty of th Subject here?—Scotland hath outdone all Eastern and Southern Countries, an having the Lives, Liberties, and Estates subjected to t Arbitrary will and pleasure of those that go∣vern: They have lately plundred and harasse the richest and wealthiest Countries of th Kingdom, and brought down the barbaro Highlanders to devour them; and all this with∣out almost a colourable pretence to do it. No can there be found a reason of State for wh they have done, but that these wicked Minister designed to procure a Rebellion at any rate which as they managed, was onely prevented by the miraculous hand of God, or otherwise all Papists in England would have been armed and the fairest opportunity given in the ju time for the execution of that wicked and bloud designe the Papists had. And it is not possible for any man that duly considers it, to think ∣ther, but that those Ministers that acted it we as guilty of the Plot as any of the Lords that a in question for it. My Lords, I am forced speak this the plainer, because till the pressu be fully and clearly taken off from Scotland,  is not possible for me or any thinking man to be∣lieve that good is meant us here: we must sti be upon our guard, apprehending that the prin∣cipal is not changed at Court; and that
these men that are still in Place and Authority, have that influence on the mind of our excellent Prince, that he is not nor cannot be that to us, that his own nature and goodness would incline him to, &c. By the very next Post after this Speech was said to have been spoken, forty written Copies of it were sent from London to Edinburgh; and the Fanaticks grew so insolent and daring on it, that several loyal Gentlemen wrote up accounts to what height of insolencies this Speech had blown up the enemies of the Church and Monarchy; and that they had just reasons to fear, that very dangerous attempts, if not a down-right Rebellion, would speedily ensue thereupon. For now they began to look and speak big in Edinburgh; and many were heard and seen on the Crown of the Causway, who had skulked about in darkness before. And as for the disaffected parts of the Country, they now displayed the Banners of Jesus Christ, as they blasphemously called their Colours at their Conventicles every∣where: and their Preachers now told them. That the time of their deliverance, and Gods taking vengeance on their enemies, was now at hand; onely they must repent, and be strong and of a good courage to fight the battels of the Lord. They also threatned in all places such as they thought were seriously active against them, talking of great
Changes and Revolu∣tions in England; and in publick places drop∣ped Lists of the names of those men whom they had a mind should fall by Heroical hands: particularly at Cupar the Shire-town in Fyffe, a threatning Declaration was found, while the Deputy-Sheriff was there deman∣ding the legal Fines from those who had been convicted of frequenting Field-Conventicles, and entertaining declared and attainted Tray∣tors and Fugitives, and intercommuned Rebels. The Declaration was thus directed. To all and sundry to whom these presents shall come, but especially to the Magi∣strates of the Town of Cupar in Fyffe. BE it known to all men, that whereas under a Pretext of Law, though most falsly, there is most abominable, illegal, and oppressive Rob∣beries and Spoils committed in this Shire; Captain Carnegie and his Souldiers, by vertue of a Precept from William Carmichael, &c. he being authorized and held on to it by that Apostate Prelate Sharpe, who, &c. These are therefore to declare to all that shall any way be concerned in this villanous Robbery and Oppres∣sion, either by assisting, recepting, levying, or any manner of way countenancing the same, that they shall be holden as guilty thereof. And however they bethink themselves for the pre∣sent
secured, being guarded by a Military Force, and those that are thus robbed despicable; yet let them take this for a warning, that they shall be handled severely, answerable to their Vil∣lanies, and that by a Party equal to all that dare own them: and that shortly, as God shall enable and assist them, whose names may be read in these following Letters, A B C D, &c. to the end of the Alphaber. On this followed the Murther of the Arch∣bishop upon the third of May 1679. because, as their first Declaration said, It was appoin∣ted as a day of solemn Thanksgiving for set∣ting up an Ʋsurper to destroy the Interest of Christ, and assume the power which is proper to him alone. These Assassinations were commended to this barbarous people by Mr. Knox of old, who in his History of Scotland approves of the pri∣vate murthering of the Cardinal Beton by Norman Lesley Son to the Earl of Rothsey, and James Melvin; calling it a godly fact, and proposing it as an Example to be followed by Posterity. And in a Scotish Pamphlet printed at the beginning of the late Wars, called Si∣ons Plea, the Heroical Fact of Felton is com∣mended, as fit to be followed by the Nobles of Scotland, saying, God hath chalked out a way,
guiding you by the hand, in giving this first blow; will you not follow him? Mr. Hunt and Baxter of later days, insist on the same Ex∣ample. So that we see the Fanaticks come nothing short of the Jesuits in the practice of Assassinations, and promoting Open Rebellions: concerning which, we have this ingenious Distick, accommodated both to Ignatius the Founder of the Jesuits, and Lesley the Cham∣pion of the Presbyterians. Quam bello plus pace noces & ad ocia versus, Crudeles animum vertis ad insidias Scotiâ & in mediâ conscripto milite regnas Dira{que} (fraterna nomine) bella geris. How mischievous the designes of these men were, appears partly by their obstinate perse∣vering in their treasonable opinions, and justi∣fying their rebellious practices, even to their deaths, and refusing to save their lives by asking pardon, and praying for the King; and partly by the following Declarations which were taken with some of them. The new Covenant taken from Donald Cargil a Field-preacher, at Queens-ferry, the third of June 1680. Sect. 4. SEriously that the hand of our
Kings hath been against the Throne of the Lord, and that now for a long time the Succession of our Kings, and the most part of our Rulers with him, hath been against the purity and power of Reli∣gion and Godliness, and freedom of the Church of God—and hath of late so ma∣nifestly rejected God, his Service and Re∣formation, disclaiming the Covenant of God, and blasphemously enacting it to be burnt by the hand of a Hangman.—Gover∣ned contrary to all right Laws divine and humane; exercised such Tyranny and Ar∣bitrary Government, oppress'd men in their Consciences and Civil Rights; used free Subjects, Christian and reasonable men, with less Discretion and Justice than their Beasts, &c. We do reject that King, and those associate with him, from being our Rulers, because standing in the way of our right, free, and peaceable serving of God— according to our Covenant; and declare them henceforth to be no lawful Rulers, as they have declared us to be no lawful Sub∣jects—And that after this, we neither owe nor shall yield any willing obedience to them, but shall rather suffer the utmost of their cruelties and injustice, until God shall plead our Cause: and that upon these ac∣counts; because they have altered and de∣stroyed the Lords
established Religion, over∣turned the fundamental and established Laws of the Kingdom, taken away Christs Church and Government, and changed the Civil Government of this Land into Tyran∣ny—So that none can look upon us or judge us bound in Allegiance to them, un∣less they say also we are bound in Allegi∣ance to Devils; they being his Vicegerents, and not Gods. —We do declare, that we shall set up over our selves, and over all that God shall give us, Power, Govern∣ment, and Governours, according to the Word of God, and especially to that, Exod. 18.21. and shall no more commit the govern∣ment of our selves, and the making of Laws for us, to any one single person and lineal Successor; we being not tyed to one Fami∣ly-government, not being an Inheritance, but an Office. —And we declare against enacting that [blasphemous] (so Calvin calls that Supremacy of Henry the Eighth, up∣on which this Prerogative is founded) and scrilegious Prerogative given to a King o∣ver the Church of God.
A Declaration and Testimony of the true Prssbyterian, Anti-Prelatick, and Anti-Erastian persecuted Party in Scotland. IT is not amongst the smallest of the Lords Mercies to this poor Land, that there hath alway been some who have gi∣ven testimony of every course of Defecti∣on which we are guilty of; which is a to∣ken for good that he doth not as yet intend to cast us off altogether, but will leave a Remnant in whom he will be glorious, if they through his grace keep themselves clean still—from Popery, Prelacy, & Erastian Supremacy, so much usurped by Him, who it is true (as far as we know) is descended from the Race of our Kings; yet he hath so far deborded from what he ought to have been, by his Perjury, and Usurpation in Church-matters, and Tyranny in matters Civil, as is known by the whole Land, that we have just reason to believe that one of the Lords great controversies is, That we have not disowned him, and the men of his practices, whether inferiour Magistrates or others, as enemies to our Lord
and his Crown, and the True Protestant and Presby∣terian interest in their hands. Therefore although we be for Government and Go∣vernours, such as the Word of God and our Covenants allows; yet we for our selves, and all that will adhere to us, as the Repre∣sentatives of the true Presbyterian-Church, and covenanted Nation of Scotland, consi∣dering the great hazard of lying under such a sin, do by these Presents disown Charles Stuart, who hath been reigning, or rather we may say tyrannizing on the Throne of Scotland (forefaulted several years since, by his Perjury and breach of Covenant with God and his Church) and usurpation of his Crown and Royal Prerogatives therein— and by his Tyranny and breach of the very leges regnandi in matters Civil; for which reasons we declare that several years since he should have been denuded of being King— As also being under the Standard of Christ, we declare War against such a Tyrant and Usurper, and all the men of his practices, as enemies to our Lord Jesus Christ, his Cause and Covenants, and against all such as have strengthened him, sided with him, or any∣wise acknowledged him in his Usurpation and Tyranny Civil and Ecclesiastical; yea, and against all such as shall strengthen, side with, or anywise acknowledge any other
in the like Usurpation and Tyranny, &c. Given at Sanquair, 22 June 1680. Collected out of the true Copies, collated with the Originals, kept among the Records of his Majesties Privy-Coun∣cil. Al. Gibson, Will. Paterson. But that the hand of Joab (i.e. the Jesuits) was in all these Tumults and Rebellions, will thus appear: Dr. Oates, whose Testimony ad homines is very creditable, assures us, That the Jesuits creep in among Dissenters under the disguise of Nonconforming Ministers, to divide and exa∣sperate, to blow up Animosities and Calumnies into actual Rebellion against the Civil Govern∣ment, under a pretence of the dislike of the Ec∣clesiastical. Thus in his printed Narrative, part 1. he says, That Rich. Strange Provin∣cial, John Keins, Basil Langworth, John Fen∣wick, and Harcourt, Jesuits, did write a trea∣sonable Letter to one Father Suiman an Irish Jesuit at Madrid in Spain, in which was con∣tained the plotting and contriving a Rebellion of the Presbyterians in Scotland, against the
Episcopal Government: in order to which, they employed Matthew Wright, Will. Mor∣gan, and one Ireland, to go and preach under the notion of Presbyterians, and give the dis∣affected Scots a true understanding of their sad estate and condition by Episcopal Tyranny; and to tell them, they had now a fair opportunity to vindicate their Liberty and Religion; and that it could be done no other way but by the Sword. Paragr. 18. That the Fathers of the Society in Ireland were very vigilant to prepare the peo∣ple to rise for their Liberty and Religion, and to recover their Estates. Parag. 35. That the Jesuits, by order of their Provincial, were to send new Messengers into Scotland, to promote the Commotions there, and to inform the people of the great Tyranny they lay under, by being de∣nied liberty of Conscience; and that not being to be procured but by the Sword, they must take that course to purchase their liberty. Parag. 43. That two new Ministers were sent into Scotland on the fifth of Aug. 78. one by the name of Fa∣ther Moore, the other of Sanders, alias Brown, with instructions to carry themselves like Non∣conformist-Ministers, and to preach to the dis∣affected Scots the necessity of taking up the Sword for defence of liberty of Conscience, These Dr. Oates saw dispatched, Parag. 150. The Do∣ctor saw a Letter from Father Ireland, Aug. 7. 1678. where he intimates the joy he had that the disaffected Scots
would not lay aside their endeavours for liberty of Religion, and that the Catholicks of Scotland had promised to use their utmost interest to keep up the Commotions there. (And a good Author observes what fell out in the tragical end of the Lord Forester in Scotland, who after the defeat of the Rebels at Bothwel-bridge, took occasion, on the In∣dulgence granted by his Majesty, to erect a house within two miles of Edinburgh, for a publick Conventicle of Nonconformists: and for building this agogue, he went for a zealous man among them: but not long after, he was murthered by a woman-relation with whom he had lived incestuously many years. After his death, a Dispensation was found in his Closet from the Pope to marry her; which he delaying to do, she took his life in repa∣ration of her abused Honour. Which shews that the Supporters of the Nonconformists may be secret Papists.) Parag. 51. John Keins told the Doctor, That the Provincial had ta∣ken care of keeping alive the Differences be∣tween the disaffected Scots and Duke Lauder∣dale; that Mum and Chocolet should be put down, and the Order of the Magpies should be turned to their primitive institution and habit; by Mum; and Chocolet meaning the Protestant Peers, and by Magpies the Bishops. Paragr. 67. n. 7. One means (he says) they were to use to bring in Popery, was
by Seditious Prea∣chers and Catechists set up and maintained, and directed what to preach in their own or other private or publick Conventicles and Field-mee∣tings. And my Author says, I have heard Mr. Prance affirm, that both Gauan and White-bread used to preach frequently in Conventicles in Southwark and other places: and that he was able to prove, Whitebread the Provincial of the Jesuits, who was executed for the Plot, did not many months before the discovery preach in a Conventicle as a Nonconformist at Spald∣wick within five miles of Huntingdon; and that he had several times done the like before, as was attested by several of the Congregation before divers Gentlemen in the County of Hun∣tingdon. But to return for England; where we are told by a marvelous cunning man, That the next Scene that opened, would be Rome or Pa∣ris. But the Prophet saw nothing of Geneva or Scotland, which was also so nearly conjoyn∣ed in the Intrigue, that I scarce know how to separate them. For as I believe there was, is, and will be a Popish Designe to overthrow the Government, as long as the Jesuits re∣tain their Principles and avowed Obedience to the See of Rome: so I am confident, there was, is, and will be a Fanatick Plot against the Church and State, as long as so many Factious and Seditious persons retain their
Antimonarchical and Separating Principles. As for the Papists, they thought their work was sufficiently carried on, by the Di∣visions which they had increased among our selves by the Toleration; and therefore for a while they contented themselves with wor∣king, as so many Moles, under ground, hea∣ving at the Foundations of our Government. But, through the mercy of God, Parturiunt Montes—their intended Babel proved but a Mole-hill which was easily scattered. For, Die Lunoe 1678. it was Resolved (Nemi∣ne Contradicente) in the Parliament, That there was, is, and for several years last past, hath been a horrid and treasonable Plot and Conspiracy, contrived and carried on by those of the Popish Religion, for murthering of his Ma∣jesties sacred Person, and for subverting the Pro∣testant Religion, and the ancient and well-esta∣blished Government of this Kingdom. Of which Coleman, by several Evidences, and his own Letters, was found guilty, in conspiring the death of the King, and endeavouring to subvert the Protestant Religion, and to bring in Popery, by the aid of foreign Powers; for which he was executed, December 3. 1678. Ireland, Pickering, and Grove, were executed for the like Treasons, Jan. 24. Green, Ber∣ry, and Hill, were condemned, Feb. 10. for the Murther of Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey.
Whitebread, Harcourt, Fenwick, Gauan, and Turner, were condemned on the 14th of June 1679. And Richard Langhorne was condemned the same day. And the Lord Stafford was also executed for the same Plot and Conspiracy. It is true, that all these (Coleman onely excepted, whose Letters then produced were so plain, that they admitted of no evasion) denied their guiltiness to the last breath; but it was a practice allowed to men under their circumstances, and had been practised by other of their Perswasion, in the like case: for Garnet (Whitebread's Predecessor, a Prin∣cipal of the Jesuits) being accused for the Gunpowder-treason, as holding correspondence with one Hall then in the Tower, utterly de∣nied it with horrid Imprecations: which when Hall confessed, he beg'd pardon, and confes∣sed he had offended, if Equivocation did not help him. Tresham, another of the Conspira∣tors, had confessed that Garnet was privy to the Treason; but afterward, by the impor∣tunity of his Wife, he protested a little be∣fore his death, that his former Confession was false, and that he had not seen Garnet in six∣teen years before. Which Protestation of his was afterward proved to be false, and Garnet himself confessed that he had seen him many times within that space. And in a Book cal∣led
The Jesuits Catechism, penned, as is said, by some Secular Priests, Anno 1602, they say, That a Jesuit being condemned to die, af∣ter he hath made his Confession to a Priest, he is not tyed to reveal his guilt to the Judge, but it is lawful for him to stand in a stiff denial of it at the time of Execution, as being clear before God, although he persist in a Lye, after he hath discharged his Conscience to his Confessor, p. 166, 167. The Author of Remarks on the Debates of the House at Oxford, tells us, That those De∣bates were as great a Witness for the King, as any he had: For R. M. (says he) said, That the King's telling them in his Speech that he would stick to his Resolutions as to the Succes∣sion, and his proposing an Expedient, is arbitra∣ry, and French; and that it was the Kings de∣signe to cow the Parliament, to bring them to Oxford: And that neither Bishops, nor Coun∣sellors, nor Ministers of State, nor those of the Gospel, have endeavoured to preserve Religion or Safety. T. B. says plainly, They must let bloud. Sir N. C. says, As I understand, it is proposed the Government shall be in Regency du∣ring the Duke's life: I would be satisfied, if the D. will not submit to that, whether those that fight against him are not Traytors in Law. H. B. says, The same interest that passeth the Bill here, will do it in Scotland. Another
in∣sists, That all about the King should be remo∣ved; and that, though Ministers have been al∣tered, yet the Government hath been in such hands, as that the same Principles remain. Sir W. C. says, That the weight of England is the people; and the more they know, the heavier they will be; and that in all Ages they have sunk ill Ministers of State. (And doubtless good ones too.) R. H. looks on the slipping the Bill for Repealing the Act of 35 of Eliz. to be a breach of the Constitution of the Govern∣ment; which if it had been moved in Queen E∣lizabeth's days, that motion would certainly have been so thought. B. W. says of the King's Speech, That it was none of his; that it had nothing of his in it; that it is flat and short; That his Majesty was a better man, and a bet∣ter Protestant, than to make it himself; and that they who advised it, must answer for it. And yet to shew on whom he meant to throw this Dirt, he says afterward, The King hath gone on in a resolution as far as this in his Speech, in his Declaration formerly. Sir W. J. observes, That no man knowing in Laws or Hi∣story, but can tell us, that to Bills grateful and popular, the King gives his consent. L. G. is dissatisfied with these hands in which the Govern∣ment is, and fears the Kings being Absolute: And therefore Sir F. W. says, The same Au∣thority that can make a descent of the Crown, can modifie it.
All their Votes and Speeches must be Prin∣ted, to shew they are not ashamed of what they do. Col. M. hopes that his Posterity will do as he among the rest hath that Meeting and the former done. This Bill of Exclusion to alter the Successi∣on and modifie the Crown, and the Repeal of the Act 35 Eliz. is the means used to secure the King's Person, and the Protestant Religion. Though the King and the established Church are of a quite contrary judgment. And the Act 13 Car. 2. 1660, which says, That by the undoubted fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither the Peers of this Kingdom, nor the Com∣mons, nor both together in Parliament, nor any other person whatsoever, ever had, hath, or ought to have any Coercive power over the per∣sons of the Kings of this Realm. And by the person of the King, is meant all such persons to whom the Crown legally descends. The mischiefs of altering the Succession, hath cost too dear already, to attempt another Experiment. The Dispute between the Houses of York and Lancaster cost the Nation the lives of Eight Kings and Princes; Forty Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls; Two hundred thousand of the People; besides Barons and Gentlemen; and so much Money and Spoil, as cannot be valued.
So that it is sufficiently evident, that these irregular and violent Proceedings were a Prologue to some intended Tragedy. There were hot Irons on the Forge; we heard the blows throughout the Nation, and sparks of fire flew about our ears. But, God be than∣ked, none of those Weapons which were forged against the King or the Church, have prosper∣ed. Hitherto the Lord hath helped us. The Fanatick Party carried on their de∣signes more openly than the Papists, insomuch that they thought to bear down all before them, by the numbers and strength of their Party. The Pulpits and Presses do not onely sound Alarms, but cry Victoria. Their Peaceable designe had divided the Bishopricks between Presbyterian, Independent, and Ana∣baptist. They promise the true Protestant Peacemakers more favour than they had from their Conforming Brethren, because they joy∣ned in a Complaint of Persecution. Mr. Ba∣xter, in his Book of Obedience and Patience, p. 265. tells us, That Persecutors are not im∣mortal, but must die as well as others; and they have not alway the choice of their [Succes∣sors]. He had intimated what one such man as Felton could do; and that some great men might be dealt with as Cardinal Beton was. The King must be delivered from evil Counsellors, and the House purged of Pensio∣ners.
Petitions are procured from the City, and thanks given the Petitioners for their care, &c. Appeals are made to them and the peo∣ple; who are encouraged to joyn Tumults with their Petitions. Mr. Hunt, p. 30. of his Preface, says, So strong is the tye of duty on him (i. e. the King) from his Office, to pre∣vent publick calamities, as no respect whatsoe∣ver, no not of the right Line, can discharge; nor will he himself ever think, if duly addres∣sed, that it can. And p. 34. At this time, if ever, the applications of an active prudence are required from all honest men. If any loyal persons make their Addresses, and publish their dislike of such Seditious Pe∣titioners, they are branded as Abhorrers; as if the Votes for No more Addresses to the King in 1648. were still in force. The law∣fulness of Resistance is publickly printed, and even to this day defended by several Wri∣ters. Page 22. of Mr. Hunt, The Nation (says he) begins to be impatient, by the delays of publick Justice against the Popish Plot: That the dissolution of Parliaments gives us cause to fear that the King hath no more business for Parliaments, p. 27. That the number of the Addressers may be reduced to the Dukes Pen∣sioners: That the Addresses were obtained by application; and the designe was to make
Voi∣tes for discontinuance of Parliaments, and for a Popish Successor. And p. 12. That such as plead for the established Government, are a hired sort of Scaramouchy Zanies, Merry Andrews, and Jack Puddings: That the Succession to the Crown is the Peoples Right. And to this end Doleman or Parsons the Jesuit's Tract of Suc∣cession is reprinted, and recommended to the People. And p. 172. the King is told, if he will follow the counsel of that excellent Bill, he may live long and see good days: as if he were in danger if it pass'd not; and so he expres∣seth, p. 171. If this Bill do not pass, they will take him for a wicked King too (viz. as they took his Father) and will say he hath no law∣ful Issue to succeed him, for his own sins; and many other remarks of wickedness will they make on him. And as to the Duke, he adds, p. 193. Let him attempt the Crown notwith∣standing an Act of Parliament for his Exclusion, he is all that while but attempting to make us miserable. If he be not excluded, he doth it certainly: and we will not entail a War upon the Nation, though for the sake and interest of the glorious Family of the Stuarts. And to effect this, he tells the People, That the Ori∣ginal and Rise of Government is in the People; and that as they gave, so they may take it away as they see occasion: That Government is the perfect creature of men in society, made by pact and
consent, and not otherwise; most cer∣tainly not otherwise; and therefore most cer∣tainly ordainable by the whole Community, for the safety and preservation of the whole. The active men of the Fanatick Party had with great industry and cost got in many Members to serve in Parliament, of whom they had a very great confidence that they would promote their designes. Those men that had been actually in Arms against the Royal Martyr, are now esteemed the Patriots of their Country; and such as acted loyally, are branded, fined, and imprisoned. The Earl of Sh. who had caused the Exche∣quer to be shut up, broken the Triple League, and advised a Delenda Carthago, being now discontented by reason of a Pique between his Royal Highness and himself, is made the Head of the Faction; and either he or the Duke must fall; and no consideration is had, whether the King and Kingdom fall with the Duke or not. Certain it is, that by the intended As∣sociation (whereof I shall here give you a Copy) it was intended to reduce the Go∣vernment to a Commonwealth. WE the Knights, &c. finding to the great grief of our hearts, the Popish Priests and Jesuits, with the Papists and their Adhe∣rents and Abettors, have for several years last past
pursued a most pernicious and hellish Plot, to root out the true Protestant Religion as a pestilent Heresie, to take away the Life of our gracious King, to subvert our Laws and Liber∣ties, and to set up Arbitrary Power and Po∣pery. And it being notorious that they have been highly encouraged by the countenance and pro∣tection given and procured for them by J. D. of Y. and by their expectations of his succeeding to the Crown; and that through crafty Popish Counsels, his Designes have so far prevailed, that he hath created many and great Depen∣dents upon him by his bestowing Offices and Preferments both in Church and State. It appearing also to us, That by his influence mercenary Forces have been levied and kept on foot for his secret Designes, contrary to our Laws; the Officers thereof having been named and ap∣pointed by him, to the apparent hazard of his Majesties Person, our Religion and Government, if the danger had not been timely foreseen by se∣veral Parliaments, and part of those Forces, with great difficulty, caused by them to be dis∣banded at the Kingdoms great Expence: And it being evident, that notwithstanding all the continual endeavours of the Parliament to de∣liver his Majesty from the counsels, and out of the power of the said D. yet his Interest in the Ministers of State and others have been so
pre∣valent, that Parliaments have been unreason∣ably prorogued and dissolved, when they have been in hot pursuit of the Popish Conspiracies, and ill Ministers of State their Assistants. And that the said D. in order to reduce all into his own power, hath procured the Garisons, the Arms and Ammunition, and all the power of the Seas and Souldiery, and Lands belonging to these three Kingdoms, to be put into the hands of his Party and their Adherents, even in oppo∣sition to the Advice and Order of the last Par∣liament. And as we considering with heavy hearts how greatly the Strength, Reputation, and Treasure of the Kingdom, both at Sea and Land, is wasted and consumed, and lost by the intri∣cate expensive management of these wicked de∣structive Designes; and finding the same Coun∣cils, after exemplary Justice upon some of the Conspirators, to be still pursued with the utmost devillish Malice, and desire of Revenge; where∣by his Majesty is in continual hazard of being murdered to make way for the said D.'s ad∣vancement to the Crown, and the whole King∣dom in such case is destitute of all security of their Religion, Laws, Estates, and Liberty, sad experience in the case, Queen Mary having proved the wisest Laws to be of little force to keep out Popery and Tyranny under a Popish Prince. We have therefore endeavoured in a Parlia∣mentary
way, by a Bill for the purpose, to Bar and Exclude the said Duke from the Succession to the Crown, and to banish him for ever out of these Kingdoms of England and Ireland. But the first means of the King and Kingdoms Safe∣ty being utterly rejected, and we left almost in despair of obtaining any real and effectual secu∣rity, and knowing our selves to be intrusted to advise and act for the preservation of his Ma∣jesty and the Kingdom, and being perswaded in our Consciences that the dangers aforesaid are so imminent and pressing, that there ought to be no delay of the best means that are in our power to fecure the Kingdom against them. We have thought fit to propose to all true Protestants an Ʋnion amongst themselves, by solemn and sacred promise of mutual Defence and Assistance in the preservation of the true Protestant Religion, his Majesties Person and Royal State, and our Laws, Liberties, and Properties; and we hold it our bounden Duty to joyn our selves for the same in∣tent in a Declaration of our united Affections and Resolutions in the form insuing. I A. B. Do in the presence of God solemn∣ly promise, vow, and protest to main∣tain and defend, to the utmost of my power, with my Person and Estate, the true Prote∣stant Religion, against Popery and all Popish Superstition, Idolatry, or
Innovation, and all those who do or shall endeavour to spread or advance it within this Kingdom. I will also, as far as in me lies, maintain and defend his Majesties Royal Person and Estate; as also the Power and Priviledge of Parliaments, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, against all Incroachments and Usurpation of Arbitrary Power whatsoever; and endeavour entirely to disband all such Mercenary Forces as we have reason to be∣lieve were raised to advance it, and are still kept up in and about the City of London, to the great amazement and terrour of all the good People of the Land. Moreover, J. D. of Y. having publickly professed and owned the Popish Religion, and notoriously given life and birth to the dam∣nable and hellish Plots of the Papists against his Majesties Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Government of this Kingdom; I will never consent that the said J. D. of Y. or any other, who is or hath been a Papist, or any ways adhered to the Papists in their wicked Designs, be admitted to the Succession of the Crown of England; but by all lawful means, and by force of Arms, if need so require, ac∣cording to my abilities, will oppose him, and endeavour to subdue, expel, and destroy him, if he come into England, or the Dominions thereof, and seek by force to set
up his pre∣tended Title, and all such as shall adhere un∣to him, or raise any War, Tumult, or Scdi∣tion for him, or by his command, as pub∣lick Enemies of our Laws, Religion, and Country. To this end, we and every one of us whose hands are here under-written, do most willingly bind our selves and every one of us unto the o∣ther, joyntly and severally, in the Bond of one firm and loyal Society or Association; and do promise and vow before God, That with our joynt and particular Forces we will oppose and pursue unto destruction, all such as upon any Title what∣soever shall oppose the Just and Righteous Ends of this Association; and maintain, protect, and defend all such as shall enter into it, in the just performance of the true intent and meaning of it. And lest this just and pious Work should be any ways obstructed or hindered for want of Discipline and Conduct, or any evil-minded per∣sons, under pretence of raising Forces for the ser∣vice of this Association, should attempt or com∣mit Disorders; we will follow such Orders as we shall from time to time receive from this pre∣sent Parliament, whilst it shall be sitting, or the major part of the Members of both Houses sub∣scribing this Association, when it shall be pro∣rogued or dissolved; and obey such Officers as shall by
them be set over us in the several Counties, Cities, and Burroughs, until the next meeting of this or another Parliament; and will then shew the same Obedience and Submission unto it, and those who shall be of it. Neither will we for any respect of Persons or Causes, or for fear, or reward, separate our selves from this Association, or fail in the prose∣cution thereof during our lives, upon pain of be∣ing by the rest of us prosecuted and suppressed as perjur'd persons, and publick enemies to God, the King, and our Native Country. To which Pains and Punishments we do vo∣luntarily submit our selves, and every one of us, without benefit of any colour or pretence to ex∣cuse us. In witness of all which Premises to be inviolably kept, we do to this pre∣sent Writing put our Hands and Seals, and shall be most ready to ac∣cept and admit any others hereafter into this Society and Association. This is evidently a Plot to retrieve the Good Old Cause: and to second this, the Bill against the Succession (of which I have also given you a Copy) is violently prosecuted.
A Copy of the BILL against the Duke of York. FOrasmuch as these Kingdoms of England and Ireland, by the wonderful providence of Almighty God, many years since have been delivered from the slavery and superstition of Popery, which had despoiled the King of his so∣veraign power, for that it did and doth advance the Pope of Rome to a power over Soveraign Princes, and makes him Monarch of the Ʋni∣verse, and doth withdraw the Subjects from their Allegiance, by pretended Absolutions from all former Oaths and Obligations to their lawful Soveraign, and by many Superstitions and Immoralities, hath quite subverted the ends of the Christian Religion: but notwith∣standing that Popery hath been long since con∣demned by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, for the detestable Doctrine and treasonable at∣tempts of its Adherents against the Lives of their lawful Soveraigns, Kings and Queens of these Realms, yet the Emissaries, Priests, and Agents for the Pope of Rome resorting into this Kingdom in great numbers, contrary to the Laws thereof, have for several years late past, as well by their own devillish arts and policies, as by counsel and
assistance of foreign Princes and Prelates, known enemies to these Nations, contrived and carried on a most horrid and ex∣ecrable Conspiracy to destroy and murder the Person of his most sacred Majesty, and to sub∣vert the ancient Government of these Realms. and to extirpate the Protestant Religion, and massacre the true Professors thereof: And for the better effecting their wicked designes, and encouraging their villanous Accomplices, they have traiterously seduced the Duke of York, presumptive Heir of these Crowns, to the Com∣munion of the Church of Rome, and have in∣veigled him to enter into several Negotiations with the Pope, his Cardinals, and Nuntio's, for promoting the Romish Church and Interest; and by his means and procurement have advanced the power and greatness of the French King, to the manifest hazard of these Kingdoms; that by the descent of these Crowns upon a Papist, and by foreign Alliances and Assistance, they may be able to succeed in their wicked and villanous designes. And forasmuch as the Parliaments of England, according to the Laws and Statutes thereof, have heretofore, for great and weighty reasons of State, and for the publick good and common interest of this Kingdom, directed and limited the Succession of the Crown in other man∣ner than of course it would otherwise have gone, but never had such important and urgent Rea∣sons as
at this time press and require their using their extraordinary power in that behalf: Be it therefore enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same; and it is hereby enacted accordingly, That James Duke of York, Albany, and Ulster, having departed openly from the Church of England, and having publickly professed and owned the Popish Reli∣gion, which hath notoriously given birth and life to the most damnable and hellish Plot, by the most gracious providence of God lately brought to light, shall be excluded and disabled, and is hereby excluded and disabled for ever, from possessing, having, holding, inheriting, or enjoy∣ing the Imperial Crowns and Governments of this Realm, and these Kingdoms, and of all Ter∣ritories, Countries, and Dominions, now, or which shall hereafter be under his Majesties subjection; and off and from all Titles, Rights, Prerogatives, and Revenues with the said Crowns now or hereafter to be enjoyed: And that upon the demise or death of his Majesty without Heirs of his body, (whom God long preserve) the Crowns and Governments of this Kingdom, and all Territories, Countries, and Dominions, now, or which shall hereafter be un∣der his Majesties subjection, with all the Rights,
Prerogatives, and Revenues therewith of right enjoyed, and to be enjoyed, shall devolve and come upon such person who shall be next lawful Heir of the same, and who shall have always been truly and professedly of the Protestant Re∣ligion now established by Law within this King∣dom; as if the said Duke of York were actu∣ally dead: And that whatever acts of sove∣raign power the said Duke of York shall at any time exert or exercise, shall be taken, deemed, and adjudged, and are hereby declared and en∣acted High-Treason, and to be punished accor∣dingly. And forasmuch as the peace, safety, and well being of these Kingdoms, do so intirely de∣pend upon the due execution of, and obedience to this Law, Be it further enacted by the Autho∣rity aforesaid, That if any person shall in any∣wise, at any time, during the King's life (which God long preserve) or after his demise or de∣cease, aid, assist, counsel, or hold correspondence with the said Duke of York, who is and ought to be esteemed a perpetual Enemy to these Kingdoms and Governments, either within these Kingdoms or out of them; or shall endeavour or contrive his return into either of them, or in∣to any of the Territories or Dominions of the same; or shall during the King's life publish or declare him to be the lawful or rightful Succes∣sor, apparent, presumptive, or other Heir to the Crown of England; or shall after the demise or decease of the King that now is, proclaim, publish,
or declare the said Duke of York to be King, or to have right or title to the Crown or Go∣vernment of England or Ireland; or shall by word, writing, or printing, maintain or assert that he hath any manner of right or title to the Crown or Government of these Kingdoms, and shall be therefore convict upon the evidence of two or more lawful and credible Witnesses, shall be adjudged guilty of High-Treason, and shall suffer and forfeit as in cases of High-Treason. And forasmuch as the Duke's return and coming into any of the foresaid Kingdoms, Countries, Territories, or Dominions, will naturally con∣duce to bring vast mischiefs, and all the evils hereby provided against upon them, in War and Slaughter, and unspeakable Calamity, which therefore the said Duke must be presumed to de∣signe by such his return or coming into any the foresaid Kingdoms, &c. Be it therefore like∣wise enacted, and it is hereby enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the said Duke do at any time hereafter return or come into any of the foresaid Kingdoms, &c. he shall be, and hereby is thereupon attainted of High-Treason: And all manner of persons whatsoever are autho∣rised and required to apprehend, secure, and im∣prison his person; and in case of resistance made by him, or any of his Complices, to subdue, &c. imprison him or them by force of Arms.
Now let any considering man judge whereto these violent proceedings tended; when the King's necessary Guards be thought a grie∣vance, and the executing the penal Laws on Dissenters be made a grievance of the Sub∣jects, an encouragement to Popery, and dange∣rous to the Peace of the Kingdom: when the King may not raise moneys on his own Reve∣nues, and his People will give him none; nay, they shall be accounted Enemies to the Peace of the Nation, that assist him: when his Cu∣stoms shall be taken from him, and the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy dispensed with; the Bill for excluding the lawful Successor re∣solutely insisted on, and a War threatned by some, if it did not pass: when the D. of M. must be restored to his Offices, and all that should oppose the Bill of Exclusion, shall be dealt with as Betrayers of the King, the Pro∣testant Religion, and the Kingdom of England, and Pensioners of France; and it must be ta∣ken as a favour, that the D. of Y. was onely to be excluded, and another would perswade him to destroy himself, and another threat∣neth in print, that rather than not exclude him, they would exclude the whole glorious Family of the Stuarts: when seditious Peti∣tions were counted part of the Liberty of the People, and no Addresses to the King by the Loyal
Party to be tolerated; and public thanks given to a seditious Party of the City, for their manifest Loyalty to the King, their care, charge, and vigilancy for the preservation of his Majesties person and the Protestant Reli∣gion; and the King's Prerogative to call or dismiss his Great Council questioned; and they who infused fears and groundless jealou∣sies of the Kings ruling by an Arbitrary power, did in an arbitrary manner fine and imprison divers loyal Subjects: And when it was pub∣lished, That if the King should die a violent death, they would avenge it on the Papists: when the chief Ministers of State, the Bishops, the Lord Mayor, and Magistrates, and all that were eminent for their Loyalty, were already condemned, as being Popishly affected, and the Clergie branded as Projectors for the Church of Rome. Hereupon (a Discovery being made by one of the Conspirators) the Kings Majesty issu∣eth his Declaration, 27 of July 1683. to in∣form his Subjects of a Plot contrived by per∣sons of several Perswasions, to make a general Insurrection in this Kingdom and Scotland. And that while this Designe was forming, some Villains were carrying on that horrid and exe∣crable Plot of Assassinating his Majesties person, and his dearest Brother. And a Massacre was to follow; wherein they principally designed for slaughter the Officers of State, the present
Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London, and others that had been most eminent for Loyalty. Upon which Discovery, James Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Melvin, Sir Jo. Cockrane, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Robert Ferguson, Richard Goode∣nough, Francis Goodenough, Richard Rumbold, William Rumbold, Richard Nelthorp, Nathaniel Wade, William Tompson, James Burton, Joseph Elby, Samuel Gibbs, Francis Charleton, Joseph Tyley, Casteers and Lobb two Nonconformist-preachers, Edward Norton, John Row, John Ayloff, and John Atherton, fled from Justice, Ford Lord Grey made his escape, Arthur Earl of Essex killed himself in the Tower: Wil∣liam Lord Russel, Thomas Walcot, William Hone, and John Rous, were on their Tryals convicted and executed. And it is observa∣ble, that each of them confessed enough to clear the Justice of the Nation. The most that they could plead for themselves, was, that their Crime could amount onely to misprision of Treason. Algernoon Sidney (another of the Conspi∣rators) was tryed, condemned, and execu∣ted afterward; who professed to die for the Old Cause wherein he had been engaged from his youth. And indeed, he was so far engaged, that being named for one of the Royal Mar∣tyr's Judges, he often appeared at his Tryal. And Manus haec inimica Tyrannis, was his Motto.
The Earl of Shaftsbury had been indicted of High-Treason, 24 Novemb. 1681. for en∣deavouring to depose and put to death the King, and levy war within the Kingdom: he having declared, That in a short time the Parliament was to sit at Oxford, and that he had inspected the Elections, and was satisfied that the Parlia∣ment would insist on three matters (viz.) The Bill of Exclusion against the Duke of York, The abolishing the Act of Parliament of the 35 of Queen Elizabeth, and a new Bill for u∣niting Protestant Dissenters; which he was confident the King would not consent to: and if so, that he and other Lords had provided strength to compel him, under the command of Captain Wilkinson and John Booth: he de∣clared the King to be a man of no faith, and there was no trust in him: That he deserved to be deposed as well as King Richard the second. And the said Earl further declared, That would not desist till he brought this Kingdom  a Commonwealth, as Holland was: That the King was a man of an unfaithful heart, not f to rule and govern, being false, unjust, and crue to his people; and if he would not be governed they would depose him. Though the Witnesse swore positively to the particulars, yet there was such a Jury provided, as brought in an Ignoramus, Sir Sam. Bernardiston being their Foreman; who hath since been found guilty of Misdemeanors of a high nature.
During the late seditious Stirs and Tumults, none was more active than one Stephen Col∣ledge, (a Joyner of London) a pragmatical person, that pleased himself with the title of The Protestant Joyner; he had been busie for a long time, sowing Sedition, and talking Treason so openly, that his Friends advised him to forbear, lest he came to the Gallows. He made it his business to serve some dissen∣ting Lords, boasting of his acquaintance with the Earl of Shaftsbury, Lords Gray, Howard, Clare, Huntington, Pagit, Lovelace, &c. He had fitted his Raree Show, and scandalous Songs and Pictures reflecting on the Royal Fa∣mily. The sole pretence for his treasonable actions, was his zeal against Papists, who (he said) had feigned seventeen or eighteen Sham∣plots against the Protestants: he affirmed that London was to be seized by the Papists, and that they had a designe against the Par∣liament at Oxford; and therefore he, with some others whom he had perswaded, came well armed thither. Divers Ribbons were provided as a mark of distinction, bearing this Motto: NO POPERY, NO SLAVERY; one of which he gave to Turbervil, and it was proved, as the Lord Chief Justice said at the close of the Tryal, whom he called Pa∣pists: The King was a Papist, the Bishops and the Church of England were Papists.
He was indicted for High-Treason, the 17 and 18 of August 1681, it being proved that he said, That nothing of good was to be expected from the King: That he minded nothing but beastliness, and the destruction of the people: That he endeavoured to establish Arbitrary Government and Popery, Dugdale, Smith, and Turbervil, who had been Witnesses a∣gainst the Lord Stafford, were of the Evi∣dence against him; though there were e∣nough, if these had been laid aside, to have proved him guilty. Mr. Masters testified against him, p. 31. That he said, The Parliament in 1640. was as good a Parliament as ever was chosen. To which Mr. Masters answered, I wonder how you have the impudence to justifie their procee∣dings that raised the Rebellion against the King, and cut off his head. To which Colledge re∣plied, They did nothing but what they had just cause for; and the Parliament at Westminster was of their Opinion, p. 31. And being deman∣ded what he had to say against this testimony; he answers, That Mr. Masters had said nothing material, and that it was but a jocose discourse, p. 39. To which Mr. Justice Jones replied, Do you make mirth of the blackest Tragedy that ever was, that horrid Rebellion, and the murther of the late King? Colledge answered, I never justified that
Parliament in any thing that they did contrary to Law. One Mr. Jennings, who was another Wit∣ness, testified, that on the bleeding of Col∣ledge's Nose, he said, It was the first bloud that he lost in the Cause, but it will not be long ere more be lost. He saw him sell the Rib∣bons with NO POPERY, NO SLAVERY, to a Parliament-man as he supposed, who tyed it on his Sword, &c. p. 32. It is observed in the Tryal, that there was not one Papist that gave evidence against him; and that they were such of whom Col∣ledge had formerly given a good Character; though now the case was altered. The Jury were so well satisfied with the Evidence, that they quickly agreed, and brought him in guilty: and so he was condemned and exe∣cuted at Oxford, on Wednesday 31 of August 1681. Captain Tho. Walcot was indicted for High-Treason at the Old-Baily, July 12, &c. 1683. for endeavouring to move and stir up War and Rebellion against the King, to deprive the King of his Crown, and to put him to death; for which he conspired with divers other Traytors, and had several meetings and consults to those ends, and provided Blunderbusses, Carbines, and Pistols, &c. Which being proved by Col. Rumsey, Mr. Keeling, Mr. Bourne, Mr. West, and Captain Richardson, he was found guilty, sentenced, and executed.
Then was William Hone arraigned on the like Indictment; the Evidence against him were Mr. Keeling, Mr. West, Sir Nicholas Butler, and Capt. Richardson: upon whose testimonies he was found guilty, and execu∣ted also. July 13. the Lord Russel was tryed for en∣deavouring to raise a Rebellion, to seize and de∣stroy the Kings Guards, to deprive the King, and put him to death. The Attorney-General urged, That the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray, Sir Tho. Armstrong, Mr. Ferguson, and this Lord, with the Earl of Essex then dead, were of a Council for a general Rising; to which end they received several Messages from the Earl of Shaftsbury, who being disap∣pointed by Mr. Trenchard, who had promised to raise a thousand Foot and two or three hun∣dred Horse, he and Ferguson left the Kingdom. The Witnesses were Col. Rumsey, Mr. Shep∣herd, and the Lord Howard, on whose evi∣dence he was found guilty, and sentenced to die; and accordingly he was beheaded in Lincolns-Inne-Fields, July 21. 1683. The next was the Tryal of Mr. Rous, a∣gainst whom Mr. Leigh, Mr. Lee, Mr. Corbin, Mr. Richardson, gave such evidence, that he was presently found guilty, and received sen∣tence to die; and was executed according∣ly.
Captain Blague being indicted for conspi∣ring to seize the Tower of London, received his Tryal, but was acquitted. Algernon Sidney was tryed at the Kings-Bench-Bar, on the 7th, 21th, and 27th of November 1683. His Indictment was almost the same as the former, onely there was ad∣ded to it, his sending of Aaron Smith into Scotland to excite and stir up the Subjects to a Rebellion there; and his being the Author of a traiterous Libel, containing, among o∣ther seditious discourses, these words (viz.) The power originally in the People of England is delegated unto the Parliament: He (the most serene Lord Charles the Second now King of England meaning) is subject unto the Law of God, as he is a man; to the People that makes him a King, inasmuch as he is a King: the Law sets a measure unto that Subjection, and the Parliament judges of particular cases thereupon arising. He must be content to sub∣mit his interest to theirs, since he is no more than any one of them in any other respect, than that he is by the consent of all, raised above any o∣ther. If he doth not like this condition, he may renounce the Crown: but if he receive it upon that condition (as all Magistrates do the pow∣er they receive) and swear to perform it, he must expect that the performance will be exacted, or revenge taken by those that he hath betrayed.
And in other places these traiterous Sen∣tences are contained: viz. We may therefore change or take away Kings without breaking any Yoke, or that is made a Yoke which is not one: the injury is therefore in making and imposing, and there can be none in breaking it, &c. In p. 23, 24, 25, & 26. many other things were read at the Tryal, out of that Libel; parti∣cularly p. 26. where speaking of a King, he says, When the matter is brought to that, that he must not reign, or the People over whom he would reign must perish, it is easily decided. As if the Question had been asked in the time of Nero or Domitian, whether they should be left at liberty to destroy the best part of the world, as they endeavoured to do, or it should be rescu∣ed by their destruction! And as for the Peo∣ples being Judges in their own case, it is plain they ought to be the onely Judges, because it is their own, and onely concerns themselves. The Attorney-General (p. 13.) says, The whole Book is an Argument for the People to rise in Arms and vindicate their Wrongs. He (i. e. Sidney) lays it down, That the King hath no authority to dissolve the Parliament: but 'tis apparent the King hath dissolved many; there∣fore he hath broken his Trust, and invaded our Rights. And concludes, We may therefore shake off the Yoke: for 'tis not a Yoke we sub∣mitted to, but a Yoke by Tyranny (that is the meaning of it) imposed on us.
The Witnesses who swore to the Indict∣ment were Mr. West, Col. Rumsey, Mr. Kee∣ling, the Lord Howard, Sir Andrew Foster, Mr. Atterbury, Sir Philip Lloyd, Mr. Shep∣herd, Mr. Cary, and Mr. Cooke: upon whose evidence the Jury found him guilty of High-Treason; and accordingly sentence was pro∣nounced against him, and he was executed on Tower-hill, Decemb. 7. 1683. I shall adde onely a few Remarks on the dying Speeches and Confession of these men: and first of Col. Sidney. He had no other Apology for himself, but that he had been engaged from his youth in that Old Cause; for which he prayed, in these words: Defend thine own Cause, and defend these that defend it: stir up such as are faint, direct those that are willing, confirm those that waver; give wis∣dom and integrity unto all—Grant that I may die glorifying thee for all thy mercies, and that at the last thou hast permitted me to be singled out as a Witness of thy Truth, and even by the confession of my Opposers, for that Old Cause in which I was from my youth engaged, and for which thou hast often and wonderfully declared thy self. Now the Old Cause wherein Col. Sidney was engaged, was the destruction of the Church, and the Royal Martyr, to set up a Commonwealth; in which he acted as a
Colo∣nel, and one of the Judges of the Royal Mar∣tyr: yet he calls these Treasons Gods Truth. In what Religion this Gentleman died, God onely knows: for he made no profession at all, whether Presbyterian, Independent, Ana∣baptist, or Quaker; but a Protestant at large, as any of those Factions term themselves. As to the Lord Russel, he was also unhap∣pily engaged in the same OLD CAƲSE from his youth, as may appear by the follow∣ing Relation. Mr. Johnson, the Author of the Life of Julian, confirmed him in his riper years in those opinions whichThis Lewis was a stickling Pres∣byterian, that had gotten the Seque∣stration of Totnam-high-cross from Mr. Wimpew a loyal Minister of the Church of England. To this Lewis many Noblemen and Gentlemen sent their Sons for Education: among whom was the late Lord Russel. And to divert his Scholars, he composed a Farce, wherein the young Gentle∣men were to be Actors. The Farce had all the Formalities of a High Court of Justice; President, Sollici∣tor, Witnesses, &c. The Criminal was an old Shock Water-Dog, which he called Charles Stuart. This Dog was arraigned, tryed, condemned, and executed by cutting off his head. By which action he instilled the Principles of Ring-killing into his Scholars; as if the murdering of a King, were no more than the cutting off a Dogs neck. Mr. Lewis and Dr. Manton had educated him. For Mr. Johnson having written that Traiterous Book, to defend the mischie∣vous Doctrine of Resistance, this unhappy man could not be extricated from that snare, to his death. And it was long before his acquaintance with
this Seditious Author, that Dr. Manton, a great Abettor of the first War, and a Favourite of Cromwel, had instilled the same Principles into him. For in his Comment on St. James 4.1. he proposeth this Question: Whether Religion may be defended by Arms? To which he answers; That sometime the outward exer∣cise of Religion and Worship may be established and secured by Laws; and among other Pri∣viledges and Rights, the liberty of pure Wor∣ship may be one; which being invaded by Vio∣lence, may be defended by Arms. —The Estates of a Kingdom may maintain their Religion a∣gainst the tyranny and malice of the Prince. This Doctor had the greatest influence on the Education of that Noble Gentleman, be∣ing a Chaplain to the Family, and Preacher at Covent-garden for many years. It is also very observable what this Gentleman says in his Paper delivered to the Sheriffs, where he blessed God that he fell by the Ax, and not by the fiery tryal; as if it were safer to die as a Traytor than a Martyr. —But he says, What∣ever apprehensions I had of Popery, and OF MY OWN SEVERE and heavy share I was like to have under it when it should pre∣vail. The Lord Russel in all probability had some regard to the loss of those Lands which de∣scended from his
Ancestors, but had been in the days of Henry the Eighth alienated from the Church, and which by the return of Po∣pery, might be taken from his Family. And he being perswaded, as he expresseth it in that Speech—I did believe, and do still, that Pope∣ry is breaking in upon the Nation; and that those who advance it, will stop at nothing to carry on their designe; he on the other side would stop at nothing to keep it out. This most likely made him so zealous for the Bill of Exclusion; and unhappily engaged him (the Bill being it self excluded) in this other desperate Attempt: for, as Solomon observed, It is a snare to a man to devour that which is holy. And indeed there is no other means so likely to bring in Popery, as the impotent and unlawful outcrys and endeavours of Fanatical persons pretending to keep it out. Religion is for the most part made a Cloak and Pretence to serve Interest. In Queen Mary's days, when the Pope sol∣licited the Queen for a restoration of Church∣lands and Dignities, it was first proposed to the Cabinet-Council; where the Lord of Bed∣ford being present, and knowing himself greatly concerned, fell into a great passion; and breaking his Chaplet of Beads from his girdle, flung them into the fire, swearing deeply, That he valued his sweet Abbey of Woo∣harn more than any fatherly
Counsel or Com∣mands that could come from Rome. Where∣upon the Queen considering of what temper others of the Nobility might be, was discou∣raged from prosecuting that designe. This Lord delivered a Paper to the She∣riffs, wherein he acknowledgeth that when he was at a meeting at Mr. Shepherd's, there was some discourse about the feasableness of seizing the King's Guards: and several times by acci∣dent in general discourse elsewhere (saith he) I have heard it mentioned as a thing easie to be done; particularly at my Lord Shaftsbury's; but never consented to it as fit to be done. That the Duke of Monmouth told him he was glad that he was come to Town; for my Lord Shafts∣bury and some hot men would undo them all, if great care were not taken. That being at Mr. Shepherd's with a Company that met there, there were things said by some with more heat than judgment. And it is by some inferred (saith he) that I was acquainted with these heats and ill designes, and did not discover them: but this is but misprision of Treason. He says, Nothing was sworn against him but some discourse about making some Stirs; and this is not levying War against the King, which is Treason, and not the consulting and discour∣sing about it, which was all that was witnessed a∣gainst me: and the designe of seizing the Guards, was construed a designe of killing the King; and in that I was cast.
Captain Walcot in his last Speech said, I do neither blame the Judges nor Jury, nor the Kings Council: I onely blame some men that in reality and truth were deeper concerned than I, that came as Witnesses against me. He con∣fesseth that he was invited by Col. Romsey to some meetings where some things were discoursed of in order to asserting their Liberties and Pro∣perties, which they looked on to be invaded and violated: That Mr. West often discoursed with him concerning lopping off the two Sparks, meaning the King and the Duke; and proposed it might be done at a Play, saying, that then they would die in their Calling: That he bought Arms to that end, and said they had fifty em∣ployed to that end: That he told them the kil∣ling the King would carry such a blemish and stain with it, as would descend to Posterity; and that he having eight Children, he was loath they should be blemished with it: That by the Law of the Land he ought to die, for being in those meetings where a War was debated. Be∣ing asked by Dr. Cartwright whether the death of the King was proposed while he was there; he answered, It was so, and that he and those Lords who were like to suffer, were under general apprehensions of Popery and Slavery co∣ming in. And he confessed to the Doctor, He was guilty enough to have his life taken a∣way; adding, The same measure we mete to
a∣nother, that measure God will mete to us. So that on this mans Confession, if there were no other, (considering the circumstances wherein he was, being a person formerly en∣gaged in the Rebellion, a man of Estate and Parts) nothing can be more evident than both parts of the Plot (viz.) to raise a Re∣bellion, and to murther the King and his Royal Brother. Which was farther confessed by Mr. Hone, who told Dr. Cartwright that he was guilty of the Crime according to the Law of the Land, and to the Law of God; that he was to meet the King and Duke of York, but did not know at that time when or where, nor what was his bu∣siness; and afterward, that he told Mr. Kee∣ling he was for killing the King, and saving the Duke of York; for which being asked a rea∣son, he answered, As to that, I think this, That the Duke of York did openly profess himself to be a Roman Catholick, and I did say I had ra∣ther dispose of the King than the Duke of York. And being asked again by the Doctor, Had you rather a Papist should reign over us, as you take him to be, than the King? he replied, I do not know what to say to that. Captain Walcot it seems had said of Rous, that he would die an Atheist: and in truth, such bloudy men are no better; they are of the mind that Colonel Morly and some other
Commanders in Cromwel's Army were, who said, They would cast themselves on any Prince, even on the Turk, rather than suffer themselves to be subdued by the King. But this Mr. Rous did confess, That since the Hurly-burlies con∣cerning Parliaments going off and coming on, he had been a hearer, and understood too much of some kind of Meetings, and especially of those that call themselves Protestants, who are ten thousand times worse than any others; and pray∣ed God to forgive him that he had not been as careful and diligent, and as ready and forward to discover them a great while since. I gave his Majesty (says he) an account to the best of my knowledge, and he seemed to be well pleased, and thankt me for it: but before I had power to put it in writing, the Council thought it fit that I should be committed to Prison. That there was a designe to set up the Duke of Mon∣mouth, I will not say, while the King reigns; though some extravagant hot-headed men have taken upon them to discourse these things, but not any worthy man. I know those that have been worthy to be called by that name, have de∣clared in my hearing, that in opposition to the Duke of York, if the King be seized, they would stand by the Duke of Monmouth. There are others that were for a Commonwealth, and some few for the Duke of Bucks. He confesseth, that Goodenough told him
the King was to be taken off as he came from Windsor; that they wanted a place of meeting in order to it; and the place pitched on was Black-heath, where Rous advised that a Ball of Silver worth thir∣ty or forty pound might be thrown up, and the people invited to come and drink a Bowl of Punch: which would have gathered thirty or forty thousand in two or three days time: That this Goodenough spake in base Language con∣cerning the Duke of York, calling him Rogue and Dog, and that we will do his work; and that after the Kings decease, the Duke of Mon∣mouth having a Vogue with the People, must of necessity succeed. And he confessed that it was just in God, and righteous and just in the King, that he died. On the 6th of February 1683. in Hillary-Term, John Hambden Esq was tryed at the Kings-Bench-Bar, upon an Indictment of High Misdemeanour, for assembling, meeting, consulting, &c. with divers ill-disposed Sub∣jects of the King, to disquiet, molest, and disturb, and, as much as in him lay, to incite, stir up, and procure Sedition within this Kingdom of England; and further, to cause an Insurrection, and to provide Arms and armed men for that purpose. And also, for that he did consult, a∣gree and consent that a person should be sent in∣to Scotland to invite
and incite divers ill-dis∣posed people to come into England to consult and advise with him and others here, concerning a and assistance from thence to bring about their designes. He pleaded Not guilty: but upon a full and fair hearing, he was found Guilty and Fined forty thousand pounds. Which Sentence was given the 12th of February, being the last day of the said Term. The Witnesses were, James Duke of Monmouth (but he did not appear) William Lord How∣ard, whose evidence is supported by Sir An∣drew Foster, Mr. Atterbury, one Sheriff tha lodg'd Aaron Smith at Newcastle, and Be that directed him the way into Scotland The Lord Chief Justice tells the Jury, Th if there were another Witness as positive against the Defendant as my Lord Howard, the mat∣ter would amount to no less than High-Trea∣son. The next day (being the 7th of Febru∣ary 1683.) Lawrence Braddon and High Speke, Gent. were tryed upon an Informa∣tion of High Misdemeanour, Subornation, and spreading False Reports, at the Court o Kings-Bench; for that whereas the Earl of Es∣sex on the 10th of July in the thirty fifth year of the King, was committed to the Tower for High-Treasons supposed to be committed; on the 13th did there kill and murther himself, as appear by an
Inquest taken in the Tower the 14th day of July in the year aforesaid: They, not being ignorant thereof, but contriving and malici∣ously and seditiously intending to bring the Kings Government into hatred, disgrace, and contempt, did conspire and endeavour to make the Kings Subjects to believe that the said Inquisition was unduly taken, and that the said Earl was mur∣dered by some person in whose custody he was. And to bring this to effect, they procured false Witnesses to prove it. And to perswade others to the belief of it, they caused to be declared in writing, that the said Braddon would prosecute the matter. This is the sum of the Indict∣ment. To which they pleaded Not guilty. How the Intrigue was managed, in brief. The 13th of February in the morning, the King and Duke going to visit the Tower, in the interim of their being there, that dread∣ful accident of the Earl of Essex cutting his own throat happen'd. The rumour of the one and the other, caused a great concourse of people. Among the rest, there was one Edwards his son, a School-boy of about thir∣teen years old, that having played Truant in the Tower that morning upon this occasion, thought it best to tell some strange story when he came home to Dinner, to palliate his Truantry; and accordingly goes home
and tells his Mother and Sisters that he saw a hand throw a Razor out of the window of the Earl of Essex his Chamber. They were surprised at this, and charged the Boy to tell truth, and not to tell lyes to excuse his play, as he used to do. He persisted in it. Mr. Braddon being told of this Boy, goes to his fathers house, pretending he came from Sir Henry Capel and the Countess, to examine the Boy: which when he had done, he writes a Paper, and reads it to the Boy, for him to signe. The Boy refuses to signe it, because (he said) the whole matter was a lye. So Braddon went away: but coming another time, he got the Boy to signe it, telling him it was no harm. He also found out a Girl of about the same age, that said she saw a hand throw out a bloudy Razor, but from whose window she knows not: and she said many others saw it, but she could name none Braddon goes with this to Sir Henry Capel, desiring his assistance in the prosecution of the Earl's murder: but Sir Henry directs him to a Secretary of State, it being of publick con∣cern. He goes to a Secretary, has his little Witnesses examined before the King in Coun∣cil, and the business found false and frivolous. Mr. Braddon would not rest here (being in Conscience bound to prosecute the Murder, as he alleadg'd) but resolves
for the Coun∣try; and goes to one Mr. Speke, desiring his Letter commendatory to Sir Robert Atkins in Gloucester-shire: which was granted by that Gentleman, who also sent his man along with him, to defend him from Assaults. To colour this, it was pretended that Braddon had word sent him that my Lords death was discoursed the same day it was done, at Marlborough, and at the Posthouse in Frome; nay at Andover, two or three days before it happened. Mr. Speke's Letter to Sir Robert Atkins, concerning Braddon (which he had about him when taken) commends his great integrity and courage, thanking the person 'twas writ to for great kindness to him and his friends; hoping to get my Lords Murder tryed before the Tryal of any in the Tower; saying the Tyde run strong against them: and he must not be called Braddon, but Johnson, for fear of being knockt on the head: he desires the Knights di∣rections in the management. He says Mr. Braddon has been at great charge and trouble already; and he knows few that would have un∣dertaken it but himself. And all this pains was taken, to insinuate to the people, that because the King and Duke were that morning walking in the Tower, about the time this Murder was done, therefore they designed it. How base, how devilish, and hellish a designe is this! (as my
Lord Chief Justice justly exclaims.) After a long and fair Tryal, they were found guil∣ty; but continued under Bail till next Term, when, on April 21. Braddon was Fined 2000l. and to find Sureties for good behaviour du∣ring life, and be imprisoned till performed; and Speke (as being not so guilty, being one∣ly concern'd in the Letter) 1000l. with Sureties also for good behaviour during life, and imprisonment till performed. Among the rest of the late Conspirators, was one James Holloway (a forward busie young man, Inhabitant of Bristol) who ha∣ving been acquainted with all the Methods, and attended on all the motions of the De∣signe (without effect, blessed be God) till its discovery, then sensible of his guilt and danger, thought it time to consult his own safety; and leaving London in a disguise, he ranged several parts of England as a dealer in Wool, till he could find an opportunity to take shipping: which having obtained, he set sail; and after some loss of time by stress of Weather, he made Antegua in the West-Indies, resolving to visit the rest of the Ca∣ribby Islands also, and so to St. Christophers: which he judging to be the safest place, sent thence to his Factor at Nevis about some con∣cerns he had there; which Factor discovered him; whereupon Sir William Stapleton sent
to St. Christophers to apprehend him; and thence brought him to Nevis, where he was prisoner thirteen days, and then sent for Eng∣land; where being come, he was examined before the King in Council, and committed to Newgate, till Easter-Term 1684. he was brought to the Kings Bench-Bar, to shew cause why he should not suffer death (he having been Outlawed for High-Treason in his ab∣sence.) He told the Court he had nothing to say, having told all he knew to his Majesty, from whom he hoped mercy. The Court told him they had nothing to do with the Kings mercy; but they had leave to let him take a Tryal, not∣withstanding the Outlawry, whereby he might have opportunity to make his defence, if he had any thing to say for himself. But he declaring that he had nothing more to say, a day was set by the Court for his execution (as is u∣sual in Outlawries) which was done at Ty∣burn on the 30th of April 1684. He had liberty to speak there what he pleased, and held a long Dialogue with the Sheriffs; de∣livering them a Paper (which he acknow∣ledged to be his own writing) which is a kind of Epitome of what he had before deli∣ver'd to Mr. Secretary Jenkins. And so af∣ter a short Prayer, he was hang'd drawn and quarter'd, and his Quarters brought back to Newgate, and
sent thence to Bristol, which should have been the Scene of his activity in this cursed Tragedy. He says in his Paper delivered to the Se∣cretary, that asking one Tyly of Bristol, What News (July 1681) he told him, All naught; and if some speedy course be not taken, we shall be all undone: for—they have got Sheriffs to their minds— (naming North and Rich) who will find Jurors to believe any evidence against a Protestant: and so hang up all the Kings friends by degrees. He told him also, that all the Protestant Gentry, naming the Earl of Shaftsbury, Lord Howard of Escrick, and o∣thers, were come to a resolution, seeing fair means would not do, but all things on the Prote∣stant side are misrepresented to the King by such great Criminals, and none more in favour than those, to take the King from his evil Coun∣sel, and that by an Insurrection in—London, Bristol, Taunton, Exeter, Chester, Newcastle, York, and other places in the North; and that there would be a considerable party in Scotland, and another in Ireland. Mr. West told him there was a designe to take off the King and the Duke coming from Newmarket—to pre∣vent bloudshed. Holloway dislikes that, say∣ing the designe was onely to take the King from his evil Counsel. He calls it a PROTE∣STANT PLOT. He saith to the Sheriff, I hope it will be a
satisfaction that there was a Plot. Again, I pray God that no other people may concern them∣selves with Publick affairs out of their own way; and that the Scriblers might be put down; for they do more to the Kingdom than any thing else: Which was both the beginning and end of his discourse with the Sheriffs. And he begins his Paper left with the Sheriffs, with exclaiming against Pamphleteers and News-Scriblers. And afterwards—And did by some Scriblers and News-mongers con∣stantly know most publick affairs—which they undertook to represent according to their own humour. He declares his hearty sorrow for yielding thereto, or acting therein, being satisfied it might have caused very much bloudshed in the Nation. He concludes: I repent not my Con∣fession; and could I discover more, would do it throughly, though I find not mercy with man. On Thursday, Feb. 14. 1684. Sir Samuel Bernardiston was Tryed and Convicted for High Misdemeanour, at the Sessions of Nisi Prius holden at Guild-hall, London. It was upon an Information exhibited by the Attorney-General, wherein is set forth, That there having been lately a horrid Plot discovered, Sir Samuel Bernardiston intending to scandalize the Evidence, wrote a Letter containing these Sentences:
The return of the Duke of Monmouth to White-hall, and his being received into extraor∣dinary Favour of his Majesty, hath made a strange alteration of affairs at Court: for those that before spake of him very indecently, now court, cringe, and creep to him. His Grace complain∣ed to the King of the scandalous misrepresenta∣tion that was made of him in the Mondays Gazette, upon which the Gazetter was called to account for it, who alleadged for himself, that a Person of great Quality sent him in writing the words therein recited, commanding him to put them in the Gazette. Testerday being the last day of the Term, all the Prisoners that were in the Tower upon the late Sham Protestant Plot, were discharged upon Bail. Mr. Brad∣don who prosecuted the Murder of the Earl of Essex, the Information put in against him in the Kings-Bench by Mr. Attorney, for a pretended Subornation, &c. was not prosecuted, and his Bail was discharged. And the passing Sentence upon the Author of Julian the Apostate, and the Printer of the late Lord Russel's Speech, was passed over with silence. Great applicati∣ons are made to his Majesty for the pardoning Mr. Sidney in the Tower, which is believed will be attained, and that he will be banished. The Lord Howard appears despicable in the eyes of all men; he is under guard at White-hall, and 'tis believed will be sent to the Tower, for that
the Duke of Monmouth will accuse him con∣cerning the Testimony he hath given: and the Papists and High Tories are quite down in the mouth, their Pride is abated, themselves and their Plot confounded; but their Malice is not asswaged. 'Tis generally said, the Earl of Essex was murdered. The brave Lord Russel is a∣fresh lamented. The Plot is lost here, except you in the Country can find it out amongst the Addressers and Abhorrers. This sudden turn is an Amazement to all men, and must produce some strange Events, which a little time will shew. And then he goes on further, and says in another Letter, these words: I am to answer yours of the 27th and 29th past; and truly I cannot but with great sorrow lament the loss of our good Friend honest Mr. John Wright: but with patience we must sub∣mit to the Almighty, who can as well raise up In∣struments to do his work, as change hearts, of which we have so great an instance in the busi∣ness of the Duke of Monmouth, that no Age or History can parallel. I am now throughly sa∣tisfied, that what was printed in the Mondays Gazette is utterly false, and you will see it pub∣lickly declared so shortly. The King is never pleased but when he is with him, hath comman∣ded all the Privy-Council to wait upon him, and happy is he that hath most of his
favour. His Pardon was sealed and delivered to him last Wednesday. 'Tis said he will be restored to be Master of the Horse, and be called into the Council-Table, and to all his other places; and 'tis reported he will be made Captain-General of all the Forces, and Lord High Admiral, &c. He treats all his old Friends that dayly visit him with great Civilities; they are all satisfi∣ed with his integrity, and if God spares his life, doubt not but he will be an Instrument of much good to the King and Kingdom. He said pub∣lickly, That he knew my Lord Russel was as loy∣al a Subject as any in England, and that his Majesty believed the same now. I intend shortly to wait on him my self. It would make you laugh to see how strangely our High-Tories and Clergie are mortified; their Countenances speak it. Were my Shesorary to be moved for now, it would be readily granted. Sir George is grown very humble: 'Tis said Mr. Sidney is reprieved for forty days, which bodes well. And then he goes on further, and in a third Letter says, The late change here in publick affairs is so great and strange, that we are like men in a dream, can hardly believe what we see, and fear we are not fit for so great a mercy as the present juncture seems to promise. The Sham Prote∣stant Plot is quite lost and confounded. The Earl of Mackensfield is bringing Actions of
Scandalis Magnatum against all the Grand Jury-men that indicted him at last Assizes. And then in a fourth Letter are contained these Expressions: Contrary to all mens expectations, a Warrant is signed at last for beheading Col. Sidney at Tower-hill next Friday. Great endeavours have been used to obtain his Pardon, but the contrary Party have carried it, which much dasheth our hopes: but God still governs. He pleaded Not guilty: but the Jury found him Guilty without stirring from the Bar. April 14. he was brought to the Kings Bench-Bar to receive Judgment of the Court; which was, That he should pay a Fine of Ten thousand pounds to the King, should find Sureties for his good behaviour during his life, and should be committed to the Kings Bench Prison till the same was paid and done. By that which hath been said, it clearly appears how near a Correspondence there hath been between the Jesuit and Fanatick both in Principles and Practices; and that the Government and Church established hath been the onely Bulwork against Popery, that hath withstood all its assaults, though assisted by the united force of the Fanaticks. Yet all this notwithstanding, we still suffer
under the imputation of Popery; our Worship is still ca∣lumniated as Popish; and for any to return to our Communion, is to make a step towards Rome: the Ministers of our Church are ac∣cused as disguised Emissaries of the Romish Church; and the Arguments used for Confor∣mity, are but endeavours to pervert men to the Papal Superstition: our Common-prayer is but the Mass in English; kneeling at the Sa∣crament, worshiping of the Host: our Bishops Antichristian, and our Clergy Factors for Rome. And by these slanders, the Fanaticks have employed the aversion of the people a∣gainst the corruptions of Rome, to a direct opposition against the Church of England, which, above any of the reformed Churches, hath most strenuously and successfully opposed it. And it will easily appear, that the leading Fanaticks have misled their Disciples with more invincible prejudice and implicit faith than any of the Popish Priests do their Pro∣selytes; who can perswade them, that that Church which hath so peremptorily disclaim∣ed the Popes Supremacy, Infallibility, Wilwor∣ship, Prayers in an unknown Tongue, adding to the number of Sacraments, and detracting essen∣tial parts from those which they retain: That the Church of England, which in their Arti∣cles, Homilies, and Liturgie, have exceeded all the reformed Churches
in their detestati∣on of Popish Doctrines; that have still built on the foundations of Reformation laid by Cranmer, Ridly, Latimer; which hath still been chiefly maligned, and from its infancy assaulted by the Romanists as its greatest Ad∣versary, should now be reproached by those, who in this serve the Romish interest more than their own, as well-willers to the Church of Rome. And in truth, there needs no other Argu∣ment to prove how ignorant this sort of men are of the great corruptions of Rome, that for∣sake our Church, on a perswasion that we have embraced those corruptions: for either they expect that we should renounce all things that they retain, and then once more we must lay aside the Creed, the Command∣ments, the Lords Prayer, &c. or that we should retain and practise nothing that was practised in the Primitive Church, long be∣fore Popery was known in the World. And it is very apparent, that we have not more displeased the Fanaticks by retaining those de∣cent Ceremonies and ancient Orders of the Pri∣mitive Church, than we have incensed the Pa∣pists by retaining of them: for by these A∣postolical Orders and Rules of Decency, we have such a beauty added to Holiness, as was in use in the most pure and primitive times, free from the Innovations and
Superstitions of Rome: and this hath raised the envy of that Church, as well as the causeless malice of Dis∣senters against us: what these rail against as Popish (viz. our Government, Worship, Disci∣pline, and Ceremonies) the other behold with grief, and envy to see a Church much nearer to the primitive constitution than their own. I doubt not but the Reader will joyn with me in this Opinion, that it is a necessary duty incumbent on all sorts of Fanaticks that have accused our Church and Government of Pope∣ry, for retaining those innocent and indifferent things agreeable to the primitive practice, to make a publick declaration of their abhor∣rence of Romish principles and practices, such as I have already charged them withal. To which I may adde their claiming of a Supre∣macy above Princes and Parliaments in mat∣ters Ecclesiastical, and divers other things, which are the most pernicious and Antichri∣stian Doctrines and Practices of that Church; which have drawn the greatest reproach and odium on the Reformation. And if they would heartily perform this duty, I doubt not but they would see a necessity of returning to the Communion of the Church as it is now establi∣shed, and to assist her in her conflicts against the Church of Rome: than which, there is no means more probable to keep out that Pope∣ry
against which they pretend so great an a∣version. And to induce them hereunto, I shall recommend to their serious considera∣tion how far the Principles and Practices of the Jesuits under the name of Doleman, and of the old Regicides under that of Bradshaw, and our new Conspirators under the Notions of Sidney, do agree, as it is fitted to my hand in this Parallel. THE PARALLEL. 1. DOLEMAN. THere can be no doubt but that the Commonwealth hath power to chuse their own fashion of Government, as also to change the same upon reasonable Causes. In like manner is it evident, that as the Com∣monwealth hath this Authority to chuse and change her Government, so hath she also to limit the same with what Laws and Conditions she pleaseth. Conference about Succession, part 1. cap. 1. pag, 12, 13. All Law, both Natural, National, and Po∣sitive, doth teach us, That Princes are subject to Law and Order; and that the
Common∣wealth, which gave them their Authority for the common good of all, may also restrain, or take the same away again, if they abuse it to the common evil. The whole Body, though it be governed by the Prince, as by the Head, yet is it not Inferiour, but Superiour to the Prince. Neither so giveth the Commonwealth her Authority and Power up to any Prince, that she depriveth her self utterly of the same, when need shall require, to use it for her de∣fence, for which she gave it. Part 1. cap. 4. pag. 72. And finally, the Power and Authority which the Prince hath from the Common∣wealth, is in very truth, not Absolute, but Potestas vicaria & delegata, i. e. a Power De∣legate, or Power by Commission from the Com∣monwealth; which is given with such Restri∣ctions, Cautels, and Conditions, yea with such plain Exceptions, Promises, and Oaths of both Parties (I mean between the King and Com∣monwealth, at the day of his Admission o Coronation) as if the same be not kept, but wilfully broken on either Part, then is the o∣ther not bound to observe his Promise neither, though never so solemnly made or swor Part 1. cap. 4. p. 73. By this then you see the ground whereon dependeth the righteous and lawful Deposi∣tion and Chastisement of wicked Princes,
viz. Their failing in their Oath and Promises which they made at their first entrance.—Then is the Commonwealth not onely free from all Oaths made by her of Obedience or Allegi∣ance to such unworthy Princes, but is bound moreover for saving the whole Body, to re∣sist, chasten, or remove such evil Heads, if she be able; for that otherwise all would come to Destruction, Ruine, and publick Desolati∣on. Part 1. cap. 4. p. 77, 78. 2. BRADSHAW. THe People of England, as they are those that at the first (as other Countries have done) did chuse to themselves this Form of Government even for Justice sake, that Ju∣stice might be administred, that Peace might be preserved; so, Sir, they gave Laws to their Governours, according to which they should govern: and if those Laws should have prov'd inconvenient or prejudicial to the Publick, they had a Power in them, and re∣served to themselves, to alter as they shall see cause. Kings Tryal, p. 64. CHARLES STUART King of England, The Commons of England assem∣bled in Parliament, according to the funda∣mental Power that rests in themselves, have
resolved to bring you to Tryal and Judgment, p. 29. If so be the King will go contrary to the end of his Government, Sir, he must un∣derstand that he is but an Officer of Trust, and he ought to discharge that Trust, and they are to take order for the Animadversion and Punishment of such an Offending Governour. p. 65. Sir, Parliaments were ordained for that purpose, to redress the Grievances of the People. And then, Sir, the Scripture says, They that know their Masters will and do it not, what follows? The Law is your Master, the Acts of Parliament. p. 66, 67. This we know to be Law; Rex habet su∣periorem, Deum & Legem, etiam & Curiam; and so says the same Author: and truly, Sir, he makes bold to go a little further, Debent ei ponere fraenum, They ought to bridle him. p. 65. That the said Charles Stuart being admit∣ted King of England, and therein trusted with a limited Power. Vid. Char. p. 30. The House of Commons, the Supream Au∣thority and Jurisdiction of the Kingdom, p. 48. Which Authority requires you, in the name of the People of England, of which you are e∣lected King, to answer them, p. 36. Sir, you may not demur the Jurisdiction of the Court, —they sit here by the Authority
of the Commons of England; and all your Predeces∣sors and you are responsible to them. p. 44. For there is a Contract and Bargain between the King and his People, and your Oath is taken; and certainly, Sir, the Bond is reci∣procal. —Sir, if this Bond be once broken, fare∣wel Soveraignty. p. 72. Sir, though you have it by Inheritance in the way that is spoken of, yet it must not be denied that your Office was an Office of Trust: Now, Sir, if it be an Office of Inhe∣ritance, as you speak of your Title by De∣scent, let all men know, that great Offices are seizable and forfeitable, as if you had it but for a year and for your Life. p. 73. And, Sir, the People of England cannot be so far wanting to themselves, which God having dealt so miraculously and gloriously for, they having Power in their hands, and their Great Enemy, they must proceed to do Justice to themselves and to You. p. 75. 3. SIDNEY, And other of The True Protestant Party. GOd hath left Nations unto the liberty of setting up such Governments as best pleased themselves.
The Right and Power of Magistrates in e∣very Country, was that which the Laws of that Country made it to be. Sidn. Pap. p. 2. St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. stiles Kings, as well as the Governours under him, the Ordi∣nance of Man; which cannot have any other sence, but that Men make them, and give them their Power. Hunt's Postsc. p. 37. By all which it is evident, That the Succession to the Crown is the Peoples Right. And though the Succession to the Crown is Hereditary, be∣cause the People so appointed it, would have it so, or consented to have it so; yet in a parti∣cular Case, for the saving the Nation, The whole Line and Monarchy it self may be alter∣ed, by the unlimited Power of the Legislative Authority. Hunt's Postsc. p. 43. Some men will talk as if they believed themselves, That the Legislative Power is in the King, when no King of England yet ever pretended to it. A Legislative Authority is necessary to every Government, and therefore we ought not to want it; and therefore Parliaments, in which our Government hath placed the making of Laws, cannot be long discontinued. Hunt's Postsc. p. 28. BRACTON saith, that the King hath three Superiours; to wit, Deum, Legem, & Parliamentum: that is, the Power originally in the People of England is delegated unto the Parliament. Sid. Tryal, p. 23.
All Government is founded in Trust, and setled in such a Person, or limited to such a Family, for the safety and advantage of the People, as well as of the Ruler. It is remarkable that there was never a conveyance of the Crown of England to any person, but upon the tacit Concurrence, and with the virtual or implicite Consent of the People. And therefore anciently, before any King of England was actually crown'd, the People being first acquaintainted with the day appointed for that Solemnity, were three several times publickly asked, whether they would have such a Person to rule over them. Letter from a Gentleman in the City concerning the D. of Y. p. 13, 14. Those Laws were to be observ'd, and the Oaths taken by them, having the force of a Contract between Magistrate and People, could not be violated without danger of dis∣solving the whole Fabrick. Sidn. Pap. p. 2. If he doth not like his condition, he may renounce the Crown; but if he receive it upon that Condition (as all Magistrates do the Power they receive) and swear to perform it, he must expect that the performance will be exacted, or revenge taken by those he hath betrayed. Sidn. Tryal, p. 23. I will hope there are very few in this Na∣tion so ill
instructed, that do not think it in the power of the People to depose a Prince, who really undertakes to alienate his King∣dom, or that really acts the destruction or the universal Calamity of his People. Great consid. relating to the D. of Y. consider'd, p. 6. And he fixeth the Government in the major part. To give every one his due, is to administer Defence to the Innocent, and by Authority of Law to subdue the Aggressors of mankind, how great and mighty soever they be. Fiat ju∣stitia therefore. Id. p. 16. The Author of the Plea to the Dukes An∣swer, says, that when Kings are ill ones, God not onely approves of their removal, but he himself doth it. The Political Catechism placeth the Government in the two Houses of Parliament: and the Letter to a Person of Honour says, There may be a self-deposition of a Prince actu∣ally regnant. Thus far the Parallel. If there be a Note above Ela, the Sweet Singers of Scotland have reached it, in crying, Down with the established Government, down with it to the ground. Cargil a Field-prea∣cher, in the name of the true Presbyterian Kirk of Scotland, pronounced the King excom∣municate, forbidding the people not onely to obey him, but to pray for him. These men set up a Mock-Convention of States (like Brad∣shaw's
High Court) wherein, without the formality of a Tryal, they take a forfeiture of his Majesties Crown, and pronounce him depo∣sed: and all the Officers of the Crown, Privy-Counsellors, Judges, Magistrates, and Officers of the Army, who adhered to the King, and op∣posed their Field-Conventicles, especially the Conforming Clergie, as perjured and apostate persons, were marked out for destruction. Kid and King, two Field-preachers who were ex∣ecuted August 14. 1679. for preaching Sedi∣tion and Rebellion to some thousands of arm∣ed men, who had set up a Banner, and called it The Banner of Jesus Christ, in an open War against the King, and pronouncing the King guilty of Perjury, and that he had no right to govern, having driven Christ out of his King∣dom: These men in their dying Speeches bore witness to their National and the solemn League and Covenant (which they believed could not be dispensed with by any person or Party on earth) against all Oaths and Bonds contrary to it, especially that of Supremacy, and the Bond for Peace; and against all that connive at, comply with, or strengthen the hands of the Prelatical, malignant, and persecuting Party. Kid counted it an honour, that he was counted worthy to be staged upon such a consideration, and encourageth the people to persist, saying, God would perfect his strength in their
weakness; and threatned the Nation with the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon. The Scottish book called Naphtali says, Whatever indignity is done to the Solemn League and Covenant, is no less than doing de∣spite to the Covenant of Grace in his most emi∣nent exerting himself, and is a sin of the nature as that of those men who ascribed our Saviours casting out Devils by Beelzebub, but far grea∣ter. They condemn all Acts of State against it, particularly this which follows, which some would chuse to die rather than consent to: I do sincerely affirm and declare, that I judge it unlawful to Subjects, upon pretence of Reformation, or other pretence whatsoever, to enter into Leagues or Covenants, or to take up Arms against the King, or those commissionate by him; and that all those Gatherings, Convoca∣tions, Petitions, Protestations, and erecting and keeping of Council-Tables that were used in the beginning, and for carrying on of the late Trou∣bles, were unlawful and seditious: and particu∣larly, that those Oaths whereof the one was com∣monly called The National Covenant, as it was sworn and explained in the year 1638, and thereafter; and the other entituled The So∣lemn League and Covenant, were and are in themselves unlawful Oaths, and were taken by and imposed upon the Subjects of this Kingdom against the fundamental Laws and Liberties of the same: and
that there lieth no obligation upon me or any of the Subjects from the said Oaths, or either of them, to endeavour any change or alteration of the Government either in Church or State, as it is now established by the Laws of the Church and Kingdom. But instead of allowing this Declaration, they declare their assent to all the Rebellions and Bloud that had been shed in defence of their Field-meetings and Covenant against the Kings Ar∣mies, as of Wariston, Guthrie, &c. shortly after the Kings Restoration; the Rebellion at Pentland-hills and Bothwel-bridge, the Mur∣thers of Melvil Mitchel, and the Ruffians that assassinated the Archbishop; and that Field-Fast at Jedburgh in Tiveot-dale, where were seven Field-preachers, and five thousand people, the men being in Arms, to seek God for three things, (viz.) To put an end to their Persecu∣tion, To give them Grace to repent who took the Bond for Peace, and That he would bless those Lords that were gone to London. This was such another Fast as those that were kept in the days of their Q Mary: of which she was wont to say, That she was as much afraid of a Fast of the Ministers, as of an Army of Souldiers. And yet if you will believe themselves, or some Advocates of theirs nearer home, there are not a more innocent, peaceable, and harm∣less people in the world; as the Author of Naphtali said of the Rebellion of
Pentland hills: There hath not been in Britain such a company of men in Arms for the Covenant and Cause of God, for sound Judgment, true Piety, Integrity, and fervent Zeal, and undaunted Courage. But all this Zeal and Courage was still directed a∣gainst the King and the established Govern∣ment and Worship of God. For in the year 1679. the Convention of Estates gave the King a Tax of 30000l. to maintain a Regi∣ment of Foot, three Companies of Dragoons, and three Troops of Horse, to suppress the Field-Conventicles; which met in Arms: a∣gainst which their Leaders preached, saying, It was given by the enemies of Christ to drive him out of his Kingdom; and it would be as great a fin to pay it, as it was in Judas to be∣tray Christ: and that now was the time to try them whether they would have Christ for their King or no. And the same Ruffians that mur∣dered the Archbishop, did several times lay wait for the Collectors of this Tax; and they so perplexed the peoples Consciences, that a Servant of the Earl of Dondonald fell distra∣cted through trouble of mind for having as∣sisted his Master in laying the Tax on Ren∣scot. This is that little Sister for whom the No∣ble Peer pleaded, that having no Breasts, she might, like the Amazons, have liberty to take up Arms, and once more enter
our Nation, and rent us in pieces as formerly. And it were easie to shew, from the Writings of some of our own Nation, that the same Prin∣ciples have been preached to the people of this Land, who have greedily swallowed and digested the same, and think themselves un∣der the same obligation of Covenant as those barbarous people. Dr. Lake in a Sermon be∣fore the Lord Mayor, says, That discoursing some Rebels that were then in Goal in Scotland, who did openly avow the Rebellion, and refused to pray for the King, He told them they were variously reported to be Jesuits, or Jesuitically affected, or to be Fifth-Monarchy-men, wild ar∣rant Fanaticks. They told him they were neither one nor other, but true Presbyterians according to the Covenant. He replying, That we had Presbyterians in our own King∣dom, who yet did not obstinately maintain such King-deposing and murthering Doctrines; They told him, he did not understand them; for they believed the same Doctrines, but onely wanted Power and Courage to act them. And at their execution they desired the people to take no∣tice, That they died true Presbyterians, accor∣ding to the Covenant. It is another Artifice of these People, a∣greeable to the practice of the Papists, that they keep their People in ignorance, and un∣der the power of an implicit
Faith and blind Obedience, as the Papists do; and bring them up in strong prejudices against their Governors. Some have been so mad, as to baptize their Children into the National Covenant; which they are not ashamed to compare with The Covenant of Grace. Mr. Alexander Gibson, Clerk of his Maje∣sties Privy-Council, certified, May 13. 1678. that one David Ferguson taken at a Field-Conventicle, being asked why he kept not to his Parish-Church, answered, That he had sworn the Covenant, whereby he was obliged not to hear Bishops, Deans, or Curats: and that others being asked why they kept Conven∣ticles, answered, To hear Gods truth: and be∣ing demanded what that was; they answer∣ed, They could not tell. And upon examina∣tion, they could not say the Creed, the Lords Prayer, or ten Commandments. Mr. Jo. Dickson preached to them, That all the Bishops and their Clergie never did nor ever will convert one Soul. They believe without farther enquiry (being forbid to read the Books written for Obedience and Conformity) that Episcopacy is Antichristian, and Presbytery is Christs own institution. They hold with the Papists, That the actions of their Kirk and Teachers in Field-Conventicles, and armed and fighting men, is not Rebellion, be∣cause
the Presbytery is not subject to the Secu∣lar Power: That the Subjects may enter into Solemn Leagues and Covenants, without and a∣gainst the Prince: That Kings may be excom∣municate and deposed; which some of them have practised against his present Majesty: That not the King in some cases, but the Kirk have pow∣er to convocate and dissolve Assemblies; and that they may make Laws without the King: That Salvation is not to be had but in their Communion. They injoyn new Articles of belief; as, That Episcopacy is an Antichristian Order; and so are the Church-Festivals and Ceremonies: That the Oath of Supremacy is an unlawful Oath, and the People are absolved from it: That the Power of the King is origi∣nally in the People, and that there is a mutual obligation between them; and if the King per∣form not his part, the People are free from per∣forming theirs: That for the good of the Kirk and Gods Cause, they may rebel against their Prince: That the Prince nor any Secular Pow∣er can silence or deprive a Minister, who is sub∣ject to none but Christ: That Passive Obedience to the unjust commands of a Prince, is as great a sin as Active Obedience to the same: That a private person may kill a Magistrate by impulse of the Spirit, after the Example of Phinees, to deliver the Kirk from Oppression: That it is lawful to kill Protestant Bishops and their Cu∣rates, as enemies to true Godliness, and
such as would bring the Kirk to a slavish dependance on the King. James Mitchel, who was execu∣ted for attempting the murther of the Arch∣bishop, said in his dying Speech, They are all blessed that shall take the proud Prelates and dash their brains against the stones; as after∣ward some Ruffians did by the Archbi∣shop. These are their Principles, and all these they have practised, when they had oppor∣tunities. They come little behind the Pa∣pists for equivocation and persisting in false∣hood, where they think their lives or the good of the Kirk concerned. Jo. King being charged for bearing Arms against the King in the late Rebellion, de∣nied it, until one that apprehended him swore that he had both Sword and Pistols. To which he answered, he did it not in an hostile manner: which was a Jesuitical Equivoca∣tion. He bore testimony against that woful Supre∣macy so much applauded, and universally owned of such of whom better things might be expected, as usurping on Christs Royal Authority, spoiling him of his Royal Crown, Scepter, Sword, and Royal Robe, by taking those Princely Ornaments to invest a man whose breath is in his nostrils. And both Kid and King bore their Testimo∣nies against the Oath
of Allegiance and Bond of Peace; of which, to satisfie the Reader, I give him a Copy. I A. B. for testification of my faithful obedi∣ence to my most gracious Soveraign Charles King of Great Britain, &c. affirm, testifie, and declare, by this my solemn Oath, That I acknow∣ledge my said Soveraign onely Supreme Gover∣nour of this Kingdom, over all Persons, and in all Causes; and that no foreign Prince, Power, State, or Person, Civil or Ecclesiastick, hath a∣ny Jurisdiction, Power, or Superiority over the same: and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign Power, Jurisdictions, and Au∣thorities; and shall to my utmost power defend, assist, and maintain his Majesties Jurisdiction a∣foresaid, against all mortals; and shall never decline his Majesties Power and Jurisdiction, as I shall answer to God. The form of the Bond. I A. B. underscribing, do faithfully bind and o∣blige me, that I, my Wife, Barnes, and Ser∣vants respectively, shall no ways be present at any Conventicles and disorderly Meetings in time coming; but shall live orderly, in obedi∣ence to the Law, under the penalties contained in the Acts of Parliament made there-anent. As also I bind and
oblige me, that my whole Tenants and Cotters respectively, their Wives, Barnes, and Servants, shall likewise refrain and ab∣stain from the said Conventicles and other ille∣gal Meetings not authorized by Law; and that they shall live orderly, in obedience to the Law: And further, that I nor they shall re∣ceipt, supply or commune with forfeited persons, intercommuned Ministers, or vagrant Preachers; but shall do our utmost endeavour to apprehend their persons. And in case my said Tenants, Cotters, and their foresaids shall contravene, I shall take or apprehend any person or persons guilty thereof, and present to the Judge Ordi∣nars, that they may be fined or imprisoned there∣for, as is provided in the Acts of Parliament made there-anent; otherwise I shall remove them and their Families from my ground. And if I shall fail herein, I shall be liable to such pe∣nalties as the said Delinquents have incurred by the Laws, consenting to the registration here∣of in the Books of his Majesties Privy-Council, or Books of any other Judges competent, that Letters and Executorials may be direct here∣upon, in form as effairs, and constitutes my Pro∣curators. The Field-preachers damned this Bond, as an Arbitrary, Tyrannical, and Illegal pro∣ceeding: and Mr. Welsh a Field-preacher ha∣ving condemned the people for not coming
armed to their Meetings with Swords and Pistols to defend the Gospel, said, That the subscribing this Bond was a renouncing their Baptism, and making a Covenant with the De∣vil more express and worse than that of Witches. And Mr. John Dickson at a Conventicle, May 26. 1678. said, That those who subscribed it had committed a greater sin than the sin of the Holy Ghost, and were already in Hell. This Mr. Welsh, as Ravilliack Redivivus relates it, preaching to about seven thousand people, told them, That the King, the Nobles and Pre∣lates were the Murtherers of Christ: And sit∣ting down in his Chair, he said, O People, I will be silent; speak, O People, and tell me what good thing the King hath done since his coming home; yea, hath he not done all the mis∣chief a Tyrant could do? And at another time he said, That God would assert the Cause of Pentland-hills, in spite of the Curates and their Masters the Prelates, and in spite of the Pre∣lates and their Master the King, and his Master the Devil. It was but a little before the Duke of York's going to Scotland, that they were forming their Presbyteries after the Model of Ignatius, dividing the Nation into several Provinces, each of which was to have a Provincial, and over all there was appointed a General, who, as Ignatius, had been
a Souldier, and was thought fit to lead an Army. The Provin∣cials were to take an account of the growth or decay of their Party, to mark out their Friends and their Enemies, and to renew their Con∣tributions, and to give account of all to their General, who was to reside at Edinburgh or London. If this designe had succeeded, no two Facti∣ons in the world had been more like, what∣ever they are now, than the Jesuit and Fana∣tick. Which was the Incubus, and which the Succubus that brought forth the two last hellish Plots, or whether they were not Twins; or as it is in the Riddle, Mater me Genuit, eadem mox gignitur ex me, may puz∣zle the Reader to resolve. It is certain the same plastick Principles formed them both, and the Subjects were equally disposed to re∣ceive those Forms which have so affrighted the Nations: and there is little difference (the name excepted) between a Clement and a Melvil, a Ravilliack and a Mitchel, a Bradshaw and a Cargil, or the Jesuitical and a Fanatical Regicide: both make the King accountable to the People; both are for ex∣communicating, deposing, and assassinating of Kings; both have been such Fire-brands as have kindled consuming fires where-ever they have fixed their cloven feet. It is no great wonder that they are sometimes transformed
into Angels of light, seeing Satan himself may be so transformed: neither of them can do their work, if they should appear in their proper colours, armed with Pistols and Blunderbusses, in flames of fire, and an horrible stench of Gunpowder and Brimstone: they come clothed with Zeal as with a Cloak, and in Sheeps clo∣thing, with demure looks and fair speeches to deceive the hearts of the Simple; but inward∣ly they are ravening Wolves, and by their fruits you may know them. It is not a pretence of acting for a Good Old Cause, or the Catholick Church, that can justi∣fie unnatural Rebellions and Bloudshed: they who do such things, are of their Father the Devil, though they own Rome or Geneva for their Mother. It is said of Augustus, that meeting with a young man in the Country exactly like him in growth and features, he asked him merrily whether his Mother was ne∣ver at Rome. No, saith the young man, but my Father hath been there; meaning, it was more likely that Augustus and he had one Fa∣ther, than that he should be the Son of Au∣gustus. Though our Fanatick Plots were con∣ceived by those that were never at Rome, yet the Principles that begot them, most certainly came from thence. The Fanatick Zeal em∣bracing Popish Principles, hath brought forth many of those Plots and Conspiracies
which have so often disturbed our Peace and Govern∣ment. And by this time I hope the vizard and pretence of these men will vanish, (viz.) that such of them as have suffered by the hand of Justice, have died as Patriots of their Country, for their zeal against Popery, and in defence of the Liberties of the People against Tyranny and Arbitrary Government. This hath been pleaded a thousand times in behalf of a Noble Peer; and persons of the same Principles, but of the lowest rank, have plea∣ded it for themselves. This designe (says Col∣ledge) is not onely against me, but against all the Protestants in England that have had the courage to oppose the Popish Plot; and dies praying that his may be the last Protestants bloud that murdering Church of Rome may shed in Christendom. And in his dying Speech he says, He went armed to Oxford to defend him∣self in case the Papists should make any attempt by way of Massacre or Invasion; and that he came thither to live and die with the Parlia∣ment, if the Papists and their Party (as was sworn and feared they would) had offered to destroy the Parliament. And generally all that died as Conspirators, endeavoured to perswade the People that they fell as a Sacri∣fice to Popery, and died Martyrs for the Old Cause; which hath been no other than the opposing of Monarchy and the established Reli∣gion,
under the odious names of Popery and Tyranny; when they have had no more sense of true Religion and Obedience, than the Rib∣bons intended to be worn in their Hats, that could onely declare No Popery, no Tyranny; but was intended to distinguish a Party for cutting of Throats. Thus I have shewn the Intrigues between the Papists and Fanaticks to destroy the esta∣blished Church and Government of the English Nation; than which, there is none in the world setled upon better foundations, for Pie∣ty, Liberty, and Moderation; nor hath any had more signal tokens of God's Almighty Providence, and wonderful Blessings. We may truly say in the words of David concer∣ning his enemies, Many a time have they as∣saulted us from our youth up, but they have not prevailed against us. We have been like a City besieged by two potent enemies; and while one Party hath attacked us on one side. the other hath taken advantage to storm us on the other: and though they never could a∣gree among themselves, yet they alway con∣spire both in Principles and Practices to de∣stroy the established Government both of Church and State. And it is not to be won∣dered if it be so for the future, seeing thus it
hath been not onely with us from the time of the Reformation; but ever since the Gospel was preached, it hath had many enemies con∣federate against it. For of a truth (saith St. Peter, Acts 4.27.) against thy holy Child Je∣sus, whom thou hast anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the peo∣ple of Israel, have been (associated) or gathered together. From these Premises, I do earnestly recom∣mend to the Reason and Consciences of my dear Country-men, that have any love to the Protestant Religion, these following Conclu∣sions. I. That the Papists have ever since the Re∣formation endeavoured to raise up Sects and Differences among Protestants, by disguised Emissaries among the Zealous and Well∣meaning people, to seduce them to Separa∣tion. II. That they look on these Practices as the most effectual means to bring back the people to the Romish Religion. III. That for this purpose they have been indu∣strious to deprave the Government of our Kings and Bishops as Tyrannical, the Liturgie as Popish, and extolling Extemporary Prayers
as Spiritual; incouraging an unlicensed Mi∣nistry, and preaching up Liberty of Consci∣ence; and that it is to be obtained and main∣tained by the Sword: And that all persons who preach and practise such things, do real∣ly and effectually propagate the designes of the Papists, and ever have had, and shall have encouragement from them. IV. That it is manifest that our late horrid Wars, Rapine, and the Murther of our Royal Martyr, and Banishment of our Soveraign, were effected by the contrivance of the Papists and Fanaticks in conjunction. V. That the Commotions and Rebellions in Scotland, ever since 1639, sprung from the same Counsel and Conduct; and that the Pa∣pists, in hopes of effecting our ruine, will not cease to carry on the like designes, so long as our Divisions give them the like opportuni∣ties. VI. That the pretences of some men to the true Protestant Religion, are but vain, while they practise such Rapine, Oppression, and Bloudshed as the very Pagans and Infidels do abhor. VII. That Obstinate Dissenters are, before God and men, guilty of all the real danger of Po∣pery's
prevailing in these Nations on the ru∣ine of the established Protestant Religion. VIII. That the Church of England is the greatest Enemy that the Papists have, according to their own Apprehensions and declared Judg∣ment; and consequently, wholly innocent of any Designes, Compliances, or Approaches to the Church of Rome; seeing it still persists in the same Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship for which the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days laid down their lives. IX. That those of the Communion of the Church of England, ever since the Reformati∣on, have given proof of their fidelity to the Crown, and opposition to Popery, as well as Heresie, Schism, and Rebellion: which hath procured them equal hatred and opposition from the Papists and Fanaticks. X. That the Providence of Almighty God hath wonderfully appeared in preserving the esta∣blished Church and Government from the ma∣ny violent and subtile Attempts and Conspi∣racies of the several Factions. XI. That they who pretend Religion to coun∣tenance Faction and Rebellion, do least regard it, and generally do destroy that which they pretend to build up.
XII. That Covenants and Associations without and against the will of the Prince, do end in Confusion and Bloudshed. XIII. That common people are easily seduced with fair pretences of Liberty and redress of Grie∣vances, by such as neither intend nor are able to effect it. XIV. That there hath not been a Succession of four such Princes lineally descended, for emi∣nency in Religion, Peaceableness, and Clemency, in any Age or Nation, since our Saviours time, as among us: And therefore the Mur∣murings, Seditions, Conspiracies, and Rebellions of Subjects are the more to be condemned: and all unlawful endeavours to break the Line of such a Succession, is to intrench on God's Prerogative, and to distrust his Mercy, who, as old Brithwold said, will take care for the Succession. XV. That generally Conspirators and Traytors, whether they succeed or not, live and die impenitently; and if so, that they procure to themselves damnation, Rom. 13. XVI. That to murmur, resist, and rebel against such a Government as by God and
our Laws is established in Church and State, is to resist the Ordinance of God, to disgrace and betray our Religion, and to bring upon our selves both temporal and eternal destruction. XVII. Lastly, That all the Outcrys made by the Fanaticks since the discovery of the Popish Plot, have been directed chiefly to the ruine of the Established Government both in Church and State, as if they favoured that Perswasion, and as if none but themselves were enemies to Popery: whose separation from the Church e∣stablished, in the judgment of the wisest, even of their own Party, is most like to bring it in; and nothing more like to keep it out than O∣bedience to the King, and Conforming to the Church as it is now established. Thus Baxter in his Preface to the Defence of the Cure, p. 17. Our Division gratifieth the Papists, and greatly hazardeth the Protestant Religion; and that more than most of you seem to believe or regard, speaking to the Separa∣tists. And by that separation, Popery (saith he) will get so great advantage as may hazard us all; and we may lose that which the several Parties do contend about. Defence of the Cure, Introduction, p. 52. Two way especially Pope∣ry will grow out of our Divisions: First, By the odium and
scorn of our Disagreements, Inconsi∣stency, and multiplied Sects, they will perswade people that we must come for Ʋnity to them, or else run mad, and crumble into dust, and indi∣viduals: thousands have been drawn to Pope∣ry, or confirmed in it by this Argument already. And I am perswaded that all the Arguments else in Bellarmine and all other Books, have not done so much to make Papists in England, as the multitude of Sects among our selves. Yea, some Professors of Religious strictness, of great esteem for Godliness, have turned Papists themselves, when they were giddy, and wearied with turnings, and when they had run from Sect to Sect, and found no consistency in any. Se∣condly, Either the Papists by increasing the Divisions would make them be accounted sedi∣tious, rebellious, and dangerous to the publick peace; or else when so many Parties are con∣strained to beg and wait for Liberty, the Pa∣pists may not be shut out alone, but have Tolera∣tion with the rest. And shall they (saith Mr. Baxter) use our hands to do their work, and pull their freedom out of the fire? We have al∣ready unspeakably served them, both in this, and in abating the Odium of the Gunpowder-plot. ana their other Treasons, Insurrections, and Spanish Invasion. And in Sacrilegious Deser∣tion, p. 103, 104. We are indangered by Divi∣sions principally, because the self-conceited part of Religious
people would not be ruled by their Pastors, but would rule them—you have made more Papists than ever you or we are like to re∣cover. Nothing is considerable that any Papist hath to say, till he cometh to your Case (and saith) Doth not Experience tell you, that with∣out Papal unity and force this people will never be ruled or united? It is you that tempt them to use Fire and Faggot, that will not be ruled: and must you that should be our Comfort, become our Shame, and break our hearts, and make men Papists by your temptations? Wo to the world because of offences, and woe to some by whom they come. But a much wiser and better man than Mr. Baxter hath demonstrated the same thing Preface to his Sermons, Sect. 18. Three ways (saith he) our dissenting Brethren, though not intentionally and purposely, yet re∣ally and eventually have been the great Promo∣ters of the Roman interest among us. 1. By putting to their helping hand to the pulling down of Episcopacy: and it is very well known to many, what rejoycing that Vote brought to the Romish Party, how even in Rome they sung their Io Paeans on the tidings thereof, and said triumphantly, Now the day is ours, now is the fatal Blow given to the Protestant Religion in England. 2. By opposing the interest of Rome with more violence than reason. 3. By frequent
mistaking the Question, but especiallly through the necessity of some false principle or other, which having once imbibed, they think themselves bound to maintain, whatever becomes of the common Cause of our Reformation; which may suffer as much through some mens folly and indiscretion, who pretend to be the most zealous Protestants, as by all the arts and designes of our open enemies: for many a man, when he thought most to make it sure, hath quite marred a good business by over-doing it. FINIS.
