l33a 11859533 50000
A LETTER From on Board Their Majesties Fleet NEAR USHANT, July the Twentieth, 1689. Giving an Account of the good Condition of it, and of the taking of some French Ships with LETTERS from IRELAND. Licensed and Entered according to Order. SIR, HAving this Opportunity, I thought it convenient to let you understand how the Affairs are with us here: We have been accru∣sing some days off this Harbour, and have used all means to induce the French to come out and fight us, but all will not do; although yesterday our Admiral command∣ed fifteen Men of War, with four Fire-ships, to go into the very Road of Brest, and put up the Flag of Defiance, yet notwithstanding they would not offer to stir. Our Fleet is in a very good condition, and well mann'd, wanting no∣thing but the Enemy to come out; for we are able to fight any Navy in the World. Our Fleet consists of above Eighty Sail, Twelve of which carrys Flags (viz.) five English, and seven Dutch, and three more are daily expected. Some days since we took a small Ves∣sel going from France to Ire∣land; they pretended at first to be Protestants making their Escape, but upon strict Enquiry they were found to be otherwise; and upon search we found a Packet of Let∣ters under the Coat of the Mast, which discovered the whole In∣trigue. They are English, Scotch, and Irish, who had been for some time in the French King's Service, and were going to the late King in order to be preferred.
Yesterday we took a small French Man of War coming from Waterford; it should have carried Thirty six Guns, but they had but Eighteen, they having left the rest in Ireland: They had a Pacquet of Letters from the late King James going to the French King: The Captain of the said Ship reports, that the late King declares, That all the Nobility of England have left King William, and that Scotland hath unanimous∣ly declared for him: He gives out at Dublin, that as soon as the French Fleet is arrived in Ireland, he will go with Ten thousand men into Scotland, and so to England. But I do not doubt, but by the Bles∣sing of God, that we shall be able to prevent ever their coming thither. Again, he says. That the pretend∣ed Parliament have passed an Act, for giving the late King James 20000 l. per Month, for Thirteen Months: As also another Act, that all Religious shall pay their own Clergy: He comfirms the Defeat near Enniskelling, and the taking of the 20000 l. and that London-Derry holds out, and makes a brave Resistance, and have lately taken ninety Head of Cattel from the Enemy: He adds, That the Bishop and Dean of VVaterford were bar∣barously murthered, and several of the Servants wounded; and that the Differences and Jealousies be∣tween the French and Irish grow greater and greater; and he does verily believe, That upon the landing of an English Army in that Kingdom, several of the Na∣tive Irish will revolt, being alrea∣dy weary of the French Yoke. This is all at present from Your Servant to command. J. L. ADVERTISEMENTS. THE Art of curing Diseases by Ex∣pectation; with Remarks on a sup∣posed Great Case of Apoplectick Fits: Also most useful Observations on Coughs, Con∣sumptions, Stone, Dropsies, Feavers, and Small Pox; with a Confutation of Dispen∣satories, and other Various Discourses in Physick. By Gideon Harvey, M. D. 12o. THE Conclave of Physicians, in Two Parts, Compleat; detecting their In∣trigues, Frauds, and Plots against their Patients, and their destroying of the Fa∣culty of Physick: Also a Peculiar Discourse of the Jesuits Bark, the History thereof, with its true Use and Abuse. Moreover a Narrative of some Eminent Cases and New Principles in Physick, of greater Use than any yet known; By Gideon Harvey, M. D. their Majesties Physician of the Tower, and Fellow of the Colledge of Phy∣sicians of the Hague: In 12o. Both Print∣ed for, and sold by James Partridge at the Post-house at Charing-Cross. LONDON, Printed for Iames Partridge at the Post-house at Charing-Cross. MDCLXXXIX.
