M2648 11968521 51773
Democritus Platonissans, OR, AN ESSAY UPON THE INFINITY OF WORLDS OUT OF PLATONICK PRINCIPLES. Hereunto is annexed CUPIDS CONFLICT together with THE PHILOSOPHERS DEVOTION: And a Particular Interpretation appertain∣ing to the three last books of the Song of the Soul. By H. More Master of Arts, and Fellow of Christs Colledge in Cambridge. Plat. Pythagoras Terram Planetam quendam esse censuit qui circa solem in centro mundi defixum converteretur. Pythagoram secuti sunt Philolaus, Seleucus, Cleanthes, &c. imò PLA∣TO jam senex, ut narrat Theophrastus. Libert. Fromond. de Orbe terrae immobili. CAMBRIDGE Printed by ROGER DANIEL, Printer to the UNIVERSITE. 1646.
To the Reader. READER, IF thou standest not to the judgement of thine eye more then of thy reason, this fragment may passe favourably, though in the neglectfull disguise of of a fragment; if the strangenesse of the argument prove no hinderance. INFINITIE of WORLDS! A thing monstrous if assented to, and to be start∣led at, especially by them, whose thoughts this one have alwayes so engaged, that they can find no leisure to think of any thing else. But I onely make a bare proposall to more acute judge∣ments, of what my sportfull fancie, with pleasure hath sug∣gested: following my old designe of furnishing mens minds with varietie of apprehensions concerning the most weigh∣tie points of Philosophie, that they may not seem rashly to have settled in the truth, though it be the truth: a thing as ill beseeming Philosophers, as hastie prejudicative sentence Po∣liticall Iudges. But if I had relinquishd here my wonted self, in proving Dogmaticall, I should have found very noble Patro∣nage for the cause among the ancients, Epicurus, Democritus, Lucretius, &c. Or if justice may reach the dead, do them the right, as to shew, that though they be hooted at, by the Rout of the learned, as men of monstrous conceits, they were either ve∣ry wise or exceeding fortunate to light on so probable and speci∣ous an opinion, in which notwithstanding there is so much dis∣ficultie and seeming inconsistencie. Nay and that sublime and subtil Mechanick too, Des-Chartes, though he seem to mince it must hold infinitude of worlds, or which is as harsh one infinite one For what is his mundus indefinitè extensus, but extensus infinitè? Else it sounds onely infinitus quoad nos but simpliciter finitus. But if any space be left out unstuffd with Atoms, it will hazard the dissipation of the whole frame of Nature into disjoynted dust. As may be proved by the Principles of his own Philoso∣phie.
And that there is space whereever God is, or any actuall and self-subsistent Being, seems to me no plainer then one of the . For mine own part I must confesse these apprehensions do plainly oppose what heretofore I have conceived; but I have sworn more faithfull friendship with Truth then with my self. And therefore without all remorse lay batterie against mine own edifice: not sparing to shew how weak that is, that my self now deems not impregnably strong. I have at the latter end of the last Canto of Psychathanasia, not without triumph concluded, that the world hath not continued ab aeterno, from this ground: —Extension That's infinite implies a contradiction. And this is in answer to an objection against my last argument of the souls Immortalitie, viz. divine goodnesse. Which I there make the measure of his providence. That ground limits the essence of the world as well as its duration, and satisfies the curiositie of the Opposer, by shewing the incompossibilitie in the Creature, not want of goodnesse in the Creatour to have staid the framing of the Universe. But now roused up by a new Pbilosophick furie, I answer that difficultie by taking away the Hypothesis of either the world or time being finite: defending the infinitude of both. Which though I had done with a great deal of vigour and life, and semblance of assent, it would have agreed well enough with the free heat of Poefie, and might have passed for a pleasant flourish: but the severitie of my own judgement, and sad Genius hath cast in many correctives and coolers into the Canto it self; so that it cannot amount to more then a discussion. And discussion is no prejudice but an honour to the truth: for then and never but then is she Victorious. And what a glorious Trophee shall the finite world erect when it hath vanquished the Infinite; a Pygmee a Giant. For the better understanding of the connexion of this Ap∣pendix, with the Poem of the souls Immortalitie; I have ta∣ken off the last stanza's thereof, and added some few new ones to them for a more easie and naturall leading to the present Can∣to. Psychathan. lib. 3. Cant. 4.
Stanz. 33. But thou who ere thou art that thus dost strive With fierce assault my groundwork to subvert, And boldly dost into Gods secrets dive, Base fear my manly face note make m'avert. In that odde question which thou first didst stert, I'll plainly prove thine incapacitie, And force thy feeble feet back to revert, That cannot climb so high a mysterie, I'le shew thee strange perplexed inconsistencie. 34 Why was this world from all infinitie Not made? say'st thou: why? could it be so made Say I. For well observe the sequencie: If this Out-world continually hath wade Through a long long-spun-time that never had Beginning, then there as few circulings Have been in the quick Moon as Saturn sad; And still more plainly this clear truth to sing, As many years as dayes or flitting houres have been. 35 For things that we conceive are infinite, One th' other no'te surpasse in quantitie. So I have prov'd with clear convincing light, This world could never from infinitie Been made. Certain deficiencie Doth alwayes follow evolution: Nought's infinite but tight eternitie Close thrust into it self: extension That's infinite implies a contradiction. 36 So then for ought we know this world was made So soon as such a Nature could exist; And though that it continue, never fade, Yet never will it be that that long twist Of time prove infinite, though ner'e desist From running still. But we may safely say Time past compar'd with this long future list Doth show as if the world but yesterday Were made, and in due time Gods glory out may ray.
37 Then this short night and ignorant dull ages Will quite be swallowed in oblivion; And though this hope by many surly Sages Be now derided, yet they'll all be gone In a short time, like Bats and Owls yflone At dayes approch. This will hap certainly At this worlds shining conflagration. Fayes, Satyrs, Goblins the night merrily May spend, but ruddy Sol shall make them all to flie. 38 The roaring Lions and drad beasts of prey Rule in the dark with pitious crueltie; But harmlesse Man is master of the day, Which doth his work in pure simplicitie. God blesse his honest usefull industrie. But pride and covetize, ambition, Riot, revenge, self-love, hypocrisie, Contempt of goodnesse, forc'd opinion; These and such like do breed the worlds confusion. 39 But sooth to say though my triumphant Muse Seemeth to vant as in got victorie, And with puissant stroke the head to bruize Of her stiff fo, and daze his phantasie, Captive his reason, dead each facultie: Yet in her self so strong a force withstands That of her self afraid, she'll not aby, Nor keep the field. She'll fall by her own hand As Ajax once laid Ajax dead upon the strand. 40 For thus her-self by her own self's oppos'd; The Heavens the Earth the universall Frame Of living Nature God so soon disclos'd As He could do, or she receive the same. All times delay since that must turn to blame, And what cannot He do that can be done? And what might let but by th' all-powerfull Name Or Word of God, the Worlds Creation More suddenly were made then mans swift thought can run?
41 Wherefore that Heavenly Power or is as young As this Worlds date; or else some needlesse space Of time was spent, before the Earth did clung So close unto her-self and seas embrace Her hollow breast, and if that time surpasse A finite number then Infinitie Of years before this Worlds Creation passe. So that the durance of the Deitie We must contract or strait his full Benignitie. 42 But for the cradle of the Cretian Iove, And guardians of his vagient Infancie What sober man but sagely will reprove▪ Or drown the noise of the fond Dactyli By laughter loud? Dated Divinitie Certes is but the dream of a drie brain▪ God maim'd in goodnesse, inconsistencie; Wherefore my troubled mind is now in pain Of a new birth, which this one Canto'll not contain. Now Reader, thou art arrived to the Canto it self, from which I have kept thee off by too tedious Preface and Apologie, which is seldome made without consciousnesse of some fault, which I professe I find not in my self, unlesse this be it, that I am more tender of thy satisfaction then mine own credit. As for that high sullen Poem, Cupids Conflict, I must leave it to thy candour and favourable censure. The Philosophers Devotion I cast in onely, that the latter pages should not be unfurnished. H. M.
Nihil tamen frequentius inter Autores occurrit, quám ut omnia adeò ex modulo ferè sensuum suorum aestiment, ut ea quae insuper infinitis rerum spatiis extare possunt, sive superbè sive imprudenter rejiciant;  in usum suum fa∣bricata fuisse glorientur, perinde facientes ac si pediculi hu∣manum caput, aut pulices sinum muliebrem propter se solos condita existimarent, eáque demum ex gradibus saltibūsve suis metirentur. The Lord Herbert in his De Causis Errorum. De generali totius hujus mundi aspectabilis constructio∣ne ut rectè Philosophemur duo sunt imprimis observanda: Unum ut attendentes ad infinitam Dei potentiam & bonita∣tem, nè vereamur nimis ampla & pulchra & absoluta ejus ope∣ra imaginari: sed è contra caveamus, nè si quos fortè limites nobis non certò cognitos, in ipsis supponamus, non satis magni∣ficè de creatoris potentia sentire videamur. Alterum, ut etiam caveamus, nè nimis superbè de nobis ipsis sentiamus. Quod fieret non modò, si quos limites nobis nullâ cognitos ratione, nec divina revelatione, mundo vellemus af∣fingere, tanquam si vis nostra cogitationis, ultra id quod à Deo revera factum est ferri posset; sed etiam maximè, si res omnes propter nos solos, ab illo creatas esse fingeremus. Renatus Des-Cartes in his Princip. Philosoph. the third part.
Democritus Platonissans. THE ARGUMENT. 'Gainst boundlesse time th' objections made, And wast infinity Of worlds, are with new reasons weigh'd, Mens judgements are left free. 1 HEnce, hence unhallowed ears and hearts more hard Then Winter clods fast froze with Northern wind. But most of all, foul tongue I thee discard That blamest all that thy dark strait'ned mind, Can not conceive: But that no blame thou find; What e're my pregnant Muse brings forth to light, She'l not acknowledge to be of her kind, Till Eagle-like she turn them to the sight Of the eternall Word all deckt with glory bright. 2 Strange sights do straggle in my restlesse thoughts, And lively forms with orient colours clad Walk in my boundlesse mind, as men ybrought Into some spacious room, who when they 've had A turn or two, go out, although unbad. All these I see and know, but entertain None to my friend but who's most sober sad; Although the time my roof doth them contain Their presence doth possesse me till they out again 3 And thus possest in silver trump I sound Their guise, their shape, their gesture and array But as in silver trumpet nought is found When once the piercing sound is past away, (Though while the mighty blast therein did stay, Its tearing noise so terribly did shrill, That it the heavens did shake, and earth dismay) As empty I of what my flowing quill In heedlesse hast elswhere, or here, may hap to spill.
4 For 'tis of force and not of a set will. Ne dare my wary mind afford assent To what is plac'd above all mortall skill. But yet our various thoughts to represent Each genle wight will deem of good intent. Wherefore with leave th' infinitie I'll sing Of Time, Of Space: or without leave; I'm brent With eagre rage, my heart for joy doth spring, And all my spirits move with pleasant trembeling. 5 An inward triumph doth my soul up-heave And spread abroad through endlesse 'spersed aire. My nimble mind this clammie clod doth leave, And lightly stepping on from starre to starre Swifter then lightning, passeth wide and farre, Measuring th' unbounded Heavens and wastfull skie; Ne ought she finds her passage to debarre, For still the azure Orb as she draws nigh Gives back, new starres appear, the worlds walls 'fore her flie. 6 For what can stand that is so badly staid? Well may that fall whose ground-work is unsure. And what hath wall'd the world but thoughts unweigh'd In freer reason? That antiquate, secure, And easie dull conceit of corporature, Of matter, quantitie, and such like gear Hath made this needlesse, thanklesse inclosure, Which I in full disdain quite up will tear And lay all ope, that as things are they may appear. 7 For other they appear from what they are By reason that their Circulation Cannot well represent entire from farre Each portion of the Cuspis of the Cone (Whose nature is elsewhere more clearly shown) I mean each globe, whether of glaring light Or else opake, of which the earth is one. If circulation could them well transmit Numbs infinite of each would strike our 'stonishd sight;
8 All in just bignesse and right colours dight But totall presence without all defect 'Longs onely to that Trinitie by right, Ahad, Aeon, Psyche with all graces deckt, Whose nature well this riddle will detect; A Circle whose circumference no where Is circumscrib'd, whose Centre's each where set, But the low Cusp's a figure circular, Whose compasse is ybound, but centre's every where. 9 Wherefore who'll judge the limits of the world By what appears unto our failing sight Appeals to sense, reason down headlong hurld Out of her throne by giddie vulgar might. But here base senses dictates they will dight With specious title of Philosophie, And stiffly will contend their cause is right From rotten rolls of school antiquitie, Who constantly denie corporall Infinitie. 10 But who can prove their corporalitie Since matter which thereto's essentiall If rightly sifted's but a phantasie. And quantitie who's deem'd Originall Is matter, must with matter likewise fall. What ever is, is Life and Energie From God, who is th' Originall of all; Who being everywhere doth multiplie His own broad shade that endlesse throughout all doth lie. 11 He from the last projection of light Ycleep'd Shamajim, which is liquid fire (It Aether eke and centrall Tasis hight) Hath made each shining globe and clumperd mire Of dimmer Orbs. For Nature doth inspire Spermatick life, but of a different kind. Hence those congenit splendour doth attire And lively heat, these darknesse dead doth bind, And without borrowed rayes they be both cold and blind.
12 All these be knots of th' universall stole Of sacred Psyche; which at first was fine, Pure, thin, and pervious till hid powers did pull Together in severall points and did encline The nearer parts in one clod to combine. Those centrall spirits that the parts did draw The measure of each globe did then define, Made things impenetrable here below, Gave colour, figure, motion, and each usuall law. 13 And what is done in this Terrestriall starre The same is done in every Orb beside. Each flaming Circle that we see from farre Is but a knot in Psyches garment tide. From that lax shadow cast throughout the wide And endlesse world, that low'st projection Of universall life each thing's deriv'd What e're appeareth in corporeall fashion; For body's but this spirit, fixt, grosse by conspissation. 14 And that which doth conspissate active is; Wherefore not matter but some living sprite Of nimble Nature which this lower mist And immense field of Atoms doth excite, And wake into such life as best doth fit With his own self. As we change phantasies The essence of our soul not chang'd a whit, So do these Atoms change their energies Themselves unchanged into new Centreities. 15 And as our soul's not superficially Colourd by phantasms, nor doth them reflect As doth a looking-glasse such imag'rie As it to the beholder doth detect: No more are these lightly or smear'd or deckt With form or motion which in them we see, But from their inmost Centre they project Their vitall rayes, not merely passive be, But by occasion wak'd rouze up themselves on high.
16 So that they're life, form, sprite, not matter pure, For matter pure is a pure nullitie, What nought can act is nothing, I am sure; And if all act, that is they'll not denie But all that is is form: so easily By what is true, and by what they embrace For truth, their feigned Corporalitie Will vanish into smoke, but on I'll passe, More fully we have sung this in another place. 17 Wherefore more boldly now to represent The nature of the world, how first things were How now they are: This endlesse large Extent Of lowest life (which I styled whileere The Cuspis of the Cone that's every where) Was first all dark, till in this spacious Hall Hideous through silent horrour torches clear And lamping lights bright shining over all Were set up in due distances proportionall. 18 Innumerable numbers of fair Lamps Were rightly ranged in this hollow hole, To warm the world and chace the shady damps Of immense darknesse, rend her pitchie stole Into short rags more dustie dimme then coal. Which pieces then in severall were cast (Abhorred reliques of that vesture foul) Upon the Globes that round those torches trac'd, Which still fast on them stick for all they run so fast. 19 Such an one is that which mortall men call Night, A little shred of that unbounded shade. And such a Globe is that which Earth is hight; By witlesse Wizzards the sole centre made Of all the world, and on strong pillars staid. And such a lamp or light is this our Sun, Whose firie beams the scortched Earth invade. But infinite such as he, in heaven won, And more then infinite Earths about those Suns do run;
20 And to speak out: though I detest the sect Of Epicurus for their manners vile, Yet what is true I may not well reject. Truth's incorruptible, ne can the style Of vitious pen her sacred worth defile. If we no more of truth should deign t' embrace Then what unworthy mouths did never soyl, No truths at all mongst men would finden place But make them speedie wings and back to Heaven apace. 21 I will not say our world is infinite, But that infinitie of worlds ther be. The Centre of our world's the lively light Of the warm sunne, the visible Deitie Of this externall Temple. Mercurie Next plac'd and warm'd more throughly by his rayes, Right nimbly 'bout his golden head doth flie: Then Venus nothing slow about him strayes, And next our Earth though seeming sad full spritely playes. 22 And after her Mars rangeth in a round With firie locks and angry flaming eye, And next to him mild Iupiter is found, But Saturn cold wons in our utmost skie. The skirts of his large Kingdome surely lie Near to the confines of some other worlds Whose Centres are the fixed starres on high, 'Bout which as their own proper Suns are hurld Ioves, Earths and Saturns; round on their own axes twurld. 23 Little or nothing are those starres to us Which in the azure Evening gay appear (I mean for influence) but judicious Nature and carefull Providence her dear And matchlesse work did so contrive whileere, That th' Hearts or Centres in the wide world pight Should such a distance each to other bear, That the dull Planets with collated light By neighbour suns might cheared be in dampish night.
24 And as the Planets in our world (of which The sun's the heart and kernell) do receive Their nightly light from suns that do enrich Their sable mantle with bright gemmes, and give A goodly splendour, and sad men relieve With their fair twinkling rayes, so our worlds sunne Becomes a starre elsewhere, and doth derive Joynt light with others, cheareth all that won In those dim duskish Orbs round other suns that run. 25 This is is the parergon of each noble fire Of neighbour worlds to be the nightly starre, But their main work is vitall heat t' inspire Into the frigid spheres that 'bout them fare, Which of themselves quite dead and barren are. But by the wakening warmth of kindly dayes, And the sweet dewie nights they well declare Their seminall virtue in due courses raise Long hidden shapes and life, to their great Makers praise. 26 These with their suns I severall worlds do call, Whereof the number I deem infinite: Else infinite darknesse were in this great Hall Of th' endlesse Universe; For nothing finite Could put that immense shadow unto flight. But if that infinite Suns we shall admit, Then infinite worlds follow in reason right. For every Sun with Planets must be fit, And have some mark for his farre-shining shafts to hit. 27 But if he shine all solitarie, alone, What mark is left,? what aimed scope or end Of his existence? wherefore every one Hath a due number of dim Orbs that wend Around their centrall fire. But wrath will rend This strange composure back'd with reason stout. And rasher tongues right speedily will spend Their forward censure, that my wits run out On wool-gathering, through infinite spaces all about.
28 What sober man will dare once to avouch An infinite number of dispersed starres? This one absurdity will make him crouch And eat his words; Division nought impairs The former whole, nor he augments that spares. Strike every tenth out, that which doth remain, An equall number with the former shares, And let the tenth alone, th' whole nought doth gain, For infinite to infinite is ever the same. 29 The tenth is infinite as the other nine, Or else nor they, nor all the ten entire Are infinite. Thus one infinite doth adjoyn Others unto it and still riseth higher. And if those single lights hither aspire, This strange prodigious inconsistencie Groweth still stranger, if each fixed fire (I mean each starre) prove Sunnes, and Planets flie About their flaming heads amid the thronged skie. 30 For whatsoever that their number be Whether by seavens, or eighths, or fives, or nines, They round each fixed lamp; Infinity Will be redoubled thus by many times. Besides each greater Planet th' attendance finds Of lesser. Our Earths handmaid is the Moon, Which to her darkned side right duly shines, And Iove hath foure, as hath been said aboven, And Saturn more then foure if the plain truth were known. 31 And if these globes be regions of life And severall kinds of plants therein do grow, Grasse, flowers, hearbs, trees, which the impartiall knife Of all consuming Time still down doth mow, And new again doth in succession show: Which also 's done in flies, birds, men and beasts; Adde sand, pearls, pebbles, that the ground do strow Leaves, quills, hairs, thorns, blooms, you may think the rest Their kinds by mortall penne can not well be exprest:
32 And if their kinds no man may reckon well, The summe of successive particulars No mind conceive nor tongue can ever tell. And yet this mist of numbers (as appears) Belongs to one of these opacous sphears. Suppose this Earth; what then will all those Rounds Produce? No Atlas such a load upbears. In this huge endlesse heap o'rewhelmed, drownd, Choak'd, stifled, lo! I lie, breathlesse, even quite confound. 33 Yet give me space a while but to respire, And I my self shal fairly well out-wind; Keep this position true, unhurt, entire, That you no greater difficulty find In this new old opinion here defin'd Of infinite worlds, then one world doth imply. For if we do with steddy patience mind All is resolv'd int' one absurdity, The grant of something greater then infinitie. 34 That God is infinite all men confesse, And that the Creature is some realty Besides Gods self, though infinitely lesse. Joyn now the world unto the Deity. What? is there added no more entitie By this conjunction, then there was before? Is the broad breasted earth? the spacious skie Spangled with silver light, and burning Ore? And the wide bellowing seas, whose boyling billows roar, 35 Are all these nothing? But you will reply; As is the question so we ought restrain Our answer unto Corporeity. But that the phantasie of the body 's vain I did before unto you maken plain. But that no man depart unsatisfi'd A while this Universe here will we feigne Corporeall, till we have gainly tride, If ought that's bodily may infinite abide.
36 What makes a body saving quantity? What quantitie unlesse extension? Extension if 't admit infinity Bodies admit boundlesse dimension. That some extension forward on doth run Withouten limits, endlesse, infinite Is plane from Space, that ever paceth on Unstop'd, unstaid, till it have filled quite That immense infinite Orb where God himself doth sit. 37 But yet more sensibly this truth to show If space be ended set upon that end Some strong arm'd Archer with his Parthian bow, That from that place with speedy force may send His fleeter shafts, and so still forward wend. Where? When shall he want room his strength to trie? But here perversly subtill you 'l contend Nothing can move in mere vacuity, And space is nought, so not extended properly. 38 To solve these knots I must call down from high Some heavenly help, feather with angels wing The sluggish arrow. If it will not flie, Sent out from bow stiff-bent with even string, Let angels on their backs it thither bring Where you free mind appointed had before, And then hold on, till in your travelling You be well wearied, finding ever more Free passage for their flight, and what they flying bore. 39 Now to that shift that sayes Vacuity Is nought, and therefore not at all extent We answer thus: There is a distancy In empty space, though we be well content To balk that question (for we never meant Such needlesse niceties) whether that it be A reall being; yet that there's parts distent One from another, no mans phantasie Can e're reject if well he weigh't and warily.
40 For now conceive the aire and azure skie All swept away from Saturn to the Sunne, Which eath is to be wrought by him on high. Then in this place let all the Planets runne (As erst they did before this feat vvas done) If not by nature, yet by divine power, Ne one hairs breadth their former circuits shun And still for fuller proof, th' Astronomer Observe their hights as in the empty heavens they scoure. 41 Will then their Parallaxes prove all one Or none, or different still as before? If so, their distances by mortall men Must be acknowledg'd such as were of yore, Measur'd by leagues, miles, stades, nor lesse nor more From circuit unto circuit shall be fouud Then was before the sweeping of the floor. That distance therefore hath most certain ground In emptinesse we may conclude with reason sound. 42 If distance now so certainly attend All emptinesse (as also mensuration Attendeth distance) distance without end Is wide disperst above imagination (For emptinesse is void of limitation) And this unbounded voidnesse doth admit The least and greatest measures application; The number thus of the greatest that doth fit This infinite void space is likewise infinite. 43 But what so e're that infinite number be, A lesser number will a number give So farre exceeding in infinity That number as this measure we conceive To fall short of the other. But I'll leave This present way and a new course will trie Which at the same mark doth as fully drive And with a great deal more facility. Look on this endlesse Space as one whole quantity.
44 Which in your mind int' equall parts divide, Tens, hundreds, thousands or what pleaseth best. Each part denominate doth still abide An infinite portion, else nor all the rest Makes one infinitude. For if one thousandth part may be defin'd By finite measures eas'ly well exprest, A myriad suppose of miles assign'd Then to a thousand myriads is the whole confin'd. 45 Wherefore this wide and wast Vacuity, Which endlesse is outstretched thorough all, And lies even equall with the Deity, Nor is a thing meerly imaginall, (For it doth farre mens phantasies forestall Nothing beholden to our devicefull thought) This inf'nite voidnesse as much our mind doth gall, And has as great perplexities ybrought As if this empty space with bodies were yfraught. 46 Nor have we yet the face once to denie But that it is, although we mind it not; For all once minded such perplexity It doth create to puzzled reason, that She sayes and unsayes, do's she knows not what. Why then should we the worlds infinity Misdoubt, because when as we contemplate Its nature, such strange inconsistency And unexpected sequels, we therein descry? 47 Who dare gainsay but God is every where Unbounded, measurelesse, all infinite; Yet the same difficulties meet us here Which erst us met and did so sore affright With their strange vizards. This will follow right Where ever we admit infinity Every denominated part proves streight A portion infinite, which if it be, One infinite will into myriads multiply.
48 But with new argument to draw more near Our purpos'd end. If God's omnipotent And this omnipotent God be every where, Where e're he is then can he eas'ly vent His mighty virtue thorough all extent. What then shall hinder but a roscid aire With gentle heat each where be 'sperst and sprent. Unlesse omnipotent power we will empair, And say that empty space his working can debarre. 49 Where now this one supposed world is pight Was not that space at first all vain and void? Nor ought said; no, when he said, Let't be light. Was this one space better then all beside, And more obedient to what God decreed? Or would not all that endlesse emptinesse Gladly embrac'd (if he had ever tride) His just command? and what might come to passe Implies no contradictious inconsistentnesse. 50 Wherefore this precious sweet Ethereall dew For ought we know God each where did distill, And thorough all that hollow voidnesse threw And the wide gaping drought therewith did fill, His endlesse overflowing goodnesse spill In every place; which streight he did contrive Int' infinite severall worlds, as his best skill Did him direct and creatures could receive For matter infinite needs infinite worlds must give. 51 The Centre of each severall world's a sunne With shining beams and kindly warming heat, About whose radiant crown the Planets runne, Like reeling moths around a candle light. These all together, one world I conceit. And that even infinite such worlds there be, That inexhausted Good that God is hight A full sufficient reason is to me, Who simple Goodnesse make the highest Deity,
52 Als make himself the key of all his works And eke the measure of his providence; The piercing eye of truth to whom nought lurks But lies wide ope unbar'd of all pretense. But frozen hearts! away! flie farre from hence, Unlesse you'l thaw at this celestiall fire And melt into one minde and holy sense With Him that doth all heavenly hearts inspire, So may you with my soul in one assent conspire. 53 But what's within, uneath is to convey To narrow vessels that are full afore. And yet this truth as wisely as I may I will insinuate, from senses store Borrowing a little aid. Tell me therefore When you behold with your admiring eyes Heavens Canopie all to bespangled o're With sprinkled starres, what can you well devize Which causen may such carelesse order in the skies? 54 A peck of peasen rudely poured out On plaister flore, from hasty heedlesse hond Which lie all carelesse scattered about, To sight do in as seemly order stond, As those fair glistering lights in heaven are found. If onely for this world they were intended, Nature would have adorn'd this azure round With better art, and easily have mended This harsh disord'red order, and more beauty lended. 55 But though these lights do seem so rudely thrown And scattered throughout the spacious skie, Yet each most seemly sits in his own Throne In distance due and comely Majesty; And round their lordly seats their servants hie Keeping a well-proportionated space One from another, doing chearfully Their dayly task. No blemmish may deface The worlds in severall deckt with all art and grace.
56 But the appearance of the nightly starres Is but the by-work of each neighbour sun; Wherefore lesse marvell if it lightly shares Of neater Art; and what proportion Were fittest for to distance one from one (Each world I mean from other) is not clear. Wherefore it must remain as yet unknown Why such perplexed distances appear Mongst the dispersed lights in Heaven thrown here & there. 57 Again, that eminent similitude Betwixt the starres and Phoebus fixed light, They being both with steddinesse indu'd, No whit removing whence they first were pight, No serious man will count a reason slight To prove them both, both fixed suns and starres And Centres all of severall worlds by right, For right it is that none a sun debarre Of Planets which his just and due retinue are. 58 If starres be merely starres not centrall lights Why swell they into so huge bignesses? For many (as Astronomers do write) Our sun in bignesse many times surpasse. If both their number and their bulks were lesse Yet lower placed, light and influence Would flow as powerfully, and the bosome presse Of the impregned Earth, that fruit from hence As fully would arise, and lordly affluence. 59 Wherefore these fixed Fires mainly attend Their proper charge in their own Universe, And onely by the by of court'sie lend Light to our world, as our world doth reverse His thankfull rayes so farre as he can pierce Back unto other worlds. But farre aboven Further then furthest thought of man can traverse, Still are new worlds aboven and still aboven, In the endlesse hollow Heaven, and each world hath his sun.
60 An hint of this we have in winter-nights, When reason may see clearer then our eye, Small subtil starres appear unto our sights As thick as pin-dust scattered in the skie. Here we accuse our seeing facultie Of weaknesse, and our sense of foul deceit, We do accuse and yet we know not why. But the plain truth is, from a vaster hight The numerous upper worlds amaze our dazzled sight. 61 Now sith so farre as sense can ever trie We find new worlds, that still new worlds there be, And round about in infinite numbers lie, Further then reach of mans weak phantasie (Without suspition of temeritie) We may conclude; as well as men conclude That there is aire farre bove the mountains high, Or that th'Earth a sad substance doth include Even to the Centre with like qualities indu'd. 62 For who did ever the Earths Centre pierce, And felt or sand or gravell with his spade At such a depth? what Histories rehearse That ever wight did dare for to invade Her bowels but one mile in dampish shade? Yet I'll be bold to say that few or none But deem this globe even to the bottome made Of solid earth, and that her nature's one Throughout, though plain experience hath it never shown. 63 But sith sad earth so farre as they have gone They still descrie, eas'ly they do inferre Without all check of reason, were they down Never so deep, like substance would appear, Ne dream of any hollow horrour there. My mind with like uncurb'd facilitie Concludes from what by sight is seen so clear That ther's no barren wast vacuitie Above the worlds we see, but still new worlds there lie,
64 And still and still even to infinitie. Which point since I so fitly have propos'd, Abating well the inconsistencie Of harsh infinitude therein supposd And prov'd by reasons never to be loos'd That infinite space and infinite worlds there be; This load laid down, I'm freely now dispos'd A while to sing of times infinitie, May infinite Time afford me but his smallest fee. 65 For smallest fee of time will serve my turn This part for to dispatch, sith endlesse space (Whose perplext nature well mans brains might turn, And weary wits disorder and misplace) I have already passed: for like case Is in them both. He that can well untie The knots that in those infinite worlds found place, May easily answer each perplexitie Of these worlds infinite matters endlesse durancie. 66 The Cuspis and the Basis of the Cone Were both at once dispersed every where; But the pure Basis that is God alone: Else would remotest sights as bigge appear Unto our eyes as if we stood them near. And if an Harper harped in the Moon, His silver sound would touch our tickled eare: Or if one hollowed from highest Heaven aboven, In sweet still Evening-tide, his voice would hither roam. 67 This all would be if the Cuspe of the Cone Were very God. Wherefore I rightly 't deem Onely a Creaturall projection, Which flowing yet from God hath ever been, Fill'd the vast empty space with its large streem. But yet it is not totall every where As was even now by reason rightly seen: Wherefore not God, whose nature doth appear Intirely omnipresent, weigh'd with judgement clear.
68 A reall infinite matter, distinct And yet proceeding from the Deitie Although with different form as then untinct Has ever been from all Eternitie. Now what delay can we suppose to be, Since matter alway was at hand prepar'd Before the filling of the boundlesse skie With framed Worlds; for nought at all debar'd, (pair'd. Nor was His strength ungrown, nor was His strength em- 69 How long would God be forming of a flie? Or the small wandring moats that play i' th' sun? Least moment well will serve none can denie, His Fiat spoke and streight the thing is done. And cannot He make all the World as soon? For in each Atom of the matter wide The totall Deitie doth entirely won, His infinite presence doth therein reside, And in this presence infinite powers do ever abide. 70 Wherefore at once from all eternitie The infinite number of these Worlds He made, And will conserve to all infinitie, And still drive on their ever-moving trade, And steddy hold what ever must be staid; Ne must one mite be minish'd of the summe, Ne must the smallest atom ever fade, But still remain though it may change its room; This truth abideth strong from everlasting doom. 71 Ne fear I what hard sequel after-wit Will draw upon me; that the number's one Of years, moneths, dayes, houres, and of minutes fleet Which from eternitie have still run on. I plainly did confesse awhile agone That be it what it will that's infinite More infinites will follow thereupon, But that all infinites do justly fit And equall be, my reason did not yet admit.
72 But as my emboldened mind, I know not how, In empty Space and pregnant Deitie Endlesse infinitude dares to allow, Though it begets the like perplexitie: So now my soul drunk with Divinitie, And born away above her usuall bounds With confidence concludes infinitie Of Time of Worlds, of firie flaming Rounds; Which sight in sober mood my spirits quite confounds. 73 And now I do awhile but interspire A torrent of objections 'gainst me beat, My boldnesse to represse and strength to tire. But I will wipe them off like summer sweat, And make their streams streight back again retreat. If that these worlds, say they, were ever made From infinite time, how comes 't to passe that yet Art is not perfected, nor metalls fade, Nor mines of grimie coal low-hid in griefly shade. 74 But the remembrance of the ancient Floud With ease will wash such arguments away. Wherefore with greater might I am withstood. The strongest stroke wherewith they can assay To vanquish me is this; The Date or Day Of the created World, which all admit; Nor may my modest Muse this truth gainsay In holy Oracles so plainly writ. Wherefore the Worlds continuance is not infinite. 75 Now lend me, Origen! a little wit This sturdy stroke right fairly to avoid, Lest that my rasher rymes, while they ill fit With Moses pen, men justly may deride And well accuse of ignorance or pride. But thou, O holy Sage! with piercing sight Who readst those sacred rolls, and hast well tride With searching eye thereto what fitteth right Thy self of former Worlds right learnedly dost write:
76 To weet that long ago there Earths have been Peopled with men and beasts before this Earth, And after this shall others be again And other beasts and other humane birth. Which once admit, no strength that reason bear'th Of this worlds Date and Adams efformation, Another Adam once received breath And still another in endlesse repedation, And this must perish once by finall conflagration. 77 Witnesse ye Heavens if what I say's not true, Ye flaming Comets wandering on high, And new fixt starres found in that Circle blue, The one espide in glittering Cassiopie, The other near to Opbiuchus thigh. Both bigger then the biggest starres that are, And yet as farre remov'd from mortall eye As are the furthest, so those Arts declare Unto whose reaching sight Heavens mysteries lie bare. 78 Wherefore these new-seen lights were greater once By many thousand times then this our sphear Wherein we live, 'twixt good and evil chance. Which to my musing mind doth strange appear If those large bodies then first shaped were. For should so goodly things so soon decay? Neither did last the full space of two year. Wherefore I cannot deem that their first day Of being, when to us they sent out shining ray. 79 But that they were created both of old, And each in his due time did fair display Themselves in radiant locks more bright then gold, Or silver sheen purg'd from all drossie clay. But how they could themselves in this array Expose to humane sight, who did before Lie hid, is that which well amazen may The wisest man and puzzle evermore: Yet my unwearied thoughts this search could not give o're.
80 Which when I'd exercis'd in long pursuit To finden out what might the best agree With warie reason, at last I did conclude That there's no better probabilitie Can be produc'd of that strange prodigie, But that some mighty Planet that doth run About some fixed starre in Cassiopie As Saturn paceth round about our Sun, Unusuall light and bignesse by strange fate had wonne. 81 Which I conceive no gainer way is done Then by the siezing of devouring fire On that dark Orb, which 'fore but dimly shone With borrowed light, not lightened entire, But halfed like the Moon. And while the busie flame did fieze throughout, And search the bovvels of the lowest mire Of that Saturnian Earth; a mist broke out, And immense mounting smoke arose all round about. 82 Which being gilded with the piercing rayes Of its own sun and every neighbour starre, It soon appear'd with shining silver blaze, And then gan first be seen of men from farre. Besides that firie flame that was so narre The Planets self, which greedily did eat The wastning mold, did contribute a share Unto this brightnesse; and what I conceit Of this starre doth with that of Ophiuchus fit. 83 And like I would adventure to pronounce Of all the Comets that above the Moon, Amidst the higher Planets rudely dance In course perplex, but that from this rash doom I'm bett off by their beards and tails farre strown Along the skie, pointing still opposite Unto the sun, however they may roam; Wherefore a cluster of small starres unite These meteors some do deem, perhaps with judgement right.
84 And that these tayls are streams of the suns light Breaking through their near bodies as through clouds. Besides the Optick glasse has shown to sight The dissolution of these starrie crouds. Which thing if't once be granted and allow'd, I think without all contradiction They may conclude these Meteors are routs Of wandring starres, which though they one by one Cannot be seen, yet joyn'd, cause this strange vision. 85 And yet methinks, in my devicefull mind Some reasons that may happily represse These arguments it's not uneath to find. For how can the suns rayes that be transmisse Through these loose knots in Comets, well expresse Their beards or curld tayls utmost incurvation? Beside, the conflux and congeries Of lesser lights a double augmentation Implies, and 'twixt them both a lessening coarctation. 86 For when as once these starres are come so nigh As to seem one, the Comet must appear In biggest show, because more loose they lie Somewhat spread out, but as they draw more near The compasse of his head away must wear, Till he be brought to his least magnitude; And then they passing crosse, he doth repair Himself, and still from his last losse renew'd Grows till he reach the measure which we first had view'd. 87 And then farre distanc'd they bid quite adiew, Each holding on in solitude his way. Ne any footsteps in the empty Blew Is to be found of that farre-shining ray. Which processe sith no man did yet bewray, It seems unlikely that the Comets be Synods of starres that in wide Heaven stray. Their smallnesse eke and numerositie Encreaseth doubt and lessens probabilitie.
88 A cluster of them makes not half a Moon, What should such tennis-balls do in the skie? And few 'll not figure out the fashion Of those round firie meteors on high. Ne ought their beards much move us, that do lie Ever cast forward from the Morning sunne, Nor back cast tayls turn'd to our Evening-eye, That fair appear when as the day is done. This matter may lie hid in the starres shadowed Cone. 89 For in these Planets conflagration, Although the smoke mount up exactly round, Yet by the suns irradiation Made thin and subtil no where else its found By sight, save in the dim and duskish bound Of the projected Pyramid opake, Opake with darknesse, smoke and mists unsound. Yet gilded like a foggie cloud doth make Reflection of fair light that doth our senses take. 90 This is the reason of that constant site Of Comets tayls and beards: And that their show's Not pure Pyramidall, nor their ends seem streight But bow'd like brooms, is from the winds that blow, I mean Ethereall winds, such as below Men finden under th' Equinoctiall line. Their widend beards this aire so broad doth strow Incurvate, and or more or lesse decline: If not, let sharper wits more subtly here divine. 91 But that experiment of the Optick glasse The greatest argument of all I deem, Ne can I well encounter nor let passe So strong a reason if I may esteem The feat withouten fallacie to been, Nor judge these little sparks and subtile lights Some auncient fixed starres though now first seen, That near the ruin'd Comets place were pight, On which that Optic instrument by chance did light.
92 Nor finally an uncouth after-sport Of th' immense vapours that the searching fire Had boyled out, which now themselves consort In severall parts and closely do conspire, Clumper'd in balls of clouds and globes entire Of crudled smoke and heavy clunging mists; Which when they've staid a while at last expire; But while they stay any may see that lists So be that Optick Art his naturall sight assists. 93 If none of these wayes I may well decline The urging weight of this hard argument, Worst is but parting stakes and thus define: Some Comets be but single Planets brent, Others a synod joyn'd in due consent: And that no new found Meteors they are. Ne further may my wary mind assent From one single experience solitaire, Till all-discovering Time shall further truth declare. 94 But for the new fixt starres there's no pretence, Nor beard nor tail to take occasion by, To bring in that unluckie inference Which weaken might this new built mysterie. Certes in raging fire they both did frie. A signe whereof you rightly may aread Their colours changeable varietie First clear and white, then yellow, after red, Then blewly pale, then duller still, till perfect dead. 95 And as the order of these colours went, So still decreas'd that Cassiopean starre, Till at the length to sight it was quite spent: Which observations strong reasons are, Consuming fire its body did empare And turn to ashes. And the like will be In all the darksome Planets wide and farre. Ne can our Earth from this state standen free A Planet as the rest, and Planets fate must trie.
96 Ne let the tender heart too harshly deem Of this rude sentence: for what rigour more Is in consuming fire then drowning stream Of Noahs floud which all creaturs choak'd of yore, Saving those few that were kept safe in store In that well builded ship? All else beside Men, birds, and beasts, the lion, buck, and bore Dogs, kine, sheep, horses all that did abide Upon the spacious earth, perish'd in waters wide. 97 Nor let the slow and misbelieving wight Doubt how the fire on the hard earth may seize; No more then how those waters erst did light Upon the sinfull world. For as the seas Boyling with swelling waves aloft did rise, And met with mighty showers and pouring rain From Heavens spouts; so the broad flashing skies Thickned with brimstone and clouds of fiery bain Shall meet with raging Etna's and Vesuvius flame. 98 The burning bowels of this wasting ball Shall gullup up great flakes of rolling fire, And belch out pitchie flames, till over all Having long rag'd, Vulcan himself shall tire And (th' earth an ashheap made) shall then expire. Here Nature laid asleep in her own Urn With gentle rest right easly will respire, Till to her pristine task she do return As fresh as Phenix young under th' Arabian Morn. 99 O happy they that then the first are born, While yet the world is in her vernall pride: For old corruption quite away is worn As metall pure so is her mold well tride. Sweet dews, cool-breathing airs, and spaces wide Of precious spicery wafted with soft wind: Fair comely bodies goodly beautifi'd Snow-limb'd, rose-cheek'd, ruby-lip'd, pearl-ted, star eyn'd Their parts each fair in fit proportion all conbin'd.
100 For all the while her purged ashes rest These rellicks dry suck in the heavenly dew, And roscid Manna rains upon her breast, And fills with sacred milk sweet fresh and new, Where all take life and doth the world renew; And then renew'd with pleasure be yfed. A green soft mantle doth her bosome strew With fragrant herbs and flowers embellished, Where without fault or shame all living creatures bed. 101 Ne ought we doubt how Nature may recover In her own ashes long time buried. For nought can ever consume that centrall power Of hid spermatick life, which lies not dead In that rude heap, but safely covered; And doth by secret force suck from above Sweet heavenly juice, and therewith nourished Till her just bulk, she doth her life emprove, Made mother of much children that about her move. 102 Witnesse that uncouth bird of Arabie Which out of her own ruines doth revive With all th' exploits of skillfull Chymistrie, Such as no vnlgar wit can well believe. Let universall Nature witnesse give That what I sing's no feigned forgerie. A needlesse task new fables to contrive, But what I sing is seemly verity Well suting with right reason and Philosophie. 103 But the fit time of this mutation No man can finden out with all his pains. For the small sphears of humane reason run Too swift within his narrow compast brains. But that vast Orb of Providence contains A wider period; turneth still and slow. Yet at the last his aimed end he gains. And sure at last a fire will overflow The aged Earth, and all must into ashes go.
104 Then all the stately works and monuments Built on this bottome shall to ruine fall. And all those goodly statues shall be brent Which were erect to the memoriall Of Kings Kaesars, ne may better 'fall The boastfull works of brave Poetick pride That promise life and fame perpetuall; Ne better fate may these poor lines abide. Betide what will to what may live no lenger tide! 105 This is the course that never-dying Nature Might ever hold from all Eternitie, Renuing still the faint decayed creature Which would grow stark and drie as aged tree, Unlesse by wise preventing Destinie She were at certain periods of years Reduced back unto her Infancie, Which well fram'd argument (as plain appears) My ship from those hard rocks and shelves right safely stears. 106 Lo! now my faithfull muse hath represented Both frames of Providence to open view, And hath each point in orient colours painted Not to deceive the sight with seeming shew But earnest to give either part their due; Now urging th' uncouth strange perplexitie Of infinite worlds and Time, then of a new Softening that harsher inconsistencie To fit the immense goodnesse of the Deity. 107 And here by curious men 't may be expected That I this knot with judgement grave decide, And then proceed to what else was objected. But, ah! What mortall wit may dare t' areed Heavens counsels in eternall horrour hid? And Cynthius pulls me by my tender ear Such signes I must observe with wary heed: Wherefore my restlesse Muse at length forbear. Thy silver sounded Lute hang up in silence here. FINIS
Cupids Conflict. Mela. Cleanthes. Cl. MEla my dear! why been thy looks so sad As if thy gentle heart were sunk with care? Impart thy case; for be it good or bad Friendship in either will bear equall share. Mel. Not so; Cleanthes, for if bad it be My self must bleed afresh by wounding thee. But what it is, my slow, uncertain wit Cannot well judge. But thou shalt sentence give How manfully of late my self I quit, When with that lordly lad by chance I strive. Cl. Of friendship Mela! let's that story hear. Mel. Sit down Cleanthes then, and lend thine ear. Upon a day as best did please my mind Walking abroad amidst the verdant field Scattering my carefull thoughts i'th' wanton wind The pleasure of my path so farre had till'd My feeble feet that without timely rest Uneath it were to reach my wonted nest. In secret shade farre moved from mortals sight In lowly dale my wandring limbs I laid On the cool grasse where Natures pregnant wit A goodly bower of thickest trees had made. Amongst the leaves the chearfull birds did fare And sweetly carrol'd to the echoing air. Hard at my feet ran down a crystall spring Which did the cumbrous pebbles hoarsly chide For standing in the way. Though murmuring The broken stream his course did rightly guide And strongly pressing forward with disdain The grassie flore divided into twain.
The place a while did feed my foolish eye As being new, and eke mine idle ear Did listen oft to that wild harmonie And oft my curious phansie would compare How well agreed the Brooks low muttering Base, With the birds trebbles pearch'd on higher place. But senses objects soon do glut the soul, Or rather weary with their emptinesse; So I, all heedlesse how the waters roll And mindlesse of the mirth the birds expresse, Into my self 'gin softly to retire After hid heavenly pleasures to enquire. While I this enterprize do entertain; Lo! on the other side in thickest bushes A mighty noise! with that a naked swain With blew and purple wings streight rudely rushes. He leaps down light upon the flowry green, Like sight before mine eyes had never seen. At's snowy back the boy a quiver wore Right fairly wrought and gilded all with gold. A silver bow in his left hand he bore, And in his right a ready shaft did hold. Thus armed stood he and betwixt us tway The labouring brook did break his toilsome way. The wanton lad whose sport is others pain Did charge his bended bow with deadly dart, And drawing to the head with might and main, With fell intent he aim'd to hit my heart. But ever as he shot his arrows still In their mid course dropt down into the rill. Of wondrous virtues that in waters been Is needlesse to rehearse, all books do ring Of those strange rarities. But ne're was seen Such virtue as resided in this spring. The novelty did make me much admire But stirr'd the hasty youth to ragefull ire.
As heedlesse fowls that take their per'lous flight Over that bane of birds, Averno lake, Do drop down dead: so dead his shafts did light Amid this stream, which presently did slake Their fiery points, and all their feathers wet Which made the youngster Godling inly fret. Thus lustfull Love (this was that love I ween) Was wholly changed to consuming ire. And eath it was, fith they're so near a kin They be both born of one rebellious fire. But he supprest his wrath and by and by For feathered darts, he winged words let flie. Vain man! said he, and would thou wer'st not vain That hid'st thy self in solitary shade And spil'st thy precious youth in sad disdain Hating this lifes delight! Hath God thee made Part of this world, and wilt not thou partake Of this worlds pleasure for its makers sake? Unthankfull wretch! Gods gifts thus to reject And maken nought of Natures goodly dower That milders still away through thy neglect And dying fades like unregarded flower. This life is good, what's good thou must improve, The highest improvement of this life is love. Had I (but O that envious Destinie, Or Stygian vow, or thrice accursed charm Should in this place free passage thus denie Unto my shafts as messengers of harm! Had I but once transfixt thy froward breast, How would'st thou then—I staid not for the rest; But thus half angry to the boy replide: How would'st thou then my soul of sense bereave! I blinded, thee more blind should choose my guide! How would'st thou then my muddied mind deceive With fading shows, that in my errour vile, Base lust, I love should tearm, vice, virtue stile.
How should my wicked rymes then idolize Thy wretched power, and with impious wit Impute thy base born passions to the skies And my souls sicknesse count an heavenly fit, My weaknesse strength, my wisdome to be caught My bane my blisse, mine ease to be o'rewraught. How often through my fondly feigning mind And frantick phansie, in my Mistris eye Should I a thousand fluttering Cupids find Bathing their busie wings? How oft espie Under the shadow of her eye-brows fair Ten thousand Graces sit all naked bare? Thus haunted should I be with such feat fiends: A pretty madnesse were my portion due. Foolish my self I would not hear my friends. Should deem the true for false, the false for true. My way all dark more slippery then ice My attendents, anger, pride, and jealousies. Unthankfull then to God I should neglect All the whole world for one poor sorry wight, Whose pestilent eye into my heart project Would burn like poysonous Comet in my spright. Aye me! how dismall then would prove that day Whose onely light sprang from so fatall ray. Who seeks for pleasure in this mortall life By diving deep into the body base Shall loose true pleasure: But who gainly strive Their sinking soul above this bulk to place Enlarg'd delight they certainly shall find Unbounded joyes to fill their boundlesse mind. When I my self from mine own self do quit And each thing else; then an all-spreaden love To the vast Universe my soul doth fit Makes me half equall to all-seeing Jove. My mighty wings high stretch'd then clapping light I brush the starres and make them shine more bright.
Then all the works of God with close embrace I dearly hug in my enlarged arms All the hid paths of heavenly Love I trace And boldly listen to his secret charms. Then clearly view I where true light doth rise, And where eternall Night low-pressed lies. Thus lose I not by leaving small delight But gain more joy, while I my self suspend From this and that; for then with all unite I all enjoy, and love that love commends. That all is more then loves the partiall soul Whose petty loves th' impartiall fates controll. Ah fon! said he, (and laughed very loud) That trickst thy tongue with uncouth strange disguize, Extolling highly that with speeches proud To mortall men that humane state denies, And rashly blaming what thou never knew Let men experienc'd speak, if they'll speak true. Had I once lanc'd thy froward flinty heart And cruddled bloud had thawn with living fire And prickt thy drousie sprite with gentle smart How wouldst thou wake to kindly sweet desire, Thy soul fill'd up with overflowing pleasures Would dew thy lips with hony-dropping measures. Then wouldst thou caroll loud and sweetly sing In honour of my sacred Deity That all the woods and hollow hills would ring Reechoing thy heavenly harmonie. And eke the hardy rocks with full rebounds Would faithfully return thy silver sounds. Next unto me would be thy Mistresse fair, Whom thou might setten out with goodly skill Her peerlesse beauty and her virtues rare, That all would wonder at thy gracefull quill. And lastly in us both thy self shouldst raise And crown thy temples with immortall bayes.
But now thy riddles all men do neglect, Thy rugged lines of all do lie forlorn. Unwelcome rymes that rudely do detect The Readers ignorance. Men holden scorn To be so often non-plusd or to spell, And on one stanza a whole age to dwell. Besides this harsh and hard obscuritie Of the hid sense, thy words are barbarous And strangely new, and yet too frequently Return, as usuall plain and obvious, So that the show of the new thick-set patch Marres all the old with which it ill doth match. But if thy haughty mind, forsooth, would deign To stoop so low to hearken to my lore, Then wouldst thou with trim lovers not disdeign To adorn the outside, set the best before. Nor rub nor wrinkle would thy verses spoil Thy rymes should run as glib and smooth as oyl. If that be all, said I, thy reasons slight Can never move my well establishd mind. Full well I wote alwayes the present sprite, Or life that doth possesse the soul, doth blind, Shutting the windows 'gainst broad open day Lest fairer sights its uglinesse bewray. The soul then loves that disposition best Because no better comes unto her view. The drunkard drunkennesse, the sluggard rest, Th' Ambitious honour and obeisance due. So all the rest do love their vices base 'Cause virtues beauty comes not into place. And looser love 'gainst Chastitie divine Would shut the door that he might sit alone. Then wholly should my mind to him incline: And woxen strait, (since larger love was gone) That paultrie sprite of low contracting lust Would fit my soul as if't were made for't just.
Then should I with my fellow bird or brute So strangely metamorphis'd, either ney Or bellow loud: or if 't may better sute Chirp out my joy pearch'd upon higher spray. My passions fond with impudence rehearse, Immortalize my madnesse in a verse. This is the summe of thy deceiving boast That I vain ludenesse highly should admire, When I the sense of better things have lost And chang'd my heavenly heat for hellish fire, Passion is blind, but virtues piercing eye Approching danger can from farre espie. And what thou dost Pedantickly object Concerning my rude rugged uncouth style, As childish toy I manfully neglect, And at thy hidden snares do inly smile. How ill alas! with wisdome it accords To sell my living sense for livelesse words. My thought's the fittest measure of my tongue, Wherefore I'll use what's most significant, And rather then my inward meaning wrong Or my full-shining notion trimly scant, I'll conjure up old words out of their grave, Or call fresh forrein force in if need crave. And these attending on my moving mind Shall duly usher in the fitting sense. As oft as meet occasion I find. Unusuall words oft used give lesse offence; Nor will the old contexture dim or marre, For often us'd they're next to old, thred bare. And if the old seem in too rustie hew, Then frequent rubbing makes them shine like gold, And glister all with colour gayly new. Wherefore to use them both we will be bold. Thus lists me fondly with fond folk to toy, And answer fools with equall foolerie.
The meaner mind works with more nicetie, As spiders wont to weave their idle web, But braver spirits do all things gallantly Of lesser failings nought at all affred: So Natures carelesse pencill dipt in light With sprinkled starres hath spattered the Night. And if my notions clear though rudely thrown And loosely scattered in my poesie, May lend men light till the dead Night be gone, And Morning fresh with roses strew the skie: It is enough, I meant no trimmer frame Or by nice needle-work to seek a name. Vain man! that seekest name mongst earthly men Devoid of God and all good virtuous lere; Who groping in the dark do nothing ken But mad; with griping care their souls do tear, Or burst with hatred or with envie pine Or burn with rage or melt out at their eyne. Thrice happy he whose name is writ above, And doeth good though gaining infamie; Requiteth evil turns with hearty love, And recks not what befalls him outwardly. Whose worth is in himself, and onely blisse In his pure conscience that doth nought amisse. Who placeth pleasure in his purged soul And virtuous life his treasure doth esteem; Who can his passions master and controll, And that true lordly manlinesse doth deem, Who from this world himself hath clearly quit Counts nought his own but what lives in his sprite. So when his sprite from this vain world shall flit It bears all with it whatsoever was dear Unto it self, passing in easie fit, As kindly ripen'd corn comes out of th' eare. Thus mindlesse of what idle men will say He takes his own and stilly goes his way.
But the retinue of proud Lucifer, Those blustering Poets that flie after fame And deck themselves like the bright Morning-starre. Alas! it is but all a crackling flame. For death will strip them of that glorious plume That airie blisse will vanish into fume. For can their carefull ghosts from Limbo ake Return, or listen from the bowed skie To heare how well their learned lines do take? Or if they could; is Heavens felicitie So small as by mans praise to be encreas'd, Hells pain no greater then hence to be eas'd? Therefore once dead in vain shall I transmit My shadow to gazing Posteritie; Cast farre behind me I shall never see't, On Heavens fair Sunne having fast fixt mine eye. Nor while I live, heed I what man doth praise Or underprize mine unaffected layes. What moves thee then, said he, to take the pains And spenden time if thou contemn'st the fruit? Sweet fruit of fame, that fills the Poets brains With high conceit and feeds his fainting wit. How pleasant 'tis in honour here to live And dead, thy name for ever to survive! Or is thy abject mind so basely bent As of thy Muse to maken Merchandize? (And well I wote this is no strange intent.) The hopefull glimps of gold from chattering Pies, From Daws and Crows, and Parots oft hath wrung An unexpected Pegascian song. Foul shame on him, quoth I, that shamefull thought Doth entertain within his dunghill breast, Both God and Nature hath my spirits wrought To better temper and of old hath blest My loftie soul with more divine aspires Then to be touchd with such vile low desires.
I hate and highly scorn that Kestrell kind Of bastard scholars that subordinate The precious choice induements of the mind To wealth or worldly good. Adulterate And cursed brood! Your wit and will are born Of th' earth and circling thither do return. Profit and honour be those measures scant Of your slight studies and endeavours vain, And when you once have got what you did want You leave your learning to enjoy your gain. Your brains grow low, your bellies swell up high, Foul sluggish fat ditts up your dulled eye. Thus what the earth did breed, to th' earth is gone, Like fading hearb or feebly drooping flower, By feet of men and beast quite trodden down, The muck-sprung learning cannot long endure. Back she returns lost in her filthy source, Drown'd, chok'd or slocken by her cruell nurse. True virtue to her self's the best reward, Rich with her own and full of lively spirit, Nothing cast down for want of due regard, Or 'cause rude men acknowledge not her merit. She knows her worth and stock from whence she sprung, Spreads fair without the warmth of earthly dung, Dew'd with the drops of Heaven shall flourish long; As long as day and night do share the skie, And though that day and night should fail yet strong And steddie, fixed on Eternitie Shall bloom for ever. So the soul shall speed That loveth virtue for no worldly meed. Though sooth to sayn, the worldly meed is due To her more then to all the world beside. Men ought do homage with affections true And offer gifts for God doth there reside. The wise and virtuous soul is his own seat To such what's given God himself doth get.
But earthly minds whose sight's seal'd up with mud Discern not this flesh-clouded Deity, Ne do acknowledge any other good Then what their mole-warp hands can feel and trie By groping touch; thus (worth of them unseen) Of nothing worthy that true worth they ween. Wherefore the prudent Law-givers of old Even in all Nations, with right sage foresight Discovering from farre how clums and cold The vulgar wight would be to yield what's right To virtuous learning, did by law designe Great wealth and honour to that worth divine. But nought's by law to Poesie due said he, Ne doth the solemn Statesmans head take care Of those that such impertinent pieces be Of common-weals. Thou'd better then to spare Thy uselesse vein. Or tell else, what may move Thy busie Muse such fruitlesse pains to prove. No pains but pleasure to do the dictates dear Of inward living nature. What doth move The Nightingall to sing so sweet and clear The Thrush, or Lark that mounting high above Chants her shrill notes to heedlesse ears of corn Heavily hanging in the dewy morn. When life can speak, it can not well withhold T' expresse its own impressions and hid life. Or joy or grief that smoothered lie untold Do vex the heart and wring with restlesse strife. Then are my labours no true pains but ease My souls unrest they gently do appease. Besides, that is not fruitlesse that no gains Brings to my self. I others profit deem Mine own: and if at these my heavenly flames Others receiven light, right well I ween My time's not lost. Art thou now satisfide Said I: to which the scoffing boy replide.
Great hope indeed thy rymes should men enlight, That be with clouds and darknesse all o'recast, Harsh style and harder sense void of delight The Readers wearied eye in vain do wast. And when men win thy meaning with much pain, Thy uncouth sense they coldly entertain. For wotst thou not that all the world is dead Unto that Genius that moves in thy vein Of poetrie! But like by like is fed. Sing of my Trophees in triumphant strein, Then correspondent life, thy powerfull verse Shall strongly strike and with quick passion pierce. The tender frie of lads and lasses young With thirstie eare thee compassing about, Thy Nectar-dropping Muse, thy sugar'd song Will swallow down with eagre hearty draught; Relishing truly what thy rymes convey, And highly praising thy soul-smiting lay. The mincing maid her mind will then bewray, Her heart-bloud flaming up into her face, Grave matrons will wex wanton and betray Their unresolv'dnesse in their wonted grace; Young boyes and girls would feel a forward spring, And former youth to eld thou back wouldst bring. All Sexes, Ages, Orders, Occupations Would listen to thee with attentive ear, And eas'ly moved with thy sweet perswasions, Thy pipe would follow with full merry chear. While thou thy lively voice didst loud advance Their tickled bloud for joy would inly dance. But now, alas! poore solitarie man! In lonesome desert thou dost wander wide To seek and serve thy disappearing Pan, Whom no man living in the world hath eyde: For Pan is dead but I am still alive, And live in men who honour to me give:
They honour also those that honour me With sacred songs. But thou now singst to trees To rocks to Hills, to Caves that senselesse be And mindlesse quite of thy hid mysteries, In the void aire thy idle voice is spread, Thy Muse is musick to the deaf or dead. Now out alas! said I, and wele-away The tale thou tellest I confesse too true. Fond man so doteth on this living clay His carcase dear, and doth its joyes pursue, That of his precious soul he takes no keep Heavens love and reasons light lie fast asleep. This bodies life vain shadow of the soul With full desire they closely do embrace, In fleshly mud like swine they wallow and roll, The loftiest mind is proud but of the face Or outward person; if men but adore That walking sepulchre, cares for no more. This is the measure of mans industry To wexen some body and getten grace To 's outward presence; though true majestie Crown'd with that heavenly light and lively rayes Of holy wesdome and Seraphick love, From his deformed soul he farre remove. Slight knowledge and lesse virtue serves his turn For this designe. If he hath trod the ring Of pedling arts; in usuall pack-horse form Keeping the rode; O! then 't's a learned thing. If any chanc'd to write or speak what he Conceives not't were a foul discourtesie? To cleanse the soul from sinne, and still diffide Whether our reasons eye be clear enough To intromit true light, that fain would glide Into purg'd hearts, this way's too harsh and rough: Therefore the clearest truths may well seem dark When sloathfull men have eyes so dimme and stark.
These be our times. But if my minds presage Bear any moment, they can ne're last long, A three branch'd Flame will soon sweep clean the stage Of this old dirty drosse and all wex young. My words into this frozen air I throw Will then grow vocall at that generall thaw. Nay, now thou'rt perfect mad, said he, with scorn, And full of foul derision quit the place. The skie did rattle with his wings ytorn Like to rent silk. But I in the mean space Sent after him this message by the wind Be't so I'm mad, yet sure I am thou'rt blind. By this the out-stretch'd shadows of the trees Pointed me home-ward, and with one consent Foretold the dayes descent. So straight I rise Gathering my limbs from off the green pavement Behind me leaving then the slooping Light. Cl. And now let's up, Vesper brings on the Night. FINIS.
A Particular Interpretation appertaining to the three last books of the Platonick Song of the Soul. A ATom-lives. The same that Centrall lives. Both the terms denotate the indivisibility of the inmost essence it self; the pure essentiall form I mean, of plant, beast or man, yea of angels themselves, good or bad. Apogee, See Interpret. Gen. Autokineticall, Ananke, Acronycall, Alethea-land, Animadversall. That lively inward animadversall. It is the soul it self, for I cannot conceive the body doth animad∣vert; when as objects plainly exposed to the sight are not dis∣covered till the soul takes notice of them. B BOdy. The ancient Philosphers have defined it, . Sext. Emperic. Pyrrhon. Hypo∣typ. lib. 3. cap. 5. Near to this is that description, Psychathan, Cant. 2. Stanz. 12. lib. 2, Matter extent in three dimensions. But for that , simple trinall distension doth not im∣ply it, wherefore I declin'd it. But took in matter according to their conceit, that phansie à Materia prima, I acknowledge none, and consequently no such corpus naturale as our Phy∣siologist make the subject of that science. That  is nothing but a fixt spirit, the conspissati∣on or coagulation of the Cuspidall particles of the Cone, which are indeed the Centrall Tasis, or inward essence of the sensible world. These be an infinite number of vitall Atoms that may be wakened into diverse tinctures, or energies, into fiery, watery, earthy, &c. And one divine Fiat can unloose them all into an universall mist, or turn them out of that sweat into a drie and pure Etheriall temper. These be the last projections of life from the soul of the world; and are act or form though debil and indifferent, like that which they call the first matter. But they are not meerly passive
but meet their information half way, as I may so speak: are radiant ab intimo and awake into this or the other operation, by the powerfull appulse of some superadvenient form. That which change of Phantasmes is to the soul, that is al∣teration of rayes to them. For their rayes are ab intrinseco, as the phantasmes of the soul. These be the reall matter of which all supposed bodies are compounded, and this matter (as I said) is form and life, so that all is life and form what ever is in the world, as I have somewhere intimated in An∣tipsychopan: But however I use the terme body ordinarily in the usuall and vulgar acception. And for that sense of the ancients, nearest to which I have defined it in the place first above mentioned, that I seem not to choose that same as most easie to proceed against in disproving the corporeity of the soul, the arguments do as necessarily conclude against such a naturall body as is ordinarily described in Physiologie (as you may plainly discern if you list to observe) as also against this body composed of the Cuspidall particles of the Cone. For though they be Centrall lives, yet are they neither Pla∣sticall, Sensitive, or Rationall, so farre are they from pro∣ving to be the humane soul whose nature is there discust. C COne: Is a solid figure made by the turning of a rectan∣gular triangle, about; one of the sides that include the right angle resting, which will be then the Axis of the com∣pleated Cone. But I take it sometimes for the comprehensi∣on of all things, God himself not left out, whom I tearm the Basis of the Cone or Universe. And because all from him descends, , with abatement or contracti∣on, I give the name of Cone to the Universe. And of Cone rather then Pyramid because of the roundnesse of the figure, which the effluxes of all things imitate. Chaos, See interpret Gen. Chronicall, Clare, Circulation, The terme is taken from a toyish observati∣on, viz. the circling of water when a stone is cast into a standing pool. The motion drives on circularly, the first rings are thickest, but the further they go they grow the thin∣ner, till they vanish into nothing. Such is the diffusion of
the species audible in the strucken aire, as also of the visible species. In brief any thing is said to circulate that diffuseth its image or species in a round. It might have been more significantly called orbiculation; seeing this circumfusion makes not onely a circle, but fills a sphere, which may be called the sphere of activity. Yet Circulation more fitly sets out the diminution of activity, from those ringes in the wa∣ter which as they grow in compasse, abate in force and thick∣nesse. But sometimes I use Circulate in an ordinary sense to turn round, or return in a circle. Centre, Centrall, Centrality. When they are used out of their ordinary sense, they signifie the depth or inmost being of any thing, from whence its acts and energies flow forth. See Atom-lives. Cuspis of the Cone. The multiplide Cuspis of the Cone is nothing but the last projection of life from Psyche, which is  a liquid fire or fire and water, which are the cor∣poreall or materiall principles of all things, changed or dis∣gregated (if they be centrally distinguishable) and again mingled by the virtue of Physis or Spermaticall life of the world; of these are the Sunne and all the Planets, they be∣ing kned together, and fixt by the Centrall power of each Planet and Sunne. The volatile Ether is also of the same, and all the bodies of plants, beasts and men. These are they which we handle and touch, a sufficient number compact to∣gether. For neither is the noise of those little flies in a sum∣mer-evening audible severally: but a full Quire of them strike the ear with a pretty kind of buzzing. Strong and tu∣multuous pleasure and scorching pain reside in these, they being essentiall and centrall, but sight and hearing are one∣ly of the images of these, See Body. Eternitie. Is the steddie comprehension of all things at once. See Aeon discribed in my Expos upon Psychozoia. Energie, It is a peculiar Platonicall terme. In my In∣terpret. Gen. I expounded it Operation, Efflux, Activity. None of those words bear the full sense of it. The exam∣ples there are fit, viz. the light of the Sunne, the phantasms of the soul. We may collect the genuine sense of the word by comparing severall places in the Philosopher.
. For every being hath its Energie, which is the image of it self, so that it existing that Energie doth also exist, and standing still is pro∣jected forward more or lesse. And some of those energies are weak and obscure, others hid or undiscernable, othersome greater and of a larger projection. Plotin. Ennead. 4. lib. 5. cap. 7. And again, Ennead. 3. lib. 4. . And we remain above by the In∣tellectuall man, but by the extreme part of him we are held be∣low, as it were yielding an efflux from him to that which is be∣low, or rather an energie he being not at all lessened. This curiositie Antoninus also observes, (lib. 8. Meditat.) in the nature of the sun-beams, where although he admits of , yet he doth not of  which is . The sunne, saith he, is diffused, and his fu∣sion is every where but without effusion, &c. I will onely adde one place more out of Plotinus. Ennead. 3. lib. 6. . The na∣turall energie of each power of the soul is life not parted from the soul though gone out of the soul, viz. into act. Comparing of all these places together, I cannot better explain this Platonick term, energie, then by calling it the rayes of an essence, or the beams of a vitall Centre. For es∣sence is the Centre as it were of that which is truly called Energie, and Energie the beams and rayes of an essence. And as the Radii of a circle leave not the centre by touch∣ing the Circumference, no more doth that which is the pure Energie of an essence, leave the essence by being called out into act, but is  a working in the essence though it flow out into act. So that Energie depends alwayes on es∣ence, as Lumen on Lux, or the creature on God; Whom therefore Synesius in his Hymnes calls the Centre of all things. Entelecheia. See Interpret. Gen.
F FAith. Platonick faith in the first Good. This faith is ex∣cellently described in Proclus. where it is set above all ra∣tiocination, nay, Intellect it self. . But to them that endeavour to be joyned with the first Good, there is no need of knowledge or multifarious cooperation, but of settlednesse, steddinesse, and rest. lib. 1. cap. 24. Theolog. Platon. And in the next chapter; . For we must not seek after that absolute or first Good cognosci∣tively or imperfectly, but giving our selves up to the divine light, and winking (that is shutting our eyes of reason and understanding) so to place our selves steddily in that hidden Unitie of all things. After he preferres this faith before the clear and present assent to the , yea and the , so that he will not that any intellectuall ope∣ration should come in comparison with it. . For the operation of the Intellect is multiform and by diversitie separate from her objects, and is in a word, intelle∣ctuall motion about the object intelligible. But the divine faith must be simple and uniform, quiet and steddily resting in the ha∣ven of Goodnesse. And at last he summarily concludes, . See Procl. The∣olog. Platonick. lib. 1. cap. 25. H HYle. See Interpret. Gen. I INtellect.. Sometimes it is to be interpreted Soul. Some∣time the intellectuall facultie of the soul. Sometimes In∣tellect is an absolute essence shining into the soul: whose na∣ture is this. A substance purely immateriall, impeccable, actually omniform, or comprehending all things at once▪ which the soul doth also being perfectly joyned with the In∣tellect.
. Plot. Ennead. 1. lib. 1. cap. 8. Ideas, or Idees, Sometimes they are forms in the Intellectuall world. viz. in Aeon, or On, other sometimes, phantasmes or representations in the soul. Innate Idees are the souls nature it self, her uniform essence, able by her Fiat to produce this or that phantasme into act. Idiopathy. See Interpret. Gen. Ia L LOgos. See Interpr. Gen. Life. The vitall operation of any soul. Sometime it is the soul it self, be it sensitive, vegetative, or rationall. Lower man. The lower man is our enquickned body, into which our soul comes, it being fitly prepared for the re∣ceiving of such a guest. The manner of the production of souls, or rather their non-production is admirably well set down in Plotinus, See, Ennead. 6. lib. 4. cap. 14, 15. M MOnad. See Interpr. Gen. Mundane. Mundane spirit, Is that which is the spi∣rit of the world or Universe. I mean by it not an intellectu∣all spirit, but a fine, unfixt, attenuate, subtill, ethereall sub∣stance, the immediate vehicle of plasticall or sensitive life. Memory. Mundane memory. Is that memory that is seated in the Mundane spirit of man, by a strong impression, or in∣ustion of any phantasme, or outward sensible object, upon that spirit. But there is a Memory more subtill and abstract in the soul it self, without the help of this spirit, which she also carries away with her hauing left the body. Magicall. That is, attractive, or commanding by force of sympathy with the life of this naturall world. Moment. Sometimes signifies an instant, as indivisible, as , which in motion answers to an instant in time, or a point in a line, Aristot. Phys. In this sense I use it, Psy∣chathan. lib. 3. cant. 2. stanz. 16. But in a moment sol doth ray. But Cant. the 3. Stanz. 45. v. 2. I understand, as al∣so doth Lansbergius, by a moment one second of a minute. In Antipsych. Cant. 2. Stanz. the 20. v. 2. by a moment I understand a minute, or indefinitely any small time.
O ORb. Orb Intellectuall, is nothing else but Aeon or the Intellectuall world. The Orbs generall mentioned Psy∣cathan. lib. 1. cant. 3. stanz. 23. v. 2. I understand by them but so many universall orders of beings, if I may so terme them all; for Hyle hath little or nothing of being. Omniformity, The omniformity of the soul is the having in her nature all forms, latent at least, and power of awa∣king them into act, upon occasion. Out-world▪ and Out-Heaven. The sensible world, the vi∣sible Heaven. P PErigee, See Interpret. Gen. Psychicall, Parelies, Parallax, Protopathy. Parturient. See, Vaticinant. Phantasie. Lower phantasie, is that which resides in the Mundane spirit of a man, See Memory. Q. Quantitative. Forms quantitative, are such sensible ener∣gies as arise from the complexion of many natures toge∣ther, at whose discretion they vanish. That's the seventh Orb of things, though broken and not filling all as the other do. But if you take it for the whole sensible world, it is entire, and is the same that Tasis in Psycozoia. But the centre of Tasis, viz. the multiplication of the reall Cuspis of the Cone (for Hyle that is set for the most contract point of the Cus∣pis is scarce to be reckoned among realities) that immense diffusion of atoms, is to be referred to Psyche, as an inter∣nall vegetative act, and so belongs to Physis the lowest or∣der of life. For as that warmth that the sense doth afford the body, is not rationall, sensitive, or imaginative, but ve∣getative; So this,  i. e. liquid fire, which Psyche sends out, and is the outmost, last, and lowest operation from her self, is also vegetative. R RHomboides. See Interpr. general. Reason. I understand by Reason, the deduction of one
thing from another, which I conceive proceeds from a kind of continuitie of phantasmes: and is something like the mo∣ving of a cord at one end; the parts next it rise with it. And by this concatenation of phantasmes I conceive, that both brutes and men are moved in reasonable wayes and methods in their ordinary externall actions. Rayes. The rayes of an essence is its energie. See Energie. Reduplicative. That is reduplicative, which is not onely in this point, but also in another, having a kind of circum∣scribed ubiquitie, viz. in its own sphear. And this is either by being in that sphear omnipresent it self, as the soul is said to be in the body tota in toto & tota in qualibet parte, or else at least by propagation of rayes, which is the image of it self; and so are divers sensible objects Reduplicative, as light, colours, sounds. And I make account either of these wayes justly denominate any thing spirituall. Though the former is most properly, at least more eminently spirituall. And whether any thing be after that way spirituall saving the Divinitie, there is reason to doubt. For what is entirely omnipresent in a sphear, whose diametre is but three feet, I see not, why (that in the circumference being as fresh and entire as that in the centre) it should stop there and not proceed even in infinitum, if the circumference be still as fresh and entire as the centre. But I define nothing. S SPermaticall. It belongs properly to Plants, but is trans∣ferred also to the Plasticall power in Animalls, I enlarge it to all magnetick power whatsoever that doth immediately rule and actuate any body. For all magnetick power is founded in Physis, and in reference to her, this world is but one great Plant, (one  giving it shape and corporeall life) as in reference to Psyche, one happy and holy Animall. Spirit. Sometimes it signifieth the soul, othersometime, the naturall spirits in a mans body, which are Vinculum ani∣mae & corporis, and the souls vehicle: Sometimes life. See Reduplicative. Soul. When I speak of mans Soul, I understand that which Moses saith was inspired into the body, (fitted out and made of earth) by God, Genes. 2. which is not that im∣peccable
spirit that cannot sinne; but the very same that the Platonists call , a middle essence betwixt that which they call  (and we would in the Christian language call ) and the life of the body which is , a kind of an umbratil vitalitie, that the soul imparts to the bo∣die in the enlivening of it: That and the body together, we Christians would call  and the suggestions of it, especi∣ally in its corrupt estate, . And that that which God inspired into Adam was no more then , the soul, not the spirit, though it be called  Spiraculum vitae; is plain out of the text; because it made man but be∣come a living soul, . But you will say, he was a dead soul before, and this was the spirit of life, yea the spirit of God, the life of the soul that was breathed into him. But if  implie such a life and spirit, you must ac∣knowledge the same to be also in the most stupid of all li∣ving creatures, even the fishes (whose soul is but as salt to keep them from stinking, as Philo speaks) for they are said to be  chap. 1. v. 20. 21. See 1 Cor. chap. 15. v. 45, 46. In brief therefore, that which in Platonisme is , is in Scripture ; what  in one, , the brute or beast in the other,  the same in both. Self-reduplicative. See Reduplicative. T TRicentreitie. Centre is put for essence, so Tricentreitie must implie a trinitie of essence. See Centre, and E∣nergie. V VAticinant. The soul is said to be in a vaticinant or par∣turient condition, when she hath some kind of sense and hovering knowledge of a thing, but yet cannot distinctly and fully, and commandingly represent it to her self, cannot plainly apprehend, much lesse comprehend the matter. The phrase is borrowed of Proclus, who describing the incom∣prehensiblenesse of God, and the desire of all things towards him, speaks thus; . Theolog Platon lib. 1. cap. 21. See Psychathan. lib. 3. cant. 3. stanz. 12. & 14.
The Philosophers Devotion. SIng aloud his praise rehearse Who hath made the Universe. He the boundlesse Heavens has spread All the vitall Orbs has kned; He that on Olympus high Tends his flocks with watchfull eye, And this eye has multiplide Midst each flock for to reside. Thus as round about they stray Toucheth each with out-stretch'd ray, Nimbly they hold on their way, Shaping out their Night and Day. Never slack they; none respires, Dancing round their Centrall fires. In due order as they move Echo's sweet be gently drove Thorough Heavens vast Hollownesse, Which unto all corners presse: Musick that the heart of Iove Moves to joy and sportfull love; Fills the listning saylers eares Riding on the wandering Sphears. Neither Speech nor Language is Where their voice is not transmisse. God is Good, is Wise, is Strong, Witnesse all the creature-throng, Is confess'd by every Tongue. All things back from whence they sprong, As the thankfull Rivers pay What they borrowed of the Sea. Now my self I do resigne, Take me whole I all am thine. Save me, God! from Self-desire, Deaths pit, dark Hells raging fire, Envy, Hatred, Vengeance, Ire. Let not Lust my soul bemire. Quit from these thy praise I'll sing, Loudly sweep the trembling string.
Bear a part, O Wisdomes sonnes! Free'd from vain Relligions. Lo! from farre I you salute, Sweetly warbling on my Lute. Indie, Egypt, Arabie, Asia, Greece, and Tartarie, Carmel-tracts, and Lebanon With the Mountains of the Moon, From whence muddie Nile doth runne, Or whereever else you won; Breathing in one vitall aire, One we are though distant farre. Rise at once lett's sacrifice Odours sweet perfume the skies. See how Heavenly lightning fires Hearts inflam'd with high aspires! All the substance of our souls Up in clouds of Incense rolls. Leave we nothing to our selves Save a voice, what need we els! Or an hand to wear and tire On the thankfull Lute or Lyre. Sing aloud his praise rehearse Who hath made the Universe. FINIS.
