P2976 19500641 108879
POEMS UPON SEVERAL OCCASIONS. By S. P. Gent. LONDON, Printed by W. G. for Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery-lane, and Peter Dring at the Sun in the Poultrey neer the Counter, 1660.
A PANEGYRICK TO HIS EXCELLENCY General MONCK March 28. 1660. NOW almost twenty years have roul'd about Since first the flames of our late Wars broke out; And Brittain fainting with the losse of blood Under a lawlesse Yoke subjected stood, When now at last her groanes by Heav'n are heard Her fainting Soul and dying Hopes uprear'd; Her sable night of sorrow done away By the new dawning of a Royall day. As from the North her first distemper grew, Thence slowes the Soveraign Med'cine, to renew Her joyes again: She hopes secure to stand Upheld by her brave Generall's Warlike hand. Over the Brittish Seas flyes his great Name Born on the swift wings of no common fame, Our Enemies tremble, and our friends are glad, To these 'tis joyfull newes, to those 'tis sad The mighty shouts, and the Stentorian voice Of the glad multitude that now rejoyce
Awak's the drowsie Genius of this I'le, Who wept so long or'e Charles's Funerall pyle Till his swolne eyes with a Lethargick sleep Were seal'd up, having no more tears to weep. He understands the cause of Englands joy And least Ambition should their hopes destroy He boldly doth his mind to Monck expresse And shewes how he may Brittains ills redresse. The Genius Speech. GReat man by blood, by vertue greater made, Whose presence Banishes the gloomy shade Of Brittaines night; the faire Aurora too The Royall Phaebus ushered in by you: Thy Sword has cut our Chaines of slavery Thy hands the Gordian knots of Tyranny Unty'd; thy strenuous Arms unhing'd our Gates To shew thy strength, the greatest pride abates, To shew what thou couldst do, that we thereby Might on thy more than Samson's strength rely: But what thou didst was at anothers frown, Thou hung'st them up, that kindnesse was thy owne. Great Heronles of our Ile at last thou'st slaine That Hydra never more to rise again, Though often crush'd, that Monstrous Taile, (which bit Her own head off) did resurrection git, But now she's dead, and never more shall rise, Tryumphs, not teares attend her Obsequies. And now but one step more and thy great name Register'd stand shall in the Book of Fame In so great Characters the world may read
Thy marchlesse story when that thou art dead: The World too little for thy fame shall be And Princes honour shall thy name and thee. See then great Generall, Brittaines Genius now Before thee stands, and willing is to owe A happynesse to thee, wherein thou may'st Raise honour to thy selfe; if thou delay'st, Time and necessity will thee prevent And spoyle the lustre of thy great intent. Now drooping Brittain raises up her head, Inspir'd by thee she arises from the dead, Her War-made breaches now are cur'd again, And joyes and ease succeed her griefe and pain, Her spotlesse Virgin Chores begin to sing Iö Paeans in honour to their King: Faile not her now-bigg hopes but be content To raise an everlasting Monument To thee and thy posterity; that bayes May Crown thy Brows and Ages speake thy praise. Thou see'st our wants, and what it is wee'd have It is a King of Charles's race we crave; Since all the people in one voyce agree, God's Oracle, 'tis God that asks it thee, Who having scourg'd poor Brittain for her sin, Returns her Baulme to cure her wounds agin. We 'ave try'd, and too too long, a Commonwealth, Such as it was, a Bane to Englands Health, Where fifty Tyrants with one mouth agree, To eat up Law, Religion, Liberty▪ Monsters that Kings and Bishops Lands devour, Kept by extorted sums the Nation poor; Philosophers that changed all to gold, And let goe nothing that their gripes could hold; Yet these were they that needs would stiled be
The Keepers of our England's Libertie; But by thy power great Monck wee'r freed again, And George most bravely has the Dragon slain. Ambitious Cromwell put the purple on, And having slamn the Father, rob'd the Son O right and title, to a royall Crown, To set himself up, pul'd another down, And what he got by rapine, he made good, Though by Religion cloak'd, by sorce and blood, All what our Heroes once contended for, With the sad tempest of a civill War Himselfe usurp'd; and gloryed in his pride To have with peace what was to Kings deny'd; But yet you see the Nation scourg'd, that God Renews his mercy and has burn'd his rod, And Cromwell's name grows odious every where, Which was obey'd not out of Love, but feare. Let his example your ambition curb, Doe not our growing happinesse disturb, By mounting of a Throne is none of yours, For be assured that the sacred powers, Will blast the first fruits of thy tyranny, Fraud must preserve what's got by policy. And now our people us'd to subtleties, To be deceiv'd by crafts are grown too wise, So that the faces deny thy Regiment, And people to obey no more are bent, Till he arises in the Brittish spheare, Whom all desire the royall Crown to wear. Thou seest our griefs and knowst the wayes to cure, Our Maladies, thy Faith we knows too pure For to be tempted to betray our hopes, Who doubts thy loyalty, to treason opes A way; no though tho say'st thou'lt us deceive,
Such is our confidence wee'l not believe, Since one so good and great as Monck must be, The onely Man can give us liberty. Brittain in sackcloth has mourn'd long enough, 'Tis time to lay aside the Sword and Buff, 'Tis time to pull those Puny-Nobles down, Who speak against, and yet affect a Crown, That those by blood and vertue truly great, May be installed in their long-lest seat These shining in their ermin gallantry, Beget a reverence due to Majesty. Now I have done, and you have this to doe, To bring him in for whom the Nations sue, Great Charls, who more then by sev'n twelve months try'd, And in afflictions Furnace purifi'd, Must come forth brighter then try'd gold, more bright Then lustrous Sol after a darksome night; Whose brighter beames of Love shall raise the slain, And make our Halcyon dayes to live again; England shall blesse thy name when this is done, And stile the Phosphor to the rising Sun, To thee shall Brittain pay her anuall vowes, Whilst Ducall diadems crown thy Princely brows.
A PANEGYRICK ON HIS MAJESTIES Entrance Into LONDON. THE Heaven's great Star since He saluted Earth With his diurnal Light, ne'r yet gave Birth To such a joyfull Day, as that wherein Charles to his native England came ag'in. His loyall Subjects Hearts grown big with joy The best expressions of their Love imploy, To give a cherefull welcome to their King, From whose arivall all our blessings Spring, Whilst Foes, and Traytors to his royall Sire, Grown mad through Envie, in their rage expire. Now Phoebus ushers in the happy day, Which for posterity recorded may In golden letters ever stand; and bee A festival for regain'd libertie; And gilding all the Heavens with his Rayes, Dispenses smiles, Serenity displayes. Revived Subjects throng to see their prize, Joy sparkles in their faces, and their eyes: Their tongues, and hands with powerfull Eccohs sound
And joyfull shouts against the heavens rebound. The Aire is fill'd on every side with noyse; The voyce of Warr, and death now speaks their joyes. The Bells have tongues, which sound our Joys aloud, And say that Charles is come: the Drums are proud To speak his march. The silver Trumpets say Charles o're three Kingdoms doth tryumph to day: Which conquest got by vertues has more charms To hold a lasting peace, than that by Armes. London in all its gallantry doth shine, Conduits convert their water into wine. Adorn'd the female beauties of the Land To see their Soveraign in Ballconies stand, The bravest Heroes of the Brittish Isle Usher our Caesar through the streets the while; Whose sacred face with beams of Majesty Surrounded, far out-vies the bravery Of his adornments: and the lustrous fire Of's eyes dismays those who deny'd his sire And him to reign; now they their folly see Converted by one look of Majesty. Ten thousand Hearts and knees doe humbly bow, As he goes by; each heart a solemne vow Prepares, of praise, and of obedience too, For long and happy dayes to Heav'en they sue. Long live great Charles, and may his sacred Name, Swell to that worth, not to be spoke by Fame, May Nestors years his Happy reign attend! May heav'ns his brest with Solomons choyce befriend! The people cry. Loud shouts conclude the day, Phoebus to th' other world hasts to display The joyfull news: Night now would take her turn, But flaming fires in every Corner burne, Which Night to Day change: Phoebus place supply,
And make a Day without the Heav'n's great eye. 'Tis true whilst Charles possesses his own right, That loyall Brittains can expect no night. Our regall Sun, since Charles the first was slain, Ecclips'd has been, but now shines bright again. By Heav'n enthron'd thus, in his peoples hearts, He shall withstand all Machivilian Arts: Laurells of peace about his brows shall spread, And three great Crowns surround his royall Head. Ita Precatur S. P.
SOME TEARS Dropt o're the Herse OF THE INCOMPARABLE PRINCE HENRY DUKE OF GLOUCESTER. FAtal September to the Royal Line, Has snatch'd one Herôe of our hopefull Trine From Earth; 'tis strange Heav n should not prae- A loss so grievous by some Blazin Star, (declare Which might our Senses overjoy'd, alar'm, And time give to prepare for so great Harm. The Spring-tide of our Joy was newly Flood, Paying our Thankful Vows for so much good VVe gather now, under a gracious KING; Inspired Bards began strong Lays to Sing,
VVhen (ôh sad Fate!) Ebb'd are our Flowing Seas, And Epiques chang'd to Doleful Elegies. Cruel Extremes! thus robb'd of Joyes the chief, Thrown down like Light'ning into Seas of Gries. 'Tis past the reach of Mortals to divine, VVhy Heav'n so soon has broke our Threesold Line; VVe may not pry without a black offence Into th' Arcana's of his Providence, But may believe, since with a Bounteous Hand God has restor'd the Blessings of this Land, That he has flung us into Griefs extreme, Not out of VVrath to Us, but Love to Him. He was Fair Fruit sprung from a Royal Bud, And grown as great by fair Renown as Blood; Ripe too too soon; for in a Youth so green An Harvest was of gray-hair'd VVisdome seen. Minerva's Darling, Patron of the Gown, Lover of Learning, and Apollo's Crown He was; the Muses he began to nourish, Learn'd Men and Arts under his wings did flourish; But lest we should commit Idolatry, Heav'n took him from our Sight, not Memory; For though he's carried to th Immortal Sphere, Our Loves will make his Fame Immortal here. 'Tis Autumn now: and Ceres to our hands Has pour'd the Annual Blessings of our Lands; VVe'ave robb'd the reeming Trees of all their fruit, And left them naked till the Spring recruit Their store again; till then they hang their head, And stand like Mourners, leaves for tears they shed; So the high powers cropt from the Royal Stem, VVhat was too good for us, and fit for them, VVhilest we lament, till a new Spring arise, And CHARLES his First-born clear our weeping eyes.
A general Sadness locks up every Tongue, Amazedness host struck the Laureats dumb: (bears, And who would weep, through too much Grief for- Excess of Grie gives yet no vent for Tears, But when the coming Springs begin to rise, Grief then will draw a deluge from our Eyes; Till then these Loyal Drops fall'n into Verse, Shall wash the Cypress on his Royal Herse.
POEMS ON Several Occasions. His Mistress. AS Phoebus doth excell the Moons dim light, Or as the Moon excells the dullest Star, Her Beauty, and Complexion in my sight Excells all others I have seen, so far: Her Sun-like beams of beauty shine so bright, That others in her sight Eclipsed are The fairest faces are but foiles, each one Weares but a borrow'd lustre from her Sun. Her Shape in Wax it were most hard to frame, Nor Painters to expresse their rarest Skill Could ever counterfeit so neer the same, But blemish their's her better Beauty will; Though Venus who for Beauty had the Name Compare with her should, she'd be fairest still; Paris gave her the Ball as beauties Queen, But she had mist it had he mine but Seen. Her Aubourn Hair in Crisped Curles doe dangle Upon her Ivory shoulders, where it spreads Sly nets, where Hearts themselves doe soon intangle,
And captive lye, enchain'd by those bright threads; Spreading sost chaines, and snares in every angle, It takes all Hearts, whose eye those mazes treads: Hearts here imprison'd (never can get out) Those sost Meandres wander must about. Her Ivory pollish'd Front with seemly cheere, Grac'd at the bottom with a double bow, Where all the Graces in their Throne appeare, Where Love, and awfull Majesty doe grow, Expands it self, and shews a feild more clear, Than Candid Lillys, or the virgin snow; Her Eyes like Suns shoot rayes more sharp than Darts, Which wound all Flinty, Love-despising Hearts. Those twinkling Stars, those sparkling Diamond stones, Those glorious Suns, where dwells the Eastern Light, Peirce with the vigor of their Charmes the bones Of daring Him, who gains of them a sight; Beholding Kills, yet he their losse bemones, And 'd rather dye, than they shut live in Night. Her Nose a comly Prominence, doth part Her Cheeks, the mirrour of Dame Natures Art. Her cheeks are damask Roses blown in June, B'ing equally with Virgin Lillies mix't; Or snowy milk with blushing Strawb'ries strewn, Where equall strife the red, and white's betwixt; Or pure ver million on white Sattin shewn, By Painters rarest Skill, and pencil fix't: Those cheek no Colours livelest dye can paint, Scarlet, and snow seem to their true ones faint. Her lipps are snips of Scarlet, Iuliflowers,
Spread with the tincture of Vermilion hew, Bless'd in Self-kisses; past our humane powers To touch; so high a bliss what Mortal knew? Between those rubie Gates slide spicy showers, Which, those slain by her eyes, with life imbue: Angellick sounds, and charming smiles, so nice, Thence flow which make her presence Paradice. Within the portal of her Mouth's lock'd fast, (Which when she sings she is enforc'd to show) The Orient's Treasure in due order plac'd, Of more than precious pearles a double row; Which stand in Sea-born Coral borders chac'd, Like Crimson Sattin purl'd with silver snow. Her smooth, and dimpled Chin doth under lye, Where envies self cannot a fault espie. Her Neck's a gracefull Tower of spotlesse snow, An Alablaster prop to that fair head, Where Witt, Arts, Wisdome in perfection grow, Its Basis where are beauties also spread; For azure streams through milky feilds do flow, Where blew, with white like Heav'n is married: Her Breasts like lilly'd Globes, or Mounts appear, VVhose summetts Crown'd with Crimson cheries are. Her Arms due measure of proportion have, Her hands the types of snowy Excellence VVith Onyx tip'd; her leggs, and feet enslave Our eyes, and Captive hold from falling thence: Her whole frames equall Symetry is brave, And to spectators payes a recompence: Argus himself cannot discerne the rest, But I presume the hidden beauties best.
The Protestation. Before bright Phoebus had his beams display'd, Whilst yet Aurora usher'd in the Day, The prat'ling Eccho to my ears betray'd, As I among the trees in ambush lay, The amorous whispers of Amintas, who With protestation did his Cloris wooe. What went before I cannot tell, but she Reply'd to something that Amintas say'd, The murm'ring Eccho by the Air to me These gentle sounds in whispering notes convey'd. Alas! Amintas would that you could prove To my distrustfull Heart that men can love. How oft are wee poor sily maids beguil'd By charmes of flattering words? when wee beleive To break their oaths men will not be so vild, Being so poor a conquest to deceive Disarmed virgins? when wee them reward With Love, they'r cold, and us with scorn regard. Tis best to keep our own, for when wee yeild Our Hearts, men supplyants soon forget to be, And our affections caught, with scorn repell'd We are subjected to their tyranny: That maid is more then mad who will be kind, To men, who waver oftner than the Wind.
Blame not our Natures, but your follies blame, For we should sooner yeild were Men more true, But since weak virgins to deceive no shame They think; denialls Cruelty is due. But yet Amintas would that you could prove To my distrustfull Heart your constant love. Amintas with a sigh reply'd. 'Tis true, Some men are faulty in what you accuse them, But let not all be blamed for a few, Nor Woemen men despise, 'cause some abuse them. For if I went about it, I could prove, Men equal Woomen in a constant Love. Our sexe's cause I will not plead; my own With you, sweet Cloris, will I only plead, My constant Love must by Obedience shown Be; else I cann't be truly scann'd till dead: Constant obedience 'tis doth rightly prove, A Heart's possessor of a constant Love. Things that the least of drossy mixture hold, Last longest; my Hearts flames Aetherial be, More pure than seven times refined Gold, Than Cedar's flames: rays of a Deitie They are. It is the purity of Love Which best of all its constancy can prove. My love like Adamant endure the stroke Of strong repulses shall; full draughts of smiles, Nor worlds of beauties, shall my Heart provoke T' inconstant Change; nor all th' intising guiles A proffer'd Love can give. The world shall be First chang'd, e're I yeild to Inconstancie.
The twinkling tapours of the Night shall fall First from their azure lodging; Hecate Shall loose her light, and a perpetual Mask weare of pitch; And Heav'ns bright lamp shall be With darknesse overcome: Night into Day Shall change; and cold November into May. The Sun shall backward course the VVorld about, The fire shall cease combustibles to burn, Soft gales shall put the flinty Rocks to rout, And Neptune shall his fry to grasing turn, Mountaines to Vailes; valleys to Hills shall rise, Plaines shall be made of Craggs that touch the Skies. All beasts shall Metamorphos'd into stones Be, and all Mortalls shall their exit prove, Tormented Souls shall cease to fetch sad groans, The Heav'ns rent from their center first shall move, E're I to thee fair Cloris be unkind, Repent me of my love, or change my mind. My Tongue may't faulter, may my lipps ne're move, If unto other but to thee they shall Make protestations of a Serious love! Cloris beleive! I Heav'ns to witnesse call! The Maid converted joyn'd her lips to his, Gath'ring the first fruits of a greater bliss.
The Passionate Lover, HAd I but winde and Lungs enough to tell How much I Love; Had I a Stentor's voyce, Had I ten thousand Tongues it would doe well, To speak how much I Love my dearest Choyce, Since wholly fill'd, If I should not impart Loves might, its energy would break my Heart. Say my five senses has not Love's delight Bound all your powers with its amourous chains, Disarm'd your Subjects? Spoyl'd and robb'd you quite? Can you ought rellish but Love's pleasing paines? You now disgust all objects of this Ball, Phillis is th only object of you all. When that my eye has light on Phillis face, It tells my amorous Heart news good, or bad; By which or well th' alarm'd pulses Pace, Or ill: my looks by it are light, or sad: Doth sorrow dimm the Light of Phillis eye, Joys, and Contentment from my Bosome fly. Does threatning Anger, or disdaine appear Cloath'd in the Tyrian blushes in her Cheeks, No Poet's art in verse can paint my fear, Nor th' Horror and dismay my vitalls strikes: I dumb, and movelesse like a statue show Struck with the Thunder of her Angry brow
The fearfull Light'ning, nor the dreadfull voyce Of roaring Thunder, nor the horrid Night, Nor Ghosts, nor Goblins, nor tempestuous noise Of windes, nor Earthquakes can my senses fright, So much as when Phyllis with anger glows, And from her quick Eyes scorn-tip't Arrows throws. If pleasing smiles sit on their rubie Throne, If Joy is painted on her smoother brow, My senses wrapt beyond the Sphears, are thrown On bedds of pleasure; and forget all woe: With lesse Content the Miser doth behold His Stuffed Chests, and full-cram'd bags of Gold. My Eyes devou're each smile; the more they gaze On Hers, the more Contentment still they draw; Her smiles the clue that leads me in that maze; Her eyes give my obsequious Heart a Law: For by her smiles, or Frownes I meet delight Or Woe; or mirth or Grief; or Day or Night. Seek all the World for pleasing objects, and Dive to the bottom of the deepest Se as, Fetch all the Treasures of the Indian strand, The world's best Beauties, none my fancy please Can, like the Heaven of a pleasing smile, Which kills me with excesse of Joy the while. The sparkling Diamonds of the East I prize Below the value of her pretty Starrs, There comes far richer glances from her eyes, Her lipps than Pogues, better Rubies wears; Who round the World for daintest Roses seeks, May finde them growing in my Phyllis cheeks.
The richest Treasures of the Earth seem poor; Pearles, Gold, and Diamonds Natur's richest Gems, The World's great Treasurie, and Neptunes store, A Lover (such as I) far lesse esteems Than th object of his Love: for more delight Than in all these I take in Phyllis sight. But when the sweeter Musick of her tongue, Like the blest voyce of Angels, strikes my cars, I harken us to Oracles; a strang Lute in the hands of Orpheus; the Spheares Sweet Melody; the smooth tongu'd Orator, Seem but a duller Harmonie to Her. She charms me to a statue, and amaz'd With so much Eloquence, dumb I return No answers but by eyes; my soul is rais'd Beyond the sphear of Words: though joy'd I mourn To hear her pause, or periodize her speech: I then her to begin ag'in beseech. When in the sweetest quavers of a song Her voyce she raises, and with marchlesse straines Runs o're division with her warbling Tongue; Hearts she (as stones Amphion's musick) gaines. Harps, Harpsicall, all Violls, Organes, Lute, Trumpets, and all noyse else for shame be mute. Cease duller straines, all other voyces cease, Sweet Philomel, I pre'thee hold thy tongue; You early Larkes, and Thrushes hold your peace; The best of Musick, and of Birds among The humane, and the feather'd Chores, your choyce Layes, rev'rence doe unto her sweeter voyce.
Though all the Musick in the World should be By Musick-masters of the rarest kinde Finger'd, my eares would taste no Harmonie, No joy my soul, nor no content my mind, (Nor the Angelick Songs by me I feare So priz'd) like that when I her Sonnets hear. Had Sickness prison'd me in my Chamber long, Or bound with closer fetters to my Bed, As some by musick cur'd, I by a Song Chaunted by her divine mouth, should be fed With that Ambrosiack Essence, that would give Ease to my paines, and dying make me live. My Ear then ravish'd equal with my eye, 'Counts all sounds harsh, but her sweet Musick, and Commands all others to her melody To vaile, and to her notes attentive stand; As high Apollo to the Muses, she (Or Philomel 'mong other Birds) must be. The fragrant blasts of spicy Arabie, Panchaean Myrrh, Musk, Civet, Ambergreece, All the perfumes of Indian Spicerie, Must to the Sweetness of her breath give place: Flora's sweet garlands in the Month of May, No such delicious gales of sweetness pay. My Soul, as if exhal'd by her sweet breath, Flies to that membrane which receieves the sent, Raising the sluggish fantasie from Death, Revives the braine, and gives my Genius vent: The cherishing Odors her sweet Hybla yields, Excel the Diapasma's of the fields.
My soul upon no other food can feed, But the rich Banquet, and delicious fare Of her sweet presence, when before her spread; Then eas'd from trouble, free from duller care She feeds: the Stomach can no dainties tast, Nor hunger, whilst this better Banquet lasts. When that with ardent boldnesse I aspire To touch with my profaner lips, her hand, I think no blisses, in the World are higher, No joys to that in competition stand: My soul enflam'd, into my lips doth fly, Whilst on that bed of Lillies soft they lye. But when (a favour, seldome shown) I kiss The seat of smiles, her tender rubie lips, Joye spirits dilates, and I expire in blisse; Call'd back again from Death by an ecclips Of so great ravishment, through a withdraw, As much as Joy did, grief now breaks the Law. Thus my five senses banquet at that feast Of beauty, which shines in my Phillis face; My passionate Heart swells high within my breast, And grows too tumid fot its strickt embrace, Oh! cloud my Phillis! hide her from my eye, Of too much pleasure I with surfeit dye.
CORYDONS Complaint. THose joys that us'd to flatter me ô Phyllis when I courted thee, Under yon' shady beechen tree To cruell grief are chang'd Torments my pleasures; griefs my joy, Pains my quiet rest destroy, Since thou'rt to Corydon grown coy, And from my Love estrang'd Did e're I your commands neglect? That thus my sute you now reject, And pay my love with disrespect, My kindness with disdain? Say how I purchace may releife, Or murther'd must I be by grief? Speak that my torments may be brief; Give death to ease my pain.
If you are pleas'd to martyr me, Or binde me unto slavery, There is another tyranny That you may exercise; Those burning flames, your eyes can give: A Slave, bound by Loves Chaines I live May, without Hope of a reprieve; Thus you may tyrannize. Since that my words are spent in vain, Whilest Cruel you laugh at my pain, I at the feet of your disdain Will fall, and prostrate lye. Henceforth I'le banish all my pleasure, Since you the chiefest of my Treasure, Have heap'd my Griefs beyond all Measure, I'le yield to destiny.
To SYLVIA Weeping. FAir Sylvia, you possess more Treasures than The rubie East; those weeping eyes more Gems Than the rich Store house of the Ocean, For you at pleasure can those Chrystal streams VVhich trickle from the fountaines of your eyes Convert int' orient pearls; but richer prize. VVhat taking charmes lye in your sweeter Face, When freed from cloudy-weeping Griefs you smile VVith a clear brow! If tears with such a grace Become? if so much lustre has the foile To Beauty? what excess of Glory then VVill bud from those sweet lights when fair agen? Now the (like silver'd Cynonthia's beauty, when The interposing Earth hides her bright face) Dost suffer an Ecclipse; thy tears restrain Thy beauties radiant beams; Tears fill the place Of bounteous Light; yet is that shadow fair; Others with which (at best) may not compare. Phoebus now hides behind a watery cloud His brighter head; by which we better may Gaze on his Light: thy suns (fair Sylvia) shroud Themselves behind a cloud of Tears to day; Our of like kindness, and suppress their bright And splendid beams, to favour my weak sight. Enough, fair Sylvia! clear those Cynthian Lights, From that ecclipse of sorrow; wipe away
That hanging cloud of Tears; which still excites Your stillborne Grief such pearly price to pay: VVere you enflam'd with scorching Love, as I, Its ardor soon those dewy pearls would dry. After Aurora with her silver showers Has wash'd her Grandame Tellus chapped face, A pleasant Zephyrus the dark Heaven scoures, And Sol steps out with a far greater Grace: After a Storm fair weather doth suceeed; Let fable Grief your whiter Joys then breed. I long to see those fairer Suns to shine, Freed from the dewy moisture of a Tear, Now they would seem (after this) more divine, As Phaebus after an eclips more clear: Let Day the Night succeed, and cease to mourn, Banish Grief's night, whilst Joy's day takes its turn.
THYRSIS in despaire. SAd night of sorrow! sable night of grief! For Lovers torments is there no releif? Must still my bitter food be grief, and fears? My thirst quench'd howerly with my brinie tears? No glimmering of the Day of hope arise! Nothing but darkness mussle up the skies From my numm'd sight? I in the Bed of care Do roul; distress behems me round; dispaire Like curtains shuts me up. Come pale fac'd Hag, And let not leaden plummets make thee lag: With open arms I doe embrace thy Dart, Which can give physick to my wounded Heart. They say grief that descends to words is weak Mine is grown so I can no farther speak. But by my Death I to Corinna prove Will, that she tryumphs o're me and my Love.
ABSENCE. SUch is the melancholly Earth, when light Flies thence, and leaves its room to sable night; VVhen darkness, Cold and Shadows dwell upon Her Surface; some pale glimerings of the Moon Is all she can expect; a mourner then She is 'till Phoebus brings his day agen: Such is the matchless, mateless Turtle Dove, Sighing its murmurs for its absent Love: Such is the body when the Soul is fled: Such Pyramus supposing Thisbe dead: Such the male Palm the female broken down, As I am now, my fairest Sylvia's gon. My wither'd Head declines apace, my green And growing youth to sprout no more is seen. My blood's grown cold, and frozen; every limb As if it wanted heat, and life doth seem. My hoarse complaints the very rocks do move, VVho eccho the last accents of my Love. A silent night inhabits my sad breast, And now no chearful thought will be my guest. Till her return, whose eyes will cause a day, Thus must I in my own unquiet stay; Wishing for the bright morning, which must rise From th' Luminaries of fair Sylvia's eyes.
DAPHNIS Fled. I'Le eccho in the tell-tale groves Lycidas and Daphnis Loves Now she has left this place; Goe grave names in the tender rinde VVhisper my trouble to the VVinde, He'l tell where Daphnis stays: Send kisses by the Soft lipp'd aire, Begg charming Philomel to stay her VVith raptures of her voyce: Bid Zephyrus gently hold her back; Smooth fronted sand to shew her track, That thus forsakes her choyce. Not all the charmes the spring affords, The pleasures of delicious gourds, Flora's enamell'd dress, Or what is beautifull and fair, Or what delights above compare, Can sorrow dispossess. For Nature now's unkind to me, And my request denies I see, For Daphnis will away, In vain I prattle out my plaints, She cannot hear my loud laments, Nor would they cause her stay. By yonder spring down will I lye, VVhilst one as great flows from my eye,
To mingle with its stream Till her return, thence I'le not move But weep the absence of my Love, VVith waves as great as them If my soul flyes out in a tear, And she returnes, and that you hear Her call a loud for me, Good Nymph that answers him that speaks, Say if that Lycidas she seeks, Hee's joyn'd to Niobe.
To LUCIA playing on her LUTE. GReat Orpheus when he struck his Ivory Lyre, Drew all the Savage Creatures to admire The sweetnesse of his charming Musick; and Forgetting their fierce natures tamely stand. The Wolfe, Lamb, Lyon, and the Kid agree To Love, whilst charm'd by his sweet harmonie. Stones move themselves call'd by Amphion's Lute; And Thebes build, without man's hands to do't: Yet fairest Lucia when I heard you play, I soon confess you have more skill than they: Your fingers strike a far diviner strain, And mens Hearts harder than the stones you gain. Brute Beasts when Orpheus play'd stood still and gaz'd; When you, stiff-necked men are more amaz'd. He could unreasonable beasts controule, But you command a reasonable Soul, For men more fierce than cruell Tigers, lay Their necks down, and like captives yok'd obey. Who then to bondage powerfull'st captives drew? Orpheus tam'd beasts, a harder task, Men you.
ANOTHER. WHen last I heard your nimble fingers play Upon your Lute, nothing so sweet as they Seem'd; all my soul fled ravish'd to my ear, That sweetly animating sound to hear. My ravish'd Heart with play Kept equal time, Fell down with you, with you did Ela climbe, Grew sad or lighter, as the tunes you plai'd, And with your Lute a perfect measure made: If all so much as I, your Musick Love, The whole world would at your devotion move, And at your speaking Lutes surpassing charmes, Embrace a lasting peace, and fling by Arms.
To CELIA on some verses sent her by another. DEar Fair if that some riper wit In rapt of some To ease the fan Writ of Love, and Love shall fain, Shall those lines acceptance have? Not those indited by thy slave? Whose troubled brains no muses move, But the darling God of Love. If my lines you 'Count a toy You know Cupid is a boy, Yet his trifles often finde Fair acceptance from the kinde; Such are they whose search doth sift The givers mind above the guift. Let others write to shew their wit, When I; Love shall be Cause of it.
On Love. LOve is a fire, Love is a flame Which darting came Th'orow the azure skie; And just like the rays, in Sol's hottest days peire'd me from on high. My heart before so chill, and cold, 'gan to unfold It self in those fair beams, But its mighty flame, soon it overcame Martyr'd 'twixt extreams. Lov's masterlesse, and cruell fire if it grow higher Will kill with martyrdoms, As heat forceth heat, to a gentle retreat Love, Love overcomes.
Song. ASke me not why I am so sad, nor why I here The Nymps forbear, Do with my Arms a Crosse walk in this grove? Within the hollow concave of my troubl'd breast Which never rests Lies the true cause, and my tormentor Love. 'Tis jealous fear, causes my care, And burthens thus my Love-sick Heart, I fear that she, my deitie Delights to see my smart; For still she frowns, and Knitts her brows And doth abhorr my Company, Whilst Lycon Courts her, with her sports, I dare not do't though by. O cruell fair! why dost thou thus delight to kill Thy slave who will Whilst he has life adore thee? and will be Courted by none for to neglect his duty, though you are his foe And with tormenting pains would murther me. And since that you, forbid me sue Or ask for mercy, I will ne'r With my complaints, and sad Iaments In vain disturb your ear; No, death will doe as much as Love hath don VVith's dart he'l peirce me through; Death will be found, to Cure that wound VVhich Coelia would not doe.
DAMON to a foul Maid that courtedhim. WHat mean'st thou Bacca, Can my senses feast Upon the members of a parboyl'd Beast? What boarish appetite thinkst thou I have That thou shouldst court me, who'd first wed a grave, And death hug in my Arms, then such a hag, Whose hide pouch'd like a shrivl'd, pudding-bag, Reaks like another Aetna; thy sous'd face And hawkle nose has not so good a grace As Madam monkies; few Hairs on thy scalpe, Thy mouth is Taenarus, thy Teeth an alpe, But that no snow, but soot lyes always there, In other parts like a deformed Bear Not yet lick'd into fashion. Think'st thou Man Not turned Beast, forsake his reason can To fall int' such a sink: Thou stinking Trull Thou must like Pasiphae lie with a Bull, Or couple with a boare thy next of kin; For never hope you Man can tempt to sin, For he that dost it, were I to judge his pain, Should be (and 'tis enough) to do't again.
To LYDIA being retired privately into the Country. NOw to the secret Groves is Lydia gone Stoll'n from us all, meaning to live alone Among the silent woods, where she may be From busie servants entertainments free, And hear the pleasant songsters of the Groves, With whistling layes resound their growing Loves: With uncontrouling freedom view the trammells Of Flora which the fragrant meads inammels, With pleasure walke and see the crystall brooks, Catching the sportive fish, with silver hooks. Conversing with the flowry Napaeae, Making diversity of flow'rs agree Bound up together: 'mong the shady trees Daunce in a Circle, with the Dryades, Feeding on cleanly, though but homely food, Esteem'd the only Goddess of the wood. O how I fear those rural pleasures may Entice her there to make a tedious stay, But I with vows will Frosty Hyems move, To hast the ruines of the leavy grove; Pray cold mout'h Boreas kiss her tender cheek, To make her shelter in the town to seek, VVhere conversation, and warm fires do bring Though frost without doors lies; within a spring.
Poema Valedictorium Perdilecto intimoque Suo amico trans∣freturo. ALas! what fate (or rather providence) Is this (dear C) unthought of rapt's thee hence? What makes thee leave this Isle, and seas pass o're To seek the blessings of a forrain shore? Cann't ours content thee? yea but thy free hand Transports the panneous blessings of our land, And (for exchange bring's back what ours hath none Of,) by exoticks to inrich our own. Since then it is for publique good, and thine, That thou leav'st us, it must needs be for mine. I'le not complain, since truly one friend shou'd Suffer disasters for another's good, And this is one (and that of no mean weight) That thee, and I, (dear C—must separate.) Vota Auspicata. Farewell! farewell! may fruitefull Neptune please To sound retreat unto the surging seas, By Triton's voyce! may his resounding shell, The threatnig rage of all the billows quell. May great Oceanus, and Tridentiser (Lest in th' envious liquid pathes you erre) Be your conductors; Let the Sea-Gods place, Themselves about your ship for greater grace, May Amphetrite and the Neriedes With all the Gods, and graces of the seas, Assembling sing Io-paeans to thy Honour, And may the sea for joy thou rid'st upon her Express't with gentle leapings! May the twinns Be never seen apart! The God of winds Great Aeolus, may he reflateing gales Enchaine within th' Hyperborean vales!
And let none 'Scape but Aura's from his hand To drive you forward to your wish'd-for land! May glorious Titan pleasant make the dayes, And gild the Sea, with his projected rayes! Serener nights attend you! may the bright Phaebe, at full, give you her borrow'd light! May Mercurie th' Negotiators God Attend you too, with his Cyllenian rod, And cause your gains ariseing from the fleece Of English Sheep, Surmount that brought to Greece By Iason's hand! May these on you therefore Attend and bring you safe to this blest shore. Vero Panomphaeo. Thou thou true Neptune who the seas command'st, Without a Trident still the billows can'st, And with one single word make all obay Whether in Heav'n, in Earth, Hell, Land, or Sea! Take thou my C—under thy safe protection, Guide him and favour im, with thy sure direction, And he'le not fear the threat'ning of the waves Anchoring his hope upon a God that saves. Be thou propitious to my prayers, and then I shall be sure to see him once agen, Coronis. Fare well, dear C—I wish you well, adiew! My tears stop words, once more farewell to you. Sospitet Te Deus: Opt. max. Epigram. Stay Triton, hold your breath, and o're the main Conduct my C—reduce him safe again To Albion's shore: then sound your shell, brave boy, And make the waves leap to the skies for joy.
THE DEPART. ADieu sweet Chloris, for the Fates deny Me longer life and longer liberty. I'ave lost the one in gazing on that face, Which justly may ot'h Paphian Queen take place To thee my liberty's resign'd the grave Tomb shall bespeak me Chloris constant slave. How can I longer think to live when I Ravish'd from the clear Sun-shine of thine eye Feel chilling colds; and winter frosts begirt Continually with fatal blasts my heart? No'tis those beams, which thy bright eyes display That must dispell, and chace these snows away, That killing absence brings: nought but thy breath May now redeem me from the dart of Death. But there's no hopes, no other hopes but I Banish't your presence, must resolve to dye: Cloris adeiu! for ever now adeiu, For dye I must be'ng forc'd to part with you.
TYSTIRUS complaining. BReak sadded heart, burst thou with griefs complaint Let thy laments The hardest marble unto tears provoke: Make flints to weep Increase the deep With drops expressed from that cruell stroke. Wounded I lye, and suffer from that hand That gave the wound Unto my bleeding Soul. And from those eyes. Light'nings proced Which strike me dead Nor w'thout she raise me can I ever rise. Torment of cruell silence breeds this woe I undergoe; My tongue is fetter'd, and I dare not speak Although my heart Feels deadly smart And swell'd with sorrow at the last must break. But here's a joy which feeds my sadded mind None hath divin'd The cause of my sadnesse and distress, First shall my Love My murther prove Before, to wrong her, I my Love confess.
Damon on Amarillis dancing in a Ring SEE my fortune; See my fortune How she flyes me And denys me Wo alas! wo alas too soon Still I follow! still I follow! But she flyes me And denys me And cannot be wonn. Cruel sport; In this sort With woes to fill me Which will kill me Ah! from this pain release me. For whilst she flys, my eyes They discover I'm a lover And that it is her self must ease me. Round we go, round we goe, But she flys me And denys me Stil I follow wrapt in woe. She moves swiftly, and yet sweetly Don't forsake me I'le o're take thee If thou wilt pity bestow. Cruel sport, in this sort! To increase my fires And desires And to exhibit my despaire: She Shifts her place, apace I after move Be'ing urg'd by Love But in vain still my endeavours are.
Acrostick. FEar-killing Faith, Bold-zeal, declares thy name, Art pick't it out but nature lai'd the frame. If ever name and nature did agree, 'Tis thine which are in perfect Harmonie: Heav'n-blessed Faith, which shakes th' Aethereal towers Cold-burning zeal 'gainst Heav'n-opposeing powers Offer themselves to view: Thy virgin breast Loves Heav'n alone, doth for did Loves detest. Death cannot shake thy Faith, nor ever may Zeal like to thine, a purer breast display. Eternal flames of Heav'n-refined zeal And soreing Faith, thou in thy breast do'st feel, Live ever happy! Faith and zeal with thee E're stay, t' effect this thy name's Prophesie.
Acrostick. AGe bles't I hope thou art: May many years Run their swift courses, and the rouling spheres Tire in their motions; May the circl'ing Sun About this round globe th'row the zodiack run Giving a hund'red springs and Autumns e're Earth or the Silent grave entomb thee there. Bles't be thou here with Age: with vertues more, Let graces, with thy years encrease; thy store E're multiply: So as thou hast begun Shine thou in vertue till thy race be run: Death fear to touch this blooming blossom; Now In Aprill stay untill December bow Her head with age and mak't the earth to kiss; Ope then thy fatal arms; bear her to bliss. Pluck her from hence, 'fore Age doth call thee to her, E're curs'd be, for thou pulls the worlds cheif flower.
The Recovery. HAil gentle virgin! now my joys renew Their plumes, for they were Sick as well as you, And had you dy'd they had been buried too. How oft betwixt my hope, and fear I dy'd; Each symptom that my watchfull eyes espied, My heart with thousand Torments crucify'd. When scarlet seas' did double dye thy face, Mine pal'd to see how strong thy feaver was, How great a Tyrant to usurp that place. When thou grewst pale I even sunk for fear Lest Death's cold ashes had been strowed there, Or that, that Tyrant came to dominere. When thou did'st sound, my heart was made a prize, To pallid fear, nor could it ever rise, Till hope to raise it sprouted from thine eyes. My heart yet trembles, now I think upon't, The thoughts oft with pale sadness paint my front: Thou liv'st: such mercies e're forget I wo'nt. My Muse did languish by a Sympathy, As if her life depended had on thee, It seems thine was her numbers Treasurie. Distress'd she sat in Mourning Liveries, Whilst the clear Fountaines of her crystal eyes, Wept in sotf Tears most dolefull Elegies.
As thy cheeks Hyacinths o're come their snows, As vanquish'd are their Lillies, by the Rose, So on my muse new heat and vigor grows. This Day mythought thy starry orbs were prest With wonted lustre: and new beauties drest Thy Face: which gave flames to my Muses breast. Inspired thus she now begins to sing, New ardors now her spritely Numbers wing, And as thy health doth, so her raptures spring. Both consecrated are my Muse, and I, To sing the bliss of thy recovery, And chaunt Iö Paeans untill we dye. May Heav'n as he has rais'd thee from the Dead, (Whose Name be blest!) his mighty bucklar spread, From Death's fell arrows to defend thy Head. Daine but to cherish (with a gentle glance Of Favour shot from thy bright countenance) These lines, and it my Numbers will advance. Such mercies cannot but my spirits raise, In highest Notes to chaunt my sprightly lays, And for thy Health to Heav'n sing songs of prayse.
Innocentia & Politia. Veritas & Panurgia. WHen that Astrea took her flight from hence, To find in Heav'n a better residence, Dame Innocentia wanting her protection Was scorn'd of all: And Pollicy's infection Spreading th'row Cities, Courts, and such great places Expos'd that Dame to thousands of disgraces. Sly Subtlety the Merchant entertains, Deceit the Trades-man, to encrease his gains, The Great man Honor; that vain puf'd-up Pride, With covetousnesse of every one; beside Protean Policy, whose great resort, Is in the City, and the Prince's Court, Wherein Deceit so often doth frequent, That Dame's inseparable accident: But Innocence, of all men was discarded, Her nackednesse laugh'd at and disregarded. At last a Country-man, whose smoother brow Ne'r entertain'd Deceit; nor's mouth knew how With flatt'ring words to speak; with Court intent To utter that thing which his Heart ne'r meant, But being taught of Truth his words to spell, His Heart, and Tongue rann ever parallel: He 'Spies this naked Dame's distresse with ruth, Invites her with him to go dwell with Truth: She soon consenting, thankes him for his pity, And bids adiew both to the Court and City.
The stately buildings of the Court she shuns, Thence swifter than the Eastern-wind she runs, Far from the City, and th' infections Court She finds where Truth is wonted to resort: Met, they as Sisters joyn, delighting so That never since they would assunder goe, Their cottage low (free from all Courtly state) Strong built on holy ground is Scituate: Two moats surrounding mak't an Amnick Isle, The better to keep forth Deceit and Guile, A strong-built Wall doth it defend, whose Gate, Like that of heav'n is made angust and strait, That every one who is admitted there Mayn't enter if Deceitfull cloaths they were; For Truth gives entrance unto none, but those Who'r naked like her self; or else whose cloathes Prove tegments for to hide Truths parts divine, From the perverting Eyes of muzling Swine. Within the closure of Truth's cottage wall No high Ambition that aspires (a fall) No twy-fac'd Guile, no Discord, and no Pride, Are by these Dames permitted to reside: But Love and Meeknesse, and such Heav'nly Graces Cohabit still in those serener places. The Shadowic Groves with a perpetual spring, Sweet Philomel makeing the woods to ring, With other birds peirch'd on the tender sprays, Whose notes from warbling Throats salute the Days Approach; whose trebles to the murm'ring water According, make sweet Musick to their Maker, Maketh as if the Earth in Heav'n were plac'd Or Heav'n descended Earth with's Joys had grac'd, Such is the state, (and far more full of bliss) Where truth conjoyn'd to Innocency is.
Thus dwell these Nymps enriched with the Treasures Of rurall joyes, and of Celestial Pleasures, Useing to travel all the Country round, 'Till the strange ecchoes of the Trumpets sound, 'Till Mars with blood bedy'd, and horror fell, Affrighted them back to their closer cell: Deceit, and Guile, and Policy then flew, VVith speedy feet about the Country too VVhere they increased so their Progenie, That never Since the country could be free, So that pure Truth, and Innocentia fair, Unto some secret place, confined are. But now when Hyem's frosty snow-beard swelld VVith chilling cold; and neveous mantles held The World enwrapt; and Mountain tops did show Their losty Heads encircl'd round with snow, Dame Innocentia cloathed all in White, Her usual Badg, Steals from her secret site; Leaving the Countrey to the Court she goes, To view the Quarters of her bitter foes. B'ing thither come, the first she met was Guile, VVhose clothing made that spotlesse Dame to smile, For like to her in every thing she seem'd, So that most men her Innocentia deem'd: Look what she wore Guile ever wore the same, And counterfeited still that purer dame. In pure White Garments was she dec't, the snow Could not than she a colour purer show: But she whose eyes peirc'd her base covering, Saw her all bloached with foul spots within, And th'row her plaster'd White, and painted face Saw that with all men she usurp'd her place. The next she met with was Dame Policie, VVho with a thousand shapes deludes the eye,
Her cloaths were changeable, and her disguise To ev'ry colour would Camelionize, Her shapes so divers and her forms so many That none could truly say that she had any. Her hand-maid Guile who still attends upon her Bowing her Head full low unto her Honor Held up her train, when that she neer was come She thus salutes her, Dame we have no roome To lodge you here, our bedds are all impletc, Nor may this court, for you become a seat, For your carbasious regment, which doth vie For whitenesse with the snow, cannot come high Our sullied garments, but it shews our stains And Truths perspective shews to all our blains, Our albeous Garments seem as white as thine, Our Laws seem holy, our decrees divine, If thou art absent; but if thou art by Our white shews black, our seeming truth's a lye, Our Laws deceitfull, and it doth appear, Our Kingdom falls if thou remainest here. My neece Ambition cannot be displac'd, Her Sister flatt'ry 'ld think her self disgrac'd, Should I dislodge them for your sake, they'd snuff, And pride would think you were not fine enough: But adulation who her words can change T'as various shapes as there are humours strange Shall entertain you, and with Speeches fair Shall fill you full, if you'l be fill'd with air. VVe two are inconsonant; we cann't agree, I you oppose, you'r opposite to me, And 'tis as hard for us to joyn (it clear is) As pale fac'd Famine to conjoyn with Ceres, I am not wont apertly thus to speak, However now my mind I truly break
To you, and tell you, se'ing we cann't agree, That you must hence, and leave this place for me. Contraries cann't conjoyn, we here no room Have, therefore pray depart from whence you come. Dame Innocentia soon perceiv'd, the place Nothing afforded to her but disgrace, And scorn, therefore lest thence she should be thrust And her white garments spoyled with the dust, And stains of sin, the court unto her foes She leaves with speed (while Guile dirt at her throws) And to truths cottage, where she was before Returns; and vows to see the Court no more. Aula procul Innocentiâ.
An Elegy on the matchless Murther of Charls the First of Happy and Blessed Memory. SInce Brittains great Apollo left the land, Laurells are blasted, and dejected stand; Poets are dumb-struck, and amaz'd to see So strange, unutterable Prodigie, Charles forc'd to swim in his own sacred Gore From this accurs'd, to an immortal Shore, So that none dares, all struck with silent dread, To say, Much lesse to sing that Charles is dead. For many months my Soul and Blood was froze, Till Anger thaw'd this Ice, and Zeal arose Through all my Veins, which gave me Liberty To weep out first, then write an Elegy. Lame, and unequal as the woful times Painted with Sighs, and Tears, must  my rithmes, For who can, struck with so much grief, erect A Verse, but in a faultring Dialect? He must forget the rugged times the , That can indite ought in a pollisht stile Who will not blush, and fire his Face with Shame, That thinks by Verset' immortalize that Name, Which charactrized in our Rithmes, will give Life to our Lines, and make our Fumes to , Whilst Charles shall flourish in mans memory, Which shall till times supp'd up b' Eternity Be? Royal Phoebus gains no ray of Light By mortals praises; he 'tis gives them Sight, So Brittains Son, shall never live by verse, But Men and Rithmes, whilst they his Name reherse Shall flourish; for the Theme these shall be read, And live soul'd by him, tho' himself be dead. Dead! ah more! murthered, and martyr'd too, By cursed hands (who once their deed shall rue)
That by Pretext of guilt and crimes do draw To th' block of Death the Head of Church and Law; Both fell with thee great Monarch, when that Fate Made thee a Martyr of the Church and State. The Earth and all her mighty Monarchs stand Amaz'd, and drooping dare not now command, Benumm'd their Fingers cann't the Scepter sway, Kings cannot rule, nor people well obay, Since by thy Death the Soul of Monarchie Has suffer'd, and the Head of Majestie Chopp'd off; no King now thinks himself secure Since Laws (the Walls where Princes did immure Themselves from vulgar rage) are wrested so That murthers issue whence Justice us'd to flow. Asham'd and blushing Princes stand, to see Themselves, and regal acts outdone by thee, To see the Glory of thy setting Sun Damp all the lustre of their splendid Noon. Heav'n, and the Lamp of day, Nights Tapors tell England, that they an Act to parrallel Its bloody deed, ne'r yet beheld; thy Stage O raging Isles! the wonder of this Age, And thou shalt blush dy'd with a Tyrian Stain, (Unless thou wash it quickly off again By some notorious Act, as great as good, And take away the stains of blood, with blood) And be the scorn of Nations, whilst the Sun Shall in the twelve roads of the Zodiack Run. No Pen can reach to words sufficient To speak thy Death; no Elegy lament Thy fatal loss can in a strain that's fit, The more we strive the more fall short of it, For thou 'rt a Theme too great for thoughts, much lesse Can weaker words speak thee; o'r unhappinesse
In floods of brinie tears wee'l ever tell, And loyal hearts shall make the Ocean swell VVith sighs; which will at last bring judgement down, And 'wake th' Almightie's Justice for his own. Rebells think not 'twas his o're. weight of sin That press'd him down, alive he still had been, But for the Nations crimes; we first his life Took from him by our sins, then with the knife. God for a Notion's sins oft dealeth so, Takes off the Righteous, lets the wicked go, In mercy to the first, to set them free From following plagues, and suddain jeopardie. So our yet bleeding Monarch was a gem Too good for us, and we too bad for him. Although the murtherers grant no monument Crown'd Heroe! Fame his hasty missives sent To all Earth's Monarchs! who allready have, Counting the VVorld two little for thy grave, Rear'd up a pyramis of high renown, VVhich shall out-last the longest Monarchs crown, VVhere long-live'd Fame upon its summit sings The fatal trag'die of the best of Kings: In vaulting thee so close, think let them not That e're their Regicede shall be forgot, For though thou hidden under ground dost lye, Their Names above ground rot, and ne'r shall dye. God turns Hells spiteful Arrows on his head, The world Salvation gain'd, Christ Crucified, And murther'd Charles the Name of Martyr gains: Tho' Life and three Crowns lost: more now remains For him a Life immortal, and a Crown, Of Shining Glory, and of high Renown. Which spight of Rebels Acts, though he be Dead, Shall now for ever Crown His Royal Head. THE END.
