P3891A 99899410 58789
THE ANTIPATHIE OF THE ENGLISH LORDLY PRELACIE, BOTH TO REGALL MONAR∣CHY, AND CIVILL UNITY: OR, An Historicall collection of the severall exe∣crable Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Sediti∣ons, State-schismes, Contumacies, oppressions, & Anti-mo∣narchicall practices, of our English, Brittish, French, Scot∣tish, & Irish Lordly Prelates, against our Kings, Kingdomes, Laws, Liber∣ties; and of the severall Warres, and Civill Dissentions occasioned by them in, or against our Realm, in former and latter ages. Together with the Judgement of our owne ancient Writers, & most judicious Authors, touching the pretended Divine Jurisdiction, the Calling, Lordlinesse, Temporalties, Wealth, Secular imployments, Trayterous practises, unprofitablenesse, and mischievousnesse of Lordly Prelates, both to King State, Church; with an Answer to the chiefe Objections made for the Di∣vinity, or continuance of their Lordly Function. The first Part. By WILLIAM PRYNNE, late (and now againe) an Utter-Barester of Lincolnes Inne. Beware of false Prophets, which come unto you in sheepes cloathing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves, you shall know them by their fruits. Mat. 7.15, 16 LONDON, Printed by Authority for Michael Sparke senior. An. 1641.
TO THE RIGHT HONO∣RABLE THE HIGH COVRT OF PARLIAMENT, NOW (Through Gods sweete Providence) MOST HAPPILY ASSEMBLED. Right Honourable Senators, IT is a received principle in Law,H. 3. H. 7.10 Crne. 55. Sn∣ford. Pl del Co∣ro, f. 3..40.44 that there are no Accessories in Treason; whence to conceale a Notorious Traytor, is real∣ly to be one. The consideration of the Capitalnesse of such a Concealement in these proditorious times, and the discharge of my bounden Duty to my Soveraigne Lord the King, this Church and Kingdome, (of which I am a true, though unworthy member;) and to this Honourable Court (to whose impartiall Iustice, next under God I owe the fruition of my present Liberty, my Native Soyle, and Quondam Profession of the Law) hath in∣duced me by way of Gratitude, to present your
Honours with this large Discovery, not of one or two, but of an whole Tribe and succession of notale Arch-Traytors, Rebels, Conspirators, and deserate Enemies to our Kings, Kingdomes, Lawes, Liberties, (to say nothing of our Church and Religion) masked under the innocent disguise of an Episcopall whie Rotchet, and the specious much abused Title of, The Church; which our Prelates have monopolized to them∣selves, the better to palliate their mischievous de∣signes, and boulster out their vilanies; when as (if we beleeve either our learned Martyr, An answere to sir Tomas Moores Dia∣logue, what the Church is in his workes. p. 250. Master William Tyndall, or The true dif∣ference between Christian Subje∣ction & unchri∣stian Rebellion. p. 124. Bishop Bilson himselfe) The Church is nee taken in the new nor old Testament, for the Bishops or Priests alone, but generally for the whole Congregation of the faithfull; and oft times for the Acts 14.23. c. 20 28. 1 Cor. 14.4.5.12. 1 Tim. 3.5.5. Sed & ubitres Eccle∣sa st licet laici. Tetul. Exhort, ad Cast. p. 179 people alone, without the Priest or Minister; which is worthy your observation, and will utterly sub∣vert one principall Pillar of our Prelates suppot. I could not but conjecture, that this Antipathy, would be very distastfull to our Lordly Prelates; (the Malefactors) whose long-concealed Treasons, Conspi∣racies & seditious practises it lays open to your publick view and justice; so that I can expect nothing but such extreame Malignity, opposition and Calum∣nies from them and their confederates, as might in some sort have deterred me from divulging it. Yet, whē I considered that the detectiō of grosse Traytors & Conspirators, hath bin ever reputed, not only an in∣offensive, but acceptable and meritorious service both to Kings and States in al other persons, and that I have no cause to doubt, but that it will receive the selfe∣same benigne interpretation in me, especially from your Honours, (by some of whose earnst desires, and
peciall approbations I committed these Historicall Col∣ections to the Presse) I could not but with all ala∣crity proceede on in this service, for the Common good, to the which I have beene the more incoura∣ged by a Divine Providence. For being a Prisoner in the Tower of London, stript of my Profession and all other imployments by some Prelates undemerited malice, considering with my selfe, how I might there passe my solitary houres in the usefullest manner, for the publicke benefit of this Church and Kingdome; it pleased God among other subjects, to pitch my thoughts upon a Colle∣ction of the severall Treasons, Rebellions, Warres, Sedi∣tions, and Anti-monarchicall Practises of Lordly Prelats of all Countries and ages (especially of our owne English Bishops) which I found scattered in Histories: wher∣upon (taking my hint from the Title of a now-non-extant Booke, written by one Thomas Gybson a Physitian in King Edward the 6. his dayes, stiled Proditiones Praelatorum a Conquestu, seene by our la∣borious Iohn Bale and mentioned in his Cntr. 9. Scrpt. Brit. p. 719. Centuries (which booke it seemes the Prelates since suppres∣sed) I gathered with no facil labour, the most of those Materials I here present unto your Honours, and Marshalled them into distinct files, with an intention to make them publick, so soone as a sea∣sonable opportunity should present it selfe. But the See a new Dis∣covery of the Prelaes Tyran∣ny. Arch Prelate of Canterbury not long after, perse∣cuting me afresh in the Starchamer without any just occasion, procured me there, not onely to bee most inhumanely censured, but likewise to be sent thence close prisoner, first to Carnarvan, then to
Mount-Orguile Castle in the Isle of Iersie, and there cloystred up so narrowly that I could neither have the use of pen, inke, paper, writings nor Bookes to benefit my selfe or others; and withall searching both my Chamber and friends houses sundry times by his Pursevants, seized on all my bookes and Papers he could meete with. But these Collections escaping his clutches, fell into the hands of another persecuted Gentleman, who without my privity carried them beyond the Seas, where they were preserved till after my late returne from Exile (by the justice of this Honourable House,) and not many moneths since, (when I gave them over as lost) were unexpectedly returned to my hands in safety, whiles the businesse of Episcopacy was in agi∣tation before your Eminencies; which speciall Pro∣vidence, put me in minde of that speech of Mordeay to Ester, Estr. 4.14. Who knoweth whether thou art come to the Kingdome for such a time as this? and made me strong∣ly apprehend, that God had restored me to Liberty, and these Collections to my hands, for such a time as this, (which blessed be our good God we now live to see,) wherein our domineering Prelates lewde practises and Conspiracies against our Religion, Lawes, Liberties, Lives, Soules, and Estates, are not onely detected, but questioned; and some of the Poten∣test and pestilentest of them, charged with no lesse than High Treason, and other most grosse Misde∣meanors, in, and by your Honorable Assembly; which have rendred them so generally detestable to the whole Kingdome, that divers Petitions have beene presented to your Honours, both by Ministers and
People out of many entire Countries, for their utter extirpation; which long efflagitated difficult worke, (which your Honours have now set upon) I conceive the publishing of this Antipathy, will much facilitate and advance, being thus specially preserved, and re∣served by Gods Providence, for such a time as this. The principall motives which originally induced me to undertake this worke, were the very same which have now perswaded me to publish it. First, an unfeined desire to dispossesse the seduced  and mis-informed judgements of Princes, Nobles, and others, of that over-weaning opinion they have hitherto generally embraced of Lordly Prelats extraordinary fidelity, sincerity, Piety to Kings & King∣domes in Churh and State affaires; and of the necessity of their Supportation & continuane, both for the Se∣curity, Tranquillity and felicity of all Christian Kings States, Churches; to all which, in verity, they have beene the greatest Plagues and Opposites. This no∣table mistake, proceeding, either out of a meere nescience or inadvertency of the Prelates treche∣rous plots and turbulent Actions in all Climes and times; or, from the deception of this false Paradox, No Bishop, no King; or, from the immoderate pane∣gyricall applauses of their Parasites, (who almost deifie them in Presse, in Pulpit, especially in Court Sermons) and their owne selfe-commendations, which are now most frequent in their writings and discourses; or, from their owne outward Pompe, Splendor, and Superficiall shewes of Sanctity and Piety; backed with their sordid flattery of, and temporizing with the greatest men, the better to ef∣fect
their owne designes; will soonest and best bee rectified by this bare Historicall discovery of their Tre∣cheries and villanies in all ages; the very knowledge whereof (as the Prophet Malachy and Christ informe us) Mal 2, . will make them contemptible and base before all the people, and like Mat. 5.13. Lk. 14.35. unsavory salt, fit neither for the Land nor for the Dunghill, cause them to be cast out and trodn under foote of men, as good for nothing. Secondly, a sincere indeavour, to the uttermost of my power, to prevent those blacke imminent stormes of warre, sedition, schisme, oppression, with sndry other miseries, which the desperat procee∣dings, practises, and counsells of our all-swaying Prelates, in my weake apprehension, then threat∣ned suddenly to bring downe upon us, to the ap∣parent danger, if not ruine and desolation to our Religion, Lawes, Liberties, King, Kingdomes, of which we have since had most visible reall experi∣ments, to the insupportable charge, and infinite disturbance of his Majesty and the whole Realme; who have cause eternally to detest our Lordly Prela∣cy, as the very Heb. 12 15. root of bitternes whence al our ancient and present calamities have issued. To anticipate and redresse which sad events then, and secure us against the like effects of Prelacie both now and hereafter, I could not (in my poore Judgement) finde out any readier course within the narrow spheare of my Activity, than the publication of this History, of our Prelates practises and disloyal∣y, Quorum perfidiam exposuisse, superase est, as Saint pit. 54. Hierom witnesseth in a like case. Thirdly, to ase our Church, State, with all
conscientious godly Ministers and people, from the importable heavie yoakes of our Prelates tyranny, under which they have miserably groaned, and a∣gainst which they have lamentably declaimed for many hundred yeares, (and could never yet bee throughly eased thereof) as I have manifested by the Testimonies of our owne writers and Martyrs in the See Cap. .latter part of this Antipathy; to accomplish which long desired and now expected worke, I pre∣sume nothing can be more effectuall than such an Anatomy as this, of our Prelates villanies of this nature. Fourthly, to further the propagation of religi∣on, the frequent and sincere preaching of the Go∣spell, the powerfull practise of true piety, the sal∣vation of mens soules, and tranquillity of our Church and State: to all which, I dare confident∣ly averre, our Lordly Bishops have beene greater enemies and obstacles in all ages, hen all other professions of men whatsoever. Fiftly, to scure our long enjoyed, oft confirmed  fundamentall Lawes, and the hereditary Libertie both of our persons, States, Lives, from small losse and utter subversion: to all which our Prelates have commonly shewed themselves Arch-enemies, endea∣vouring ether secretly to undermine them by trea∣chery, or openly to trample them under their po∣tificall feete by violence, of which our present time have had large experience, especially in Canterbury who hath oft times publikely protested in a most insolent manner; that he wold breake both the Necke and back of Prohibitions & so of the Common Law, or else
they should break his, which now he findes they are like to doe. And to defend our lawes and liberties against Prelaticall incroachments, is one principall part of a Lawyers Profession; so that in this regard this Antipathy is neither without, nor besides my calling. Sixtly, to vindicate the sinere professors of Religion (for I will be no Patron of Frantike Enthusiasts, or dissembling Hypocrites) in generall, and my selfe in particular from the Calumnies of the Prelates and their Instruments. There is nothing more frequent in late Prelaticall Factious discourses, See Bishop Whites Preface before the Book of the Sabbath. Dr. Hylin An∣tidtum, Lincli∣nensi. And his moderae answer to Henry Burton, Lysimacus Nica∣nr and others. Sermons, Fox Acts and Monuments. pas∣sim. 5. R. 2, c. 5.2, H. 4. c. 15.2. H. 5. c. 7. Writings, then to accuse the true servants of God, and most zealous Christians, of Sedition, Treason, Rebellion, Faction, and Conspiracie against their Soveraignes and Superiours. In this sort have they slandered our Sermon. 3.4. and 5. Before King Edward. Martyrs, Haddon and Fox Contr. Osorium. l. 2. f. 212. Latymer, Haddon and Fox Contr. Osorium. l. 2. f. 212. Luther, and others hereto∣fore, and many poore Christians now: and this practise hath beene so common that the Century-writers observe. Cent. Magd. 2. Col. 420. Solemne est ut Christianis crimina seditionis, & laesae Majestatis a persecutoribus affingan∣tur, quibus tamen non sunt obnoxii. And for my owne particular, though conscious to my selfe of no se∣ditious or disloyall Act, it hath beene my unhap∣pinesse, to be not onely slandered, but Censured by our Prelates, as a See A New Discovery of th Prelates Tyran∣ny. Seditious Person, for Bookes authorized by their owne Chaplains approbati∣ons, and to be accused to his Majestie and proclai∣med both in Print and Pulpit, by Cantrburis speech in Star-Chamber the Epist. Dedicat. Hylin Anid. Lin. And a Mo∣derate answer to Henry Burtn. Dukrs Sermon See a new Dis∣covery of the Prelates Tyran∣ny p. 9. Canterbury and his Agents, for a Malevolent against State and Church, a Traytor, Rebell, Factious Spirit, Monster, worse than any Priest or Iesuite, one deserving to be forfeited to the Gallowes, and as ad as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram;
onely for oppugning their Arminian and Popish In∣novations, their desperate See A brevi∣ate of the Pre∣lates intolerable usurpations both upon the Kings prerogative Royall and the Subjects Liber∣ties. incroachments upon his Majesties Royall Prerogative, the Lawes and Subjects Liberties, according to my Oath and Duty. I could doe no lesse therefore for the vindication of my owne personall Innocencie (which your Honours by your unanimous Votes have now abundantly clea∣red (with the ruines of that Court which censured me) the justification of all sincere Professors from these Prelaticall black Calumnies, and the perpetual si∣lencing of our Prelates slanderous Tongues & Quils in this kinde, then present your Honours and the world with an irrefragable Catalogue of their most horrid Treasons, Rebellions, and Seditions in all ages, which alone out-vie all other mens whatsoever, both for quality and numerosity, and so returne these mali∣cious defamations with infinite disadvantage upon their own guilty Pates; Optatus adver. Parmin. l. r. p. 23. Qui ut crimina in silentium mitterent sua, vitam infamare conati sunt alienam, & cum possent ipsi ab innocentibus argui, innocentes arguere stu∣duerint, mittentes ubi{que} liter as livore dictante conscriptas, as some delinquents did of old, whose steps our Pre∣lates trace. These were the speciall reasons both of my compiling and publishing this Antipathy; wher∣in your Excellencies may clearely discerne; that these Exorbitances of our Prelates, are not so much the vi∣ces of their Persons, as of their Function; which though their many late published Pamphlets, would prove to be of Divine Right, yet the pernicious evill fruits thereof infallibly proclaime, to be of meere humane wrong. And in my weake judgement, there can be no such safe, short, and infallible way to
decide this controversie, Whether Episcopacy be of Divine institution or not? then to consider the fruits thereof in all ages: that of our Saviour being of eternall verity, Mat. 7.16.20. Ye shall know them by their fruites. Since then the fruites of our Lordly Prelates, in this (and in other kindes too as I could abundant∣ly manifest) have beene so desperately evill, and they generally the greatest See alaeus de vitis Pontificum. Monsters of impiety, that ever pestred the world, (as appeares by the lives of sundry forraine and Domesticke Pontifs;) I may infallibly conclude, their calling not to be Divine, but Antichristian, or meerely humane at the best, and in∣consistent with the safety, both of our Prince, Church, State; and by this unanswerable reason dis∣sipate into smoake all those specious flourishes and shadowes of arguments made in their defence, which I have Cap. 8.9. See the unbishoping of Timothy and Titus. And a Catalogue, &c. else-where fully answered. There are but This is the summe of the Remonstrance newly set out by Sir Thomas Aston, though written by some other Divines and Lawyers, who have contributed their best assi∣stance to it. two chiefe arguments of moment, for the continuance of Episcopacy, which sticke with any judicious men. The first in point of State Po∣lity; No Lord Bishop, no King. The second in point of Church Polity; No Bishops, no peace, no government, and nothing but Schismes in the Church: The first, I trust, I have abundantly cleared by this Antipathy; The second (God willing) I intend to dissipate in an Historicall Treatise of the Schismes of our English Lordly Prelates among themselves, enough to make a volume; and then by a larger Remonstrance, experi∣mentally evidencing out of Ecclesiasticall Histories That Bishops have beene, if not the sole, yet at least the chiefe Authors of all the Schismes that ever infested and rent the Church of God. And if this be made good (as
it easily may be against all the world) the proud Hierarchy of our Lordly Prelates will fall to ground of it self without helpe of hands to pull it downe. If any further alleadge; If See Sir Tho. Atons Remon∣strance. you remove away Bishops, you take away government, and introduce an Anarchy into the Church. The answer is very easie. First, we shall still bee under the government of  our Christian Kings, 1 Eliz. c. 1. the Supreame governours of our Church upon earth. Secondly, under the Government of our Parlia∣ments, Lawes, and inferiour Magistrates; who doe, and will take speciall care for our Churches good reglement. Thirdly, under the regiment of our grave and  painfull Ministers; whom our Lawes stile Fitz. N. Br. f. 36. Register. f. 289. b. 30. 306. Re∣ctors of their severall Parishes, and Rectories. Fourthly, under the government of an Ordinary  or Extraordinarie Provinciall or Nationall Synode, as there is occasion. Fifthly, under such a religious orderly Govern∣ment, as your Wisedomes, upon the abolishing of Episcopacy, shall please to erect among us, as most consonant to the Law of God, and Civill Government of our State. And can any then justly complaine of a want of Government in the Church, when it is but altered for the better? Sixthly, the primitive Church in the purest  times before Bishops were instituted, See hz. Chap. . was gover∣ned by a common Councell of Presbyters; and the refor∣med Churches beyond the Seas which want Bi∣shops, are so regulated at this day, without any dn∣ger of an Anarchy; and so may we as well as they.
There is nothing then remaining to uphold our Lordly Prelacie, but two of their owne princi∣pall vices, ambition and Qui obsero Laicorum, avidi∣us Clericis quaerit temporalia, & inptius utitur acquisitis? Ber∣nard. ad Clerum, & ad Pastores Serm. covetousnesse: the one ari∣sing from their Lordships, or Session in Parliament; the other from their Lordly Seats and Revenues; neither of which are of Divine Institution, as Archbishop Lauds speech in Starchamber, Bi∣shop Hals Remon∣strance, and his de∣fence thereof; and Whitgift. themselves acknowledge. If your Honourable Assembly then will but take away the Temporall Honours and Lands annexed to their Bishoprickes, I dare sweare, not one of all our Prelates will plead or write for Episcopacie any more. Saint Paul saith,1 Tim. 3.1. He that desireth the office of a Bishop, desireth a good worke: and the Fathers generally make this observation on the place, Hieron. Com. in Soph. c. . & in 1 Tim. 3. Sduli∣us, Primasius, Theodoret, Bda, Rabanne Maurus, Haymo, Ansel∣mus Cantuarien∣sis, Ocumenius, Theophylactus; and others; in 1 Tim. 3. Origen. in Mat. Hom. 31. Augustinus de ci∣vitate Di, l. 19. c. 19. & Enar. in Psal. 126. Chrys. lib. 3. de Saced∣io. in Epist. ad Ephs. Hom. 11. Opus imperf. in Matt. Hom. 25. Isiodor. Hispaln∣sis de ffciis Ec∣clesiast. lib. 2. c. 5. Gratian. Caus. 8. quast. 1. Concil. Aquisgr. sub Lud. pi. . 9.10.13 & Parisins. sub Lud & Lothri l. 1. c. 23. Episcopatus nomen est operis, non honoris; non Dominium, sed Officium; non Honos, sed Onus; Opus dixit, non Honorem, non Dignitatem; Laborem, non Delicias; Opus, per quod per humilitatem crescat, non intumescat fastidio, &c. If then your Wisdomes will make our Bishoprickes now a Worke, not an honour, or gaine, out lazie Prelates will of their own accords forgoe them, without any more dispute. To make this most apparent, I shall instance on∣ly in one particular: it is the generall resolution of Concil. Parsiens. sub Lud. & Lthri, l. 1 c. 5. & 23. Surtus. Concil. Tom. 3. p. 364.374. Councels, Fathers, and Divines, yea of the lewd Conventicle of Praedicationis munus, quod Episcopo∣rum praecipuum est. &c. Concil. Trident. Sess. 24. De Reform. c. 4. p. 976, 977. Trent it selfe: that the first and principle part of a Bishops office, is diligently to preach Gods Word to the people: and therefore this very Councell enjoynes all Bishops to preach the Scripture and Gods Law every Lordsday, and Holiday, and moreover in the Lent,
Advent, and other Fasts; quotidie, vel saltem tribus in hebdomade diebus Sacras Scripturas Divinamque legem annuncient, to preach every day, or at least three times a weeke. Now our Lordly Prelates have beene so farre from executing this principle part of their office and worke, that some of them (as Canterbury, York, London, and Oxford) did not so much as preach one Sermon in sundry yeares: others of them have preached very rarely; yea, most of them have by themselves and their instruments See Shlford and others. written and preached against frequent preaching; suppressed all week-day Lectures, and Sermons, on Lordsday afternoones throughout their Diocesses; and Dr Pierce Bishop of Bath and Wells, by name, in a Letter to Canterbury, thanked God that he had not left one Lecture, nor afternoone Sermon in his Diocesse: and suspen∣ded the Minister of Bridgwater onely for preaching a Lecture in his owne parish Church, which had continued 50. years; & when this Bishop, after much solicitation upon this Ministers promise, never to preach the Lecture more, absolved him from his su∣spension, hee then most blasphemously applyed Iob. 5.14. Christs words used to the sicke man, to this good Minister. Behold thou art made whole: Goe away, sinne no more: (that is, preach no more) lest a worse thing come unto thee: hee convented another Minister, on∣ly for expounding the Catechisme on the Lordsday after∣noone, saying, it was AS BAD as Preaching. So that preaching now in this and other our Prelates judgement, is both a Sinne, and a bad thing, careful∣ly to be suppressed. And this wee may generally ob∣serve, that those who were diligent Preachers be∣fore
they became Bishops, being once made such, became usually either See M. Lati∣mrs 4. Sermon of the Plough to this purpose. Non-preaching, or rare-preaching Prelates; doing so much the lesse worke, by how much they receive the greater wages: Whence Queene Elizabeth used to say, when shee made prea∣ching Ministers Bishops; that shee had made a Bi∣shop, but mar'd a preacher: it being true that the Bi∣shop of Dunkelde once answered Deane Thomas Farret, when hee wished him to preach, Fox Act and Monum. p. 1266. I tell thee wee Bishops were not ordained to preach: it being too meane an office for them, unlesse it be sometimes at the Court, or at some such solemne meeting, to gaine either more honour or preferment thereby, or for some such private ends; not out of any great zeale of converting soules to God: Since then our Bi∣shops thus neglect, nay hate, condemne, suppresse and persecute, the good worke of Preaching, wherein their Mat. 28.19, 20. c. 11.1. Mar. 1.38. c. 3.14 c. 16.15. Luk 4.18, 19, 31.43, 44. Act. 4.19, 20. c. 5.25.28.29.42. c. 10.42. Rom. 10, 15. c. 11.20. 1 Cor. 1.17. c. 9.16. Ga. 7.16. Eph. 3.8. 2 Tim. 4.1, 2. Act. 20.28. Ioh. 21.16, 17. office principally consists; it is most apparent, that the onely thing they now so zealously write & stickle for, is, only the temporall meanes, & honour, not the Divine spiritual worke, or office of Episcopacie; & since these thus avocate and hinder them from prea∣ching, I presume your excellent wisedomes will deem it necessary, to strip them naked of these two obstacles, which cause them thus to neglect their proper worke and duty. Neither would I have your Honours, or any else here misconceive mee: as if I advised you, to de∣prive Ministers of all Honour and Maintenance: God forbid. No, my hearts desire and prayer to God and your Honours shall be, that every painfull prea∣ching Minister may have all due Honourable respect,
and such a competent allowance, as the greatnesse of his paines and charge demerit. But that Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, and others who have no particular flocks to feed: & either preach not at all, or very sel∣dome, should have such temporall dignities, offices, and See Prov. 30.8, 9. excessive revenues, as make them either proud, luxurious, ambitious, idle, or negligent in preaching, and to forget that good worke of a Bishops office, which Saint Paul speakes of, I humbly conceive is See Chapter 8. where this is largely proved by sundry testi∣monies. neither lawfull nor expedient, but such an ir∣regularity as will be thought fit to be redressed by your Honours, not only in point of Policy, but of pie∣ty too. In a word; when I seriously consider, that Christ himselfe did Matt. 18.34. c. 20.20. to 29. c. 23.8. to 13. Mar. 9.33. to 38. c. 10.35. to 46. Luk. 9.46, 47, 48. c. 22.23. to 28. Iob. 18.36. frequently condemne and prohibit the ambitious desire of superiority and praeheminencie in his Apostes. That the Apostles themselves doe the like, in heir 1 Pet. 5.1. to 6. 1 Ioh. 2.15 16.3 Iob. 9, 10. 2 Cor. 1.24. Epistles to others. That Quic undqu deideraverit Primtum in ter∣ra, inveniet in coelo conusio∣nem; ut jam in∣rer servos Chri∣sti, non sit d Primatu certa∣men. Opus im∣per. in Matt. Hom. 35. See more to this purpose there. Saint Chryso∣stome clearely determines; That whosoever desireth primacy in Earth, shall find confusion in Heaven, that now among Christs servants and ministers, there may be no contest for primacy, or superiority. That Saint Bernard when he was offred to be made Bishop of Genoa, and Millaine See Vita Bernardi before his workes. Cl. Espencaus Digres. in 1 Tim. l. 3. c. 6 p. 330. peremptorily refused this dignity, saying upon that occasion: Erubesce O superbe cinis, Deus se humiliat, tu t exaltas? Deus se hominibus subdit, tu dominari gestiens tuo te praeponis authori, Vtinam tale me quid cogitantem Deus, uti suum olim Apostolum increpare digna∣retur, Vade post me satana, non sapis quae Dei sunt. Quotiens hominibus praeesse de∣fidero, totiens Deum meum praeire contendo, & tunc quae verè Dei sunt, non sapio Bernard. Homil. 1. de laudibus Mariae Virginis. p. 18. Blush O proud dust and ashes; God humbles himselfe, dost thou exalt thy selfe? God made himselfe inferiour to men, thou desirimg to do∣mineere preferrest thy selfe before thy maker. Would to
God when I thinke any such thing, God would vouchsafe to rebuke mee, as hee did his Apostle in times past, Get thee behind mee Sathan, thou savourest not the things that are of God: as often as I desire to rule over men, so oft I contend to goe before my God, and then I savour not the things which are truly of God. That the eminent Father Augustin. de gestis cum Eme∣rita Donatist. E∣pis. lib. Tom. 7. pars . p. 782. An vero Redemptor noster de coelis in humana membra des endit, ut membra ejus essemus, & nos ne ipsa ejus membra crudeli divisione lanien∣tur, de Cathe∣dris descendere formidamus? E∣piscopi propter Christianos po∣pulos ordinamur. Quod ergo Chri∣stianis populis ad Christianam pa∣cem prodest, hoc de nostro Episco∣patu facamus. Quod sum prop∣ter te sum, si tibi prodest; non sum, si tibi obest, si servi utiles su∣mus, cur Domini aeternis lucris pro nostris temporalibus ubli∣mitatibus invidemus: Episcopalis dignitas fucuosior nobis erit, si gregem Christi deposita magis collegerit, quam retenta disperserit; fratres mei, si Dominum cogita∣mus, locus ille altior specula vinitoris est, non fastigium superbientis; si cum volo re∣tinere Episcopatum meum dispergo gregem Christi; quomdo est damnum gregis ho∣nor Pastris  N qua fronte in futuro seculo promissum à Christo sperabimus hono∣em, si Christianam in hoc seculo noster honor impedit unitatem? Saint Augustine Bishop of Hippo, and almost 300. African Bishops more in the great schisme of the Donatists, were content to lay downe all their Bi∣shoprickes for the peace and unity of the Church: thinking thereby not to lose them, but to commit them more safely to Gods custody: and used this most golden speech, An vero Redemptor, &c. What verily did our Redeemer descend from Heaven into humane members, that wee should be his members, and shall we, lest his very members should be rent in pieces with a cruell division, feare to de∣scend out of our chairs? We are ordained Bishops for Chri∣stian people: What therefore may profit Christian people for Christian peace, that let us doe with our Bishoprickes. What I am, I am for thee, if it profit thee; I am not so, if it hurt thee. If wee be profitable servants, why do wee envie the eternall gaines of our Lord for our temporall sublimi∣ties? Our Episcopall dignity will be more fruitfull to us; if being laid downe, it shall more unite the flocke of Christ, then disperse it if retained. My brethren; if wee mind the Lord, thi higher place is the wath Tower of a vin∣dresser; not the Pinacle of a proud Person. If when I will retaine my Bishopricke I disperse the flocke of Christ, how is the dammage of the flocke, the honour of the shepherd?
For with what face shall wee expect the honour promised by Christ in the world to come, if our honour hinder Chri∣stian unity in this present world? And finally, that Bi∣shops themselves did in their very See the Booke of Common prayer in Publike Bap∣tisme. Baptisme seri∣ously vow and promise to God: To forsake the De∣vill and all his workes, the vaine pompe and glory of this world, with all the covetous desires of the same, so that they would not follow, nor be led by them: and that Saint Bernard hereupon gives this Item to them Ad Clru & ad Pastores Serm in Concil. Rhmns. Simun∣dum praedicas contemnendum, contemne tu prius, & ad ip∣sum efficacius alios invitabis: If thou preachest the World is to be contemned, do thou contemne it first, and then thou shalt more effectually invite others thereto. I cannot but presume our Lordly Prelates, if they have any sparkes of piety, or humility in them, will now at last for our Churches our Kingdomes future peace, secu∣rity and felicity, lay downe their Bishoprickes at your Honours feete; or else that your Eminences will en∣force them thereunto, it being more equall and ex∣pedient, that a few Lord Bishops should meritorious∣ly lose their pernitious honours, than our King, Church, State, Religion, Lawes, Liberties, Peace, be perpetually indangered, and imbroyled by their continuance. Now the great Moderator of the Universe, who hath miraculously congregated, preserved, directed, assisted your Honourable Assembly hitherto, and and wrought wondrous things by your Indefati∣gable industries, and most prudent consultations, for the honour and safety of his Majesty, and his Realmes; the Reformation of our Church and State; the Esta∣blishment of our undermined Religion, Lawes, and
Liberties; the pacification, and prevention, of our much feared Warres and Invasions; the relieving of our grievously oppressed ones, and the exemplary pu∣nishment of our Arch-oppressours, to the inefable joy of all true English, Scottish, Irish hearts, and of true Christians; continue his blessed assisting presence with, his Almighty protection over you; multiply all his saving graces in, powre forth all his blessings, spiritu∣all, temporall, and eternall abundantly on you, and Crowne all your religious Consultations with such a successefull issue, that the present times, and all suc∣ceeding ages may deservedly call your Honours, Esay. 58.12 the raisers up of the foundations of many generations, the repairers of our breaches, the restorers of pathes to dwell in, and the Saviours (next under God and our Soveraigne) of our almost ruined Church and State. So prayeth your Honours redeemed Captive, and eter∣nally devoted servant WILLIAM PRYNNE.
TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, BE pleased to take notice, that my primitive in∣tention was, to have presented thee with this Historicall Antipathy intirely at the same instant without fractions. But the slack∣nesse of the Printers, the importunity of some speciall friends, and some publike Negotiations in present agitation which this peece of it may seasonably pro∣mote, have induced mee to divide it into two parts, the first whereof thou hast here compleate: the second (God willing) thou shalt receive with all possible expedition. In the mean season I shall desire thy favourable acceptation of this moity, and of a perfect Table of the severall Chapters of the whole Treatise, wherein thou maist behold the lat∣ter part in Epitome, till thou enjoy it in grosse.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST PART. Chap. I. COntaining the severall Treasons, Conspiracies, Re∣bellions, Seditions, Contumacies, and Disloyalties of the Archbishops of Canterbury against their Sove∣raignes, Kings of England; and the severall Warres, Tumults, and Dissentions occasioned and raised by them, in, or against our Realme. Chap. II. Of the severall Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Sedi∣tions, State-schismes, Contempts, and Disloyalties of the Archbishops of Yorke, against their Soveraignes, and of the Warres, Tumults, and Civill Dissention caused by them. Chap. III. Comprising the severall Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebelli∣ons, Contumacies, Disloyalties, Warres, Dissentions, and State Schismes of the Bishops of London, Win∣chester, Durham, Salisbury and Lincolne.
The TABLE of the Chapters of the second Part. Chap. IV. Comprising the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Conu∣macies, and Disloyalties of the Bishops of Ely, Exe∣ter and Hereford. Chap. V. Containing the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Contu∣macies, and Disloyalties of the Bishops of Chichester, Carlile, Chester, and Norwich. Chap. VI. Comprising the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Contu∣macies, and Disloyalties of the Bishops of S. Davids, Landaffe, Bangor, Asaph, Bath and Wels. Chap. VII. Containing the several Treasons, Rebellions, Seditions, Schismes, Contumacies, Warres, and disloyalties of the Bishops of France, Normandy, Scotland, and Ire∣land, with reference unto England. Chap. VIII. Containing certaine conclusions, deduced from the premi∣ses, with the judgements and rsolutions of divers of
our ancient Writers and Martyrs, and some of our learnedest Bishops and Authors in Queene Elizabeths raigne, touching the pretended Divine Iurisdiction of Bishops, their Treasons, Rebellions, Temporalties, large Possessions, and the uselessenesse, unprofitablenesse, and mischievousnesse of Lordly Bishops, and their go∣vernment in our Church. Chap. IX. Comprising an answer to the principall Objections allea∣ged by the Prelates in defence of the Divine pretended institution, and for the continuance of their Episcopacie in our Church. ERRATA. PAge 11. l. 40. read, The King, thinking. p. 73. l. 21. such. l. 33. at, au, Royans, Ry p. 78. l. 0 faithfull. p. 25. l. 28. granted, grnted. p. 132. l. 5. Edward deceasing p. 144. l. 1. Dacans. p. 147. l 9 Datary p. 150.  l 8. Penry. p. 152. l. 24. against. p. 156. l. 16. Saxons. p. 171. l. 11. Archiepiscopall. l. 15 un intrruptd. p. 176. l. 38 oppressions. p 194, l. 13. undefied p. 212. l. 14. they, the. p. 220 l. 11. favour, feare. p. 234. l. 1. be appehended. p. 28 l. 18. this, the p. 3 l. 6. dele a. p. 242. l. 1 dele and l. 12. Edmond, Edward p 241 l 8. Bishop. p. 260. l. 13. were, where. p. 261. l. 14. excellently learned p. 62. l 37. ripped. p. 284. l. 2 ele in. p. 277 l. 27.35 deluded, deivered p. 280 l. 2. Cales l 25. forfeiting, fortefying. p. 281 l. 31. said, laid 282 l. 23 wie, we p 292. l. 23. grea∣ly p 295. l. 30. upon, this. p. 305 l. 20. left lift. l. 28. or, of. p. 312. l. 40. ever even. p. 315. l. 9. learned, unlearned. p. 318. l. 24. examination, ex∣communication, p. 323. l. 9. Geofy Hugh. p. 327. l. 17. gravissima l. 27. accuse, accurse. p. 331. l. 20. strangers. p. 334. l. 4. from his. p. 336. l. 29. imployed. In the Margin p. 35. l. 6. Beacon l. 8. vol. 3. p. 51. l. 5. Bishop, See.
THE PROLOGVE. THere is nothing more frequent in these latter days in the mouthes of our domineering Lordly Prelates, than this triviall Paradox of Archbishop Bancroft (which some would Originally father upon our late Soveraigne The Relator of the Confe∣rence at Hampton Court, p. 36. King James) NO BISHOP, NO KING; as if Kings could neither bee, nor continue Kings, unlesse Prelates were suffered both to be, and continue Lords; and Princes Crownes irreparably lost, if Bi∣shops Miters were but once cast downe. This absurd and ground∣lesse Assertion, as it is evidently disproved by those many flourishing Kings and Kingdomes, which have well subsisted withut Lord Bi∣shops, both before these Mushrome Lords (Spirituall onely in Title, but wholly Temporall in reality) first sprouted up by in∣sensible degrees in the Church of Christ, so it is most infallibly con∣vinced of notorious falshood, by the multitude of those most execra∣ble Treasons, Treacheries, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Contumacies, Insurrections, Seditions, and Anti-Monarchiall practises of Lord∣ly Prelates, against their Soveraignes, in all ages since they grew rich and potent, in all Kingdomes and Churches where they have beene admitted; of which there are so many presidents, as would fully fraught many Folio Volumes, and require another Baronius or Tostatus, to digest into severall vast Tomes. And I dare further adde, to the immortall prayse of this loyall generation of Lordly Pre∣lates, that there is no one calling or profession of men whatsoever in the Christian World guilty of so many traiterous, treacherous, per∣fidious, seditious, rebellious, contumacious practises and conspiracies against their lawfull Princes; or that have proved such execrable
firebrands of dissentions, commotions, bloody warres, Rebellions, and detestable Schismes both in Church and State, as these Prelati∣call Lords. Yea, I suppse I may confidently averre without any errour or calumny, that Lordly Prelates have beene the Originall Authors and contrivers of more Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Schismes, Warres, and Contentions in Christian Kingdomes, than all other rankes and callings of men whatsoever, not severally considered, but united. This I could at large demonstrate by an whole Volume of exam∣ples of Popes, and Lordly Prelates in forraigne parts; but I neede not travell abroad, since we have so many presidents at home, of our owne English Lordly Prelates, as may abundantly suffice to illustrate this truth; the chiefest whereof I have here collected and faithfully transcribed out of the Marginall Authors quoted to every of them, whose very words I onely recite for the most part, but where brevity or necessitie enfoce me to use my owne expressions for methd or connexion sake, when the Historians either somewhat vary, or are over-tedious in their relations; or where one Historian relates some particulars, which another omits: in which case, I must desire the Reader to peruse all the Authors quoted to each example, lest ex∣amining onely one or two of them, which record but a part, and not the entire relation, he should either wrong himselfe, or censure me of ca∣lumnie or forgerie, without just cause. Neither let the Reader here expect an exact enumeration of all the Treasons, Conspiracies, Trecheries, Rebellions, Seditions, Con∣umacies, Warres, or State-schismes that our English Prelates have beene guilty of since they became potent Lords for many of them, no doubt, were so secretly contrived, and carryed by them, that the Historians of their imes could have no information of them; others of them were so palliated and countenanced by their owne over-swaying greatnesse, that none durst question, nor record them, thoug notorious and some of them were questionlesse concealed by our Histoians; who being for the most part Monkes, Priests, or the Prelates owne creatures, flatterers and dependants, out of fa∣vour or affection, did labour all they could to palliate, not to record or lay open their ghostly Fathers nakednesse in this kinde Neither have I collected every particular of this nature which our Historians relate, bu onely selected such presidents as I cursorily observed in ow Annals, and hastily collected for the most part long since, to which I presume, he diligent Reader may accumulate many more: yet these I conceive
are so many for number, so prodigious for circumstance, that they ex∣ceede both in multtude and heinousnesse all disloyall practises of like sort acted against our English Monarches, by all other their subjects, of what quality soever, the Nobles and others attainted formerly of Treason, Rebellion, and suffering for the same, being for the most part but the Prelates instruments, the chiefe Architects, Arch-plot∣ters and inciters of all the Conspiracies, Treasons, Rebellions, warres and dissentions that ever hapned in our Kingdome, and yet these Arch-traytors and Incendiaries commonly escaped the hand of Iustice by reason of their unholy holy Order, and appeales to Rome, when as their under-hand Instruments (though lesse culpable) received due exe∣cution. If then we consider the paucity of our Arch-Prelates, and Lord Bishops (of England of which there is but one in each See at a time when full, and sometimes none for divers yeares in times of vacancy) in comparison of the numerosity of the Nobility, Gentry, and Com∣monalty of England on the one side, and then on the other hand com∣pare the multitude of the Prelates notorious Treasons, Rebellions, Seditions, and Contumacies against their Kings, with thos of the Nobility, Gentry, Commons, which they farre exceede in number and notorius circumstances: Or if we observe with what an high hand these Prelates have acted, justified, defended these their villa∣nies, not onely by protecting, but canonizing the Authors of them for holy Saints and Martyrs (as Dunstane, Becket, Anselme, Hugh, and others) onely because they were Prelates; when as in truth they ought so much the rather, to have branded them for notorious Traytors and Rebels, execrable both to God and man: we must necessarily con∣clude their, NO BISHOP, NO KING, to e a notorious Bull; and, NO KING VNLESSE NO BISHOP, to be a more probable and most true Position; and that ou English Lord Bps (especially those of Canterbury, Primates of all England, nely in e∣vill for the most part) have beene the most notorious Traytors, Rebels, Conspirators, Incendiaries, Vipers, Pests, Grievances to the Kings and State of England, of all oters; and so by consequence, rather of Antichristian and Diabolicall, thn Divine or Apostolicall instiuti∣on; fit to be utterly extirpated both by King and Kingdome; neither of which shall long flourish in happinesse, piety, or tranquillity, whiles Lordly Prelates beare the sway, and manage the chiefe Temprall Of∣fices or Affaires, contrary to Christs owne expresse Inhibitions, Mat. 20.25, 26, 27 Luk 22.25.26. Act. 6.4. 2 Tim. 2.4. 1 Pet. 5.1, 33. Rom. 12.7, 8. 1 Joh 3.9, 10,
If any surmise, I write thus sharpely onely out of malice against our Prelates, I shall desire but this favour from them, to suspend their censures, till they have impartially surveyed the ensuing Par∣ticulars, (which I have sincerely related, as I finde them recorded, without flattery on the one hand, or malignity on the other;) and then I doubt not but they will change their mindes, and readily sub∣scribe to my Conclusions, ratified by so many ancient Presidents of old, and so many visible experiments fresh before our eyes. Now, because the Arch-Prelates of Canterbury (See Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 15. to 29. erected by Gregory the first his Bull, then Pope of Rome, which have engaged them ever since to be Popes sworne Vassals for the most part, and to imitate Popes in their most execrable Treasons and Conspiracies) have beene the Archest Taytors, Rebels, and Opposites to the Kings f England in all Ages, I shall for Order and Honour sake begin first with their Contumacies, Treacheries, and Rebellious practises, and that in a Chronologicall manner according to their severall Antiqui∣ties; and from them I shall descend to the Arch-bishops of Yorke, the greatest Arch-traytors and Rebels next to those of Canterbury; and then passe to oter of our Prelates in their order, with as much brevity and perspicuity as the subject matter will permit me; con∣cluding with such materiall observations against our Lordly Hierar∣chy, as shall be infallibly warranted by the ensuing Histories, and with such domesticke Authorities against Episcopacy, the Lordlinesse, Se∣cularity, wealth, and temporall imployments of our Prelates and their mischievousnesse both in Church and state, as I trust will abundant∣ly satisfie the most Episcopall men, whose arguments both for the pre∣tended Divinity, and perpetuity of Episcopacy in our Church, I hope I shall satisfactorily answere. But not to detaine you longer with a Prologue, I shall addresse my selfe to the subject matter, surveying the Bishops of Canterburies actions in the first place.
THE ANTIPATHIE OF THE ENGLISH LORDLY PRELACIE, BOTH TO REGALL MONAR∣CHY, AND CIVILL UNITY. CHAP. I. Containing the severall Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Sedi∣tions, Contumacies, Disloyalties of the Arch-bishops of Canter∣ury against their Soveraignes, Kings of England; the severall Warres, Tumults, Dissentions occasioned and raysed by them in, or against our Realme, with their manifold practises and attempts to undermine our Lawes. IN relating these Disloyalties of our holy Arh-Prelates of Canterbury, I cannot sing as the Poet once did, Virg. Eclg. 3. p. 8. Ab Iove principium Musae; Iovis omnia plena. (sith there is little of God in any of their actions I am now to relate:) unlesse I take Iove here, not for the true living
God, but for a meere Zuidas, Hlioke, Natals Comes, Diodus Siculus, Vao, and others, thus describe him. impious, treacherous, murthering, usurping Devill incarnate, who thrust his Father Saturne out of his Royall Throne, and injuriously possessed hmselfe of his Kingdome against all right and equity. And in this sense I may truely chaunt, Ab Iove principium, &c. since I must not onely begin, but proceede and end, with Devils incarnate, masked under a Plaes white Rocher, rather than with holy Fathers of the Church. ODO.One of the first men of this stampe that encounters me in the Sea of Canterbury, is Odo, surnamed the Severe, possessing this Poncall Chaire about the yeare of our Lord 940. This pragmaticall turbulent Arch-Prelate, as hee was Wil. Malms. de Gestis Pontificum Angl. l. 1. p. 201. Mat. West. Flores Hist. An. 955, 957, 958. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. Odo Sevrus, p. 46 47.51, 52, 53. Speeds History of Great Brit∣taine, l. 7. Mo∣narch. 29. p. 403.404 Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 137. Godwyns Catalogue of Bishops, p. 62, 64, 65. thrice in Armes in the Field, after he was made a Bishop, where he ought like a valiant Champion; so hee caused King Edwin, wih whom hee had very evill agreement, to bee divorced from his Queene, some say for consanguinity, others for other reasons: Whereupon the King betaking himselfe o his Concubines, Odo therepon suspended the King from the Church, excommunicated his Concubines, causing one of them, whom the King unreasonably doed upon, to bee fetcht out of the Court with violence, branded her in the fore-head with an hot Iron, and then banished her into Ire∣land: After which shee returning into England, Odo appre∣hends her the second time, and cuts off her sinewes at the ocke bone. The King being therewith much exasperated, spoyled all the Monkes of all their goods, banished Dunstan, the chiefe of the Monkes ino Flanders; (who, together with Cynesius, the Bishop on the day of this Kings Coronation, entred most audaciously into his Bed-chamber, and by vio∣lence dragged him both out of his Bed, and Bed-chamber, where they pretended hee was sporting with his Concubine) and threatned Odo, with severe punishments, who was taken a∣way by death soone after, and so delivered from all feare of the Kings displeasure. This Odo together with his Monkes, wrought so with the Subjects before his death, that the Mercians with the Northumbrians, did utterly cast off the yoake of obe∣dience to Edwin, and by an unanimous consent, made choyce of his Brother Edgar for their King, Deo dictante & populo annuente, God himselfe (to wit, by the mouth of Odo and the other Pre∣lates and Monks) dictating it, and the people thereunto consen∣ting,
writes Matthew Westminster. Arch-bishop Parker, and Bishop Godwin, in the life of Dunstan, Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury after Odo, record, That during the time of Dunstan his Banishment into France, King Edwin, by the Rebellion of his Subjects, See Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p 52.53. Ho∣linsh. Hist. of Eng∣land. l. 6. c. 21. p. 157. at the instigation, as is likely, of our Monkes, Prelates, and their favourers, was deprived both of his life and Kingdome: Whereupon Edgar, that succeeded him, warned by his Brothers example, was content to curry sa∣vour with them and Dunstan, creating him first Bishop of Worcester, next of London, and finally of Canterbury. A good reward for this his Treason. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 61.62. See part. 2. p. 227.228. Dunstan comming to the Arch-Bishopricke in this manner,DUNSTAN. not long after caused King Edward to be slaine by his Souldiers, for refusing to ayde the Bishop of Ro∣chester against his Brother Agelredus, who besieged that City and the Bishop: The Monkes of that time impute ths trecherous Act to Queene Alsdrith, his Mother in Law, and Gods Divine Judgement, to excuse their Patron Dun∣stan. After his Murther, (as In vita Sanct Editha. Iohn Capgrave and History of Great Brittaine, l. 7 c. 42. sect. 21. p. 409. c. 43. sect. 1. p. 410. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p 61, 62. Holinshed. Hist. of England. l. 6. c. 23 p. 59. l. 7. c. 1. p. 164.165. l. 6. c. 24. p. 161. c. 25. p. 162. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 201.202. Speed record) this holy Arch-Bishop Dunstan would have ad∣vanced Edgith his sister to the Crowne, and invested her against Etheldred the lawfull Heire, had she not by the late experience of Edwards fall, utterly refused that Title which neither belonged to h Right, nor was safe for her Person to undertake: Whereupon Dunstan and the Monkes perceiving that Queene Elfrida, Alferus Duke of Mercia, and many Nobles, combined for young Etheldred, the right Heie, disavowing Prince Edward (surnamed the Martyr) as illegitimate, did with all their might oppose Etheldred, holding their states dan∣gerous, and their new-gotten footing unsure, if in the Nonage of the King, Elfrida his Mother, and other their Opposites, should rule all under him, as was pro∣bable: For Elfrida hated Dunstan, because hee desired to hinder King Edgar from marying her, after he was con∣tracted to her; rushing An impudent audacious A. impudently into the Kings Bed-Chamber the first Night hee lay with her, demanding of the King, who it was he had in Bed with him? who an∣swering, that it was his Queene and Consort; Dunstan re∣plyed, that he could not marry her without offending God,
and breaking the institution of the Roman Church, because of the spirituall Kindred that was betweene them, he being her God-father, often warning the King to be divorced from her, which he refused. Wherefore, Dunstan and the Pelates considering that Edward was altogether wrought in their mould, they abetted his Title to the Crowne (though a Bastard) as one lawfully borne, and begot in the Nuptiall Bed of Queene Ethelfleda. Their Claimes thus banded among the Satesmen, began to be diversly affected among the Commons, and had put the Game to the Hazard, if the wisedome of Dunstan had not seene he Chase: For a Coun∣cell being assembled to argue their Rights, the Arch-bishop came in with his Banner and Crosse, and not staying for further debate de Iure, did de facto present King Edward for their lawfull King; and the Assembly consisting of Clergie men, perswading peace, drew the approbation of the rest; and so was hee admitted and proclaimed their Soveraigne, and after Malmsbury de Reg. Angl. l. 2. c. 10. p. 62. Speed l. 7. c. 43, 44. p. 413, 414. Crowned at Kingston by Dunstan, and the true Heire put by for the time by this Arch-Traytor Dunstan, and his Clergie; till about three yeares after Ed∣ward was murthered, by the procurement of Queene Elfrida, and Etheldred Crowned King by Dunstan, much against his will. This King, Dunstan and his Monkes con∣tinued to oppose For Math. Westm. An. 983. p. 379. Speed p. 414. Ant. Eccles. Brit. 61. Malms. de Gestis Regum Angl. l. 2. c. 10. p. 62. Holinshed History of Englad l. 7. c. 1. Etheldred conceiving a just in∣dignation against the Bishop of Rochester for his obstinacie and contumacious carriage towards him, thereupon be∣sieged his Citie: Whereupon Dunstan commanded the King to desist from his purpose, lest hee should provoke Saint Andrew, the Patron of that City; which the King refusing to doe, without the Bishops submission, and unlesse hee would likewise pay him an hundred pounds Dunstan wondring thereat, sent this Message to the King: Because thou hast preferred Silver before God, Money before an Apostle, and Covetousnesse before me, violent mischiefes shall come upon thee, which the Lord ath spoken. Such an Arch-Traytor and proud imperious Prelate was this Arch-Bishop Dunstan. And if his Saint was such, what thinke you may his Suc∣cessors prove, who were not so holy as to be Canonized? This Dunstan Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 52, 53. Holinshed Hist. of England, l. 6. c. 22 p. 158. before hee became Arch bishop of Can∣terbury, caused King Etheldred to peferre him before all his
Nobles, and to ay up all his richest Royall Household-stuffe, Charters, Records, with all his Wealth and Treasures in his Monasterie; and finally, to commit his very Kingdome, Body and Soule, to him: so that all things were in Dunstans power, the King not daring to doe any thing, either in pub∣like Affaires of the Kingdome, or in his owne private Nego∣tiations, without Dunstans advice; so that he alone exercised Royall Authority in every place. In and by which, he wholly imployed his endeavours, how to enrich those Mo∣nasteries with Lands and Revenues, which himselfe had founded, or the Danes wasted, wasting the Kings Treasury, and appropriating the Crowne Lands to this purpose: Which, when King Edwyn comming to the Crowne, sought to resume, Dunstan much displeased herewith, sharpely re∣prehended him, then affronted him, and at last caued him to be murthered, as is before remembred. And for all this good service, he was not onely made an Arch-Prelate, but a Saint. Siricius, SIRICIUS. Malms. de Gst. Potif. l. 1. f. 203. de Gestis Rgum Ang. l. 2. c. 10. p. 62. Hery H∣tingdon, Hist. l. 5. p. 357. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 64. Godwins Catal. of Bishops, p. 65. Hlinshd Hist. of Engl. l. 7. c. 2. p. 166. his next Successor but one, consilio infausto, by an unhappie, if no perfidious Traytorly advice, perswaded King Etheldred, in the thirteenth yeare of his Raigne, to buy his Peace of the Danes at ten thousand pound annuall Rent, to the ignominie and almost utter destruction of he whole Kingdome: Which evill (writes Henry Huntingdon) hath continued to this very day, and will longer endure, un∣lesse Gods mercy helpe us. For now wee pay that to our Kings out of Custome, which was payd to the Danes out of unspeakeable feares. (Yea, we a this day have ared the worse for this President, it being much insisted on, to justifie the late Taxe of Ship-Money.) Such perfidious and pernicious Counsellers of State have these Prelates beene, in teaching Princes in every Land to lay new Exactions on, and Tyrannize more and more over their Subjects. Woe (saith M. Tindall obe∣dience of a Chri∣stian Man, p. 116.152. Mr. Tyndall) is to the Realmes where they are of the Councell; as profitable are they to the Realmes with their Counsell, as the Wolves unto the Sheepe, or the Foxes unto the Geese: As was this Arch-Prelate, who is much blamed in our Histories for this his advice. ROBERT. Robert Arch-Bishop of Canterbury layd the first founda∣tion of the Normans Conquest in England, perswading King
Edward to make Duke William his Heire;Wil. Malms. de Gestis Pontiicum Angl. l. 1. p. 204. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 73. to 79. Godwyns Catalo∣gue of Bishops, p. 68, 69, 70. Speed. l. 7. c 3. p. 203.413.414. Holinshed. Hist. of England. l. 8. c. 2.4. Whereunto when he had condiscended, himselfe became the Messenger of this good tidings unto the Duke, taking Harold with him, that he might hamper him with an oath (as hee did in∣deede) and so barre him from all possibility of the King∣dome: which Oath he breaking afterward, lost both his lie and Kingdome together. The Arch-Bishop now assu∣ring himselfe of the favour of the King not onely present but him that was to succeede, could not endure that any should beae so great sway as himselfe in Court; and there∣fore fell to devise, how he might overthrow See here the Pride, malice, de∣sperate ambition and impietie of Arch-Prelates, thus injuriously to set the Sonne against the Mo∣ther. Emma the Kings Mother, who onely served to over-top him. Hee be∣gan therefore to beae into the Kings head, how hard a hand his Mother had held upon him, when he lived in Norman∣die; how likely it was, that his Brother came by his death by the practise of her and Earle Godwyn; and that she used the company of Alwyn, Bishop of Winchester, somewhat more familiarly then was for her honour. The King some∣what too rashly crediting these Tales, without any further examination of this matter, seized upon all his Mothers goods, and committed her to Prison, in the Nunnery of Warwell, banished Earle Godwyn and his sonne, and com∣manded Alwyn upon paine of death, not to come forth of the Gates of Winchester. The Queene made the best friends she could, to be called to her answere; but the Arch-bishop so possessed the King, as other tryall of her innocencie might not bee allowed then this; shee must walke over nine Plough-shares red hot in the midst of the Cathedrall Church of Winchester: If shee performed not this Purga∣tion, or were found any thing at all hurt, she and the Bishop both should bee esteemed guilty; if otherwise, the Arch-Bishop was content to submit himselfe to such punishment as they should have endured. The Arch-Bishops Autho∣rity was then so prevalent over the most powerfull per∣sons, that the Queene her selfe, neither by her owne power, nor of the King her Sonne, nor of the Nobles and Bishops, nor by any other meanes than by her innocencie, could keepe off this so notorious an injury and contumely, theLoe how Bi∣shops Lord and Tyrannize it over Kings themselves. King and Bishops being forced to approve this most severe Edict of the Arch-Bishop, against their wills: Where∣upon
the Queene, led by two Bishops, in the open sight of the people, did this hard Purgation, and o acquitted her self and Alwyn of the Crimes objected- The King then greatly bewayling the wrong done to his Mother by the Arch-Bishops malicious false suggestions, asked her forgivenesse upon his knees, restored her and the Bishop to their goods and places; and to make satisfaction, would needes be whip∣ped by the hands of the Bishops there present; and receiving three stripes of his Mother, was by her clearely forgiven. The Arch-bishop, the author and plotter of all this stirre and mischiefe, fearing the successe of this matter, held him∣selfe at Dover, under pretence of sickenesse; and as soone as he heard how the world went, knowing England to be too hot for him, got him over to the Abbey of Gemmeticum; where overcome with shame and sorrow, he there shortly after ended his dayes: the King having passed a publike Sentence against him and his confederates, Malmes. de Ge∣sts Regum Angl. l. 2. c. 13. p. 82. Quod Statum Regni contur∣barant, &c. That they had disturbed the State of the Kingdome, stirring up the Kings mind against his Mother and faithfull subjects, whereupon he was deprived. Malmes. de Gest. Pont. Angl. l. 1. p. 205. de Gestis Reg. Ag. l. 3. p. 102. Ant. Eccl. Brit. p. 89.90.91 Speeds History l. 9. c. 2. p. 435, 436, 437. Poli∣chron. l. 6. c. 29. l. 3. c. 1, 2, 3, 4. Mat. West. An. 1067, 1070. Godns Catal. of Bishop p 71, 72 73. Holnshed Vol. 3. p. 8, 9. Hist. of Engl. l. 8. c. . Stigand,STIGAND. placed in his Sea before his death, after William the Conquerour had slaine Harold, and vanquished his Armie in Battlefield; Edwyn and Mercar endeavoured to Crowne Edgar, Etheling, the rightull Heire; to whos side, most of the Nobles, the Citizens of London, with the Navall Forces, adhered; and so did Aldred, Arch-Bishop of Yorke: who presently, with the other Prelates, ell off to William the Conquerour, being the stronger side, (to whom the Pope had sent a consecrated Banner, an Agnus Dei, and one of Saint Peters haires, in way of good speed) refusing to side with the Lords, whereupon their designements were all suddenly quashed. But Arch-bishop Sigand, and Eglesigne Abbot of Saint Augustines, assembling all the Kentish men together, encouraged them to stand for their Liber∣ties, though with the losse of their lives; and marching before them as their Generalls, enclosed him and his Armie by a Stratagem, with Branches of trees, their Banners displayed, and Bows bent, and so purchased a confirmation of their Freedomes and Customes from him, by way of composition. Then comming to London, the
Conquerour refused to be Crowned by Stigana, Aldred ArchBishop of Yorke performing this Ceremonie on he day of Christs Nativitie, Anno. 1066. Stigand not long after, and Alexander Bishop of Lincolne, fled int Scotland, where they kept themselves close for a season; and at last returning, King William departe into Normandie, knowing Stigand to be of a crafty Pate, and perfidious heart, and of great power among his Kentish men, carryed him over Sea with him, lest he hould raise new stirres, and cause a Re∣volt from him in England during his absence: and then re∣turning into England, he caused him (with other Bishops that had beene reacherous to him) to be deposed from his Arch-Bishopricke in a Synod at Winchester, for holding the Bishop of Winchester in Commendam with his Arch-Bishopricke; for invading the Sea of Canterbury, whiles Robert lived for using his Pal, left at Canterbury; for Simonie, and to prevent him from raising any further Tumults. Mat. Paris hist Major, p. 8. Speed hist. l. 9. c. 2. p. 441.443. Holnsh. p. 8, 9. The King after his degra∣dation, spoyling him of his goods, committed him to perpetual Prison; where at last he was starved with hunger, refusing to reveale those infinite Treasures which hee had heaped up in store, to worke some mischiee, which were discovered after his death. Not long after which, plures Episcopi & Abbaes, many Bishops and Abbots joyned in a Conspiracie with Ralph de Ware, and Roger Earle of Hereford, against the Con∣querour, to thrust him out of his Kingdome: such faithfull Subjects were they to their Soveraigne, to whom they had sworne allegeance. LANFRANK. William the Conquerour dying, Ma. West. Au. 1088, 1089, 1090. Mat. Pari p. 13.14. Wil. Mals. de Gest. Reg. Agl. l. p. 4.120, 121. Antiq. Eccl. Brt. p. 100. Godis Catal. of Bps, p. 74.75. Speed, l. 9. c. 3. p. 456.457. to 464. Holinsh. Vol. 3. p. .17, 18. by the perswasion of Lanfranke Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, (who had brought up William Rufus from his Child-hood) he left the Crowne of England to his younger sonne William, putting the eldest son Robert from the Crowne, which was due unto him. In which Action, God blessed not the Arch-Bishop: for the King (though thus advanced and Crowned by him, and the Pre∣lates, against all right, and the approbation of the Nobles and People, who stood for Robert) fell out with him, ba∣nished him the Realme, as being overbusie and pragmaticall; till at last, with much adoe, he mediated his peace. Now, what was this but an act of Treason, Treachery, and injustice, to thrust the right Heie from the Crown, and set up an Usurper?
Which, as it procured many bloody Warres betweene the two Brethren, so it brought great misery on the whole Realme, as the Histories of those times witnesse; and pro∣cured himselfe much blame. Speed, l. 5. c. 3. Sect. 34. p. 463. This Arch-Prelate Lanfranke, was used by Pope Gregory before this exploit of his, for the undermining of William the Conqueror, and the subjecting both of him and his State to the Papacie; which he endevou∣ring, but not effecting, his Holinesse growing angry with this Agent, Lanfrancke cleared himselfe of the blame, shewing him how diligently,Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 100. (but indeede treacherously) he had be∣stirred himselfe in counselling to sweare to yeeld obedience and doe fealty to the Pope: Suasi, sed non persuasi, saith he, I have so advised him, but I could not perswade him. O perfidi∣ous, ungratefull counsell and swasion of this Prelate, to make his Soveraigne and his Realme meee Vassals to the Pope! This Lanfrancke so farre offended William Rufus, that he banished him the Land, whereupon he went to Rome, and tra∣velled over divers Countries in Exile; till a writing on a cer∣taine night falling as it were from heaven into the hands of a Clerke, wherein it was written that William Rufus was slaine (which afterwards came to passe) he heard the newes of Rufus his death, and thereupon returned againe to his See of Canter∣bury, and there dyed of a Feaver. Eadmerus Hist. noorum, l. 1.2.3. Speed, l. 9. c. 3. sect. 33.34, 35. p. 462, 463, 464 Malms. de gestis Pontif. Anl 1 . 219. to 230. Antiq. Eles. Brit. p. 10, &c. Godn Catal. of Bishops, p. 76. &c. For Acts and Monument. p. 169, 170.171, &c. Holinsh. Vol.  f. 22. to 36. Walham, Ypo∣digma Nustr. p. 35. Anselme Arch-Bishop of Canterbury,ANSELME. his immediate suc¦cessour, presently after his Consecration sell into contestation with his Soveraigne William Rufus, naming and accepting Vr∣ban to be Pope, before the King had acknowledged him to be so; for which, and for his over-sawcie speeches and carri∣riage to the King, and his refusing to acknowledge his fau, he was commanded out of the Realme, all the Prelates of Eng∣land, except onely Gundalfus Bishop of Rochester, assenting to the King against Anselme, that he was guilty of High Treason, for attempting to deprive the Crowne of sundry Prerogatives Royall belonging to it to wit, That no Arch-Bishop nor Bishop of the Kingdomes should be subject to the Pope, or Court of Rome, with whom they had nought to do: That none ought to be received for Pope in this Realm, but him whom the King and state had first approved: That none should appeale to Rome in any case without the Kings li∣cense: and for siding with the Pope, and preferring him above his Soveraigne Pope Vrban used Anselm as his instrument to draw
the King to his beck, and to subject the Crowne and Kingdom to his will; which incredible pride and Popish incroachments of his, attempted by the meanes of Anselme, and other chiefe Prelates of the Kingdome, caused the King for prevention of further mischefes, to banish th Rebellious Trayterly Pre∣late; who repairing to the Pope, where hee had good enter∣tainement, made many complaints against his Soveraigne, whose death he both plotted and conspired; as is probable by that Vision which Anno 1091. p. 1. Matthew Westminster records to have ap∣peared to Anselme during his exile, wherein he saw God, at the prayers of the Saints in England, deliver a fiery Arrow to Mar∣tyr Saint Alban, who delivered it to an evill Spirit, an avenger of wickednesse, that cast it flying like a Comet throw the ayre, understanding presently in the Spirit, that the King wounded and shot with that Arrow, perished that night he saw this Visi∣on. Wherupon celebrating the Masse very early the next mor∣ning he packed up his clothes, Books, and other things which he would have carried with him, and forthwith began his jour∣ney towards his Church of Canterbury, to which when he came neere, he heard the King was slaine about the same time; he ha∣ving, in all likelihood, before that plotted with and hired Wal∣ter Tyrell the French Knight (who shot the King in the brest with an Arrow in stead of the Sag he was chasing) to murther the King in this manner about that time; which fore-plotted Treason was the occasion of this Vision: True it is, that the Monkes who favoured Anselme, and writ the Histories of those times impute this murther onely to a casualty, as if the Arrow had glanced against a Tree, and so by accident slaine the King, who with one only groane fell downe and dyed: But certaine∣ly this Vision with many other of that nature, registred by our Mat. Paris Hist. Major, p. 51, 52. Caxton Pars. 7. in his life. Wil. Mams. de gestis Rg. Angl. l. 4. p. 125.126. Eadmerus hist. Novrum. l. 2, 3. Huntingd. Hist. l. 7. p. 378. Mat. Westm. An. 1100 p. 21. Godwins Catal. p. 77. Monks compared with other circumstances; as the great ha∣tred of the Clergie, Monkes, and Prelates towards him, his premonition not to ride abroad a hunting that day, that Tyrell and the King were alone, and all the company else scattered from him when this was done; that most of his followers as soone as they heard of it made away; that Tyrell so easily esca∣ped without any prosecution for this fact; that the Kings Corpes was layd by some few Country Peasants onely (all the rest forsaking him) into a Colliers Cart, drawne with one sil∣ly beast, through a very foule and filthy way, where the Car
breaking, he lay pittifully goared, and filthily bemired, that he was obscurely buried at Winchester the next day following, not onely without any state or solemnity, but without any teares, In cujus Sepultura lachrymae locum prae gaudio non habeant (saith Matthew Paris;) that there were so ma∣ny predictions of his death by Monkes; that Anselme had such speedy notice of it, and provided for his returne to England the next morning after: These severall circum∣stances, I say, compared with Anselmes Vision, are strong arguments to me, that his death was not casuall, but plotted by this Arch-Prelate and his instruments, to end the controversies then betweene them. This King being thus dispatched, Mat West. An. 1102.1104.1107. Eadmeu Hist. l. 3, 4, 5. & vita Anselm. Malms. de gestis Pontif. Angl. l. 1. in vita Anselm. Mat. Paris Hist. Major, p. 56, 57 60. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 103. to 111. Godwins Catalogue of Bi∣shops, p. 78, 79, 80. M. Tindals practise of the Popish Prelates, p. 374. Speeds Hist. of Great Brit. l. 9. p. 463, 469, 472. King Henry the first succeeded him, calls home Anselme from his Exile; who immediately upon his returne deprived divers Bishops and Abbots in a Convocation at London, and presently after fell out with this King also, as hee had done with William Rufus, for disposing of all Bishoprickes that fell at his pleasure, giving investiture and possession of them by the delivery of a Staffe and a Ring, according as his predecessors had done, and all Princes generally used to doe in that Age; whereupon Anselme denying this Prerogative to his Soveraigne, refused both to conse∣crate any of the Bishops thus elected, and appointed, or to repute any of those, already consecrated by such election, for lawfull Bishops; alledging, that it was laely prohibited by Pope Vrban the second, in a Councell held under him, that any Clerke should take the investiture of any spirituall preerment from the hand of any King, Prince, or Layman: The King upon An∣selmes refusall, required Gerard Arch-Bishop of Yorke to give these Bishops Consecration; whereunto hee readily assented; but William Giffard nominated to Winchester, stood so in awe of Anselme, that he durst not accept conse∣cration at Gerards hands. This incensed the King wonder∣fully, so as presently hee commanded Giffards goods to be confiscate, and himselfe banished the Realme: great adoe there was throughot the Realme about this matter, some defending the Kings right, others taking part with the Bishops: The King thinking to pacifie the Controversies,
sent an Ambassador to the Pope, together with the Arch∣bishop, to grow to some reasonable conclusion: aseall the second, who then was Pope, would not yeeld one jot unto the King, animated no doubt by Anselme, a man so re∣solute in his quarrell: insomuch that when the Kings Am∣bassadour William Wartlewast sayd, he knew the King would rather lose his Crowne than this priviledge; he answered, Yea, let him lose his head also if he will, whilst I live, hee shall never appoint Bishop, but I will resist him what I may. So without doing any good, homeward they came. The King understanding before-hand how the world went, sent a Messenger to forbid Anselme to enter into the Realme, & presently seized all his goods, movables, and immovables into his hands. After three yeares Exile, Anselme at the im∣portunate mediation of Adila Countesse of Bloys the Kings Sister, was restored, upon these conditions; that hee should be content to consecrate the Bishops already nominated by the King, and that the King should renounce all right to such nominations and investitures for time to come: No sooner returned he againe, but hee kindled a fresh com∣bustion, by enforcing all married Priests to forsake their wives, depriving them of their goods, Benefices, and ad∣judging their wives Adulteresses. The King upon their complaint, pittying their case (halfe of the Priests of Eng∣land being then married, mediates for them, and protected them a while from Anselmes severity, granting them Licen∣ses to retaine their wives; but hee (a man alwayes most peremptory in his resolution) would not be perswaded to yeeld one jot in this or any other thing hee intended: so that notwithstanding the Kings inclination to succour them, many of them were miserably vexed; which ingendred a new quarrell betweene him and the King: In a word, this rebellious traytorly Prelate, did so good service for the Pope against these two Kings (whom hee caused to be in a manner excommunicated by the Pope, and subjugate to his pleasure) that in favour of him, he afforded to his See this honour, That whereas the Arch-bishop of Canterbury was wont to sit next the Bishop of Ruffine in Generall Coun∣sels, hereafter his place should be at the Popes right Foote, and withall used these words, Includamus hunc in Orbe nostro
tanquam Papa alterius orbis, Let us include this man in our world, as the Pope of another world. In a word, King Wil∣liam Rufus was so vexed with Anselme, William Bishop of Durham, and other rebellious Prelates, thatDe Ge.  Angl. l  123. William of Milmesbury records of him, That he animated the Iewes at London to enter into a Dispute against our Bishops, telling them (in merriment, as this Historian conceived) that if they overcame the Christians by manifest Arguments, that he would be of their Sect. Therefore this thing was acted with great feare of the Bishops and Clergie-men, affected with a pious solicitude of the Christian Faith. But in this Combate, the Iewes obtained nothing but confusion; although they often boasted, that they were not over∣come by Argumentation, but by the Faction of the Pre∣lates. This fire-brand of Contention departing this life, Ralph of Canterbury,RALPH. his immediate Successor, an insolent cholerick proud Prelate, offered two such notable affronts to King Henry the first, his Soveraigne, who advanced him to this Sea, as no Age (I thinke) can parallell. For Eadmerus, hist. Novorum, l. . p. 137. Rogerus d de Costrias Antiq. Eccl. Btis. p. 111, 112. Polichron. l. 7. c. 15. Speeds History of Great Britaine, p. 475. King Henry having assembled all his Nobles to Windsor Castle; to con∣sult with them about his Marriage with Adelicia, his second Wife, Daughter to the Duke of Loraine; the Bishop of Salisbury being requested both by the King and Queene to solemnize the Marriage betweene them, and clad in his holy Vestments, ready to performe this service, this decrepit resty proud Arch-Prelate commanded him to desist, con∣trary to the King and Queenes Precept and desire, and committed that service to the Bishop of Winchester, who performed it. After which, Adelicia being solemnly to bee Crowned Queene at London, on the Feast of Pentecost, in the presence of the King and Nobles, this Arch-Prelate as hee was chaunting Masse at the High Altar in his Pontificalibus, to grace this Solemnity, espyed the King sitting on his Royall Throne with his Crowne upon his head: Where∣upon he grew into such choler, that intermitting his begun Masse, he goes to the King, thus sitting in the Church on his Throne amidst his Nobles, and demands of him in bigge words, Who it was that had set the Crowne upon his head? (hee being Crowned by Thomas Arch-Bishop of Yorke, in the ab∣sence
of Anselme of Canterbury:) To which the King re∣plyed: It is no great matter to me who did it, and it was done so long since, that I remember not who it was. But the Arch-Bishop enraged with choler, auswered: That who∣ever had done it, did it wrongfully and unjustly; therefore thou shalt either cease to weare thy Crowne, or else I will desist from saying Masse. The King nothing moved herewith, answered with a pleasant and mild countenance: If this Crowne, as thou sayest, be not lawfully set on my head, you may doe that which you conceive to bee agreeable to Law, I will not gaine-say it. At which words, the Arch-Bishop approached neerer him, and lifting up his hands to pull the Kings Crowne from off his head, whiles the King was untying the Button under his Chinne, by which his Crowne was tyed on his head, the Nobles admiring the Kings modestie, and the Arch-Bishops anger and arrogancie, cryed out with one voyce against the Arch-Prelate, and earnestly enteated him, That in the solemne Coronation of the Queene, he would not uncrowne the King him∣selfe. With whoe clamours Ralph being overcome, desisted fom this his insolent attempt, and standing by the King, began the Song, Glory be to God on high; and then pro∣ceeded in his Masse. Polichon. l. 7. c. 15. Higden (and Speed, p. 475. Speede out of him) records, That this testie old man could hardly be entreated by the Nobles to with-hold his hands from striking the Crowne off the Kings head; and that even in the Church; in the presence of all his Lords, his Queene, and God himselfe: of such an high spirit then was this devout Arch-Prelate. From hence (writes Antiq. Eccls. Brit. p. 112. Matthew Parker) it may be discerned, how unseasonably and impudently these kind of men abused the lenity of this Prince, who thought themselves more worthy in holinesse than others, and deemed they had an im∣periall command over Princes. WILLIAM.This furious proud Prelate being dead, Polychron. l. 7. c. 18. Fabian. pars 7. c. 232. pag. 333. &c. Malmb. Hist. l. 1. p. 178, 179. Matth. Paris Hist. Major, p. 71. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 115. Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, p. 83. Speeds Hist. l. 9. p. 484, 493, 494. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 181. Hovd. Annal pars prior, p. 481. William Corbell his next Successor, was so good and trusty a subject to King Henry the first, who advanced him, that upon the Kings death, hee was content to betray and dis-inherite of the
Crowne his Daughter Maud the Empresse, and Willlmus Can∣tuariensis Archi-epicopus qui pri∣mus Sacramentum fecerat, cum, pro∣dolor, in Regem benedixit, Hove∣dn, p. 481. contrary to his Oath, to joyne with Stephen Earle of Bloys, whom he Crowned with his owne hands, but with such feare and ter∣rour of Conscience, that the consecrated Host fell out of his hands in the midst of Masse, by reason of his trembling and fearefull amazednesse. In his Chro∣nicles. Vol. 3. p. 46. in the lfe of King Stephen. Raphael Holinshed his rela∣tion of this Fact, is worthy observation: Stephen (writes hee) was Crowned at Westminster on Saint Stephens day by William Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the most part of the Nobility being present, and swearing Fealty unto him, as to their true and lawfull Soveraigne: Howbeit, there were di∣verse of the wiser sort of estates, which regarding their for∣mer Oath (to bee true unto the Empresse Maude) could have beene contented, that the Empresse should have governed till her Sonne had come to lawfull age; notwithstanding they held their peace as yet, and consented unto Stephen. But the breach of their Oathes was worthily punished afterward, insomuch, that as well the Bishops, as the other Nobles, either dyed an evill death, or were afflicted with divers kinds of calamities and mischances, and that even here in this life. Yet there were some of them (namely the Bishop of Salisbury) which protested, that they were free from their Oath of Allegeance made to the sayd Empresse, because that without the consent of the Lords of this Land, she was marryed out of the Realme: Whereas they tooke their Oath, to receive her for Queene upon that condition, That without their assent she should not marry with any person out of this Realme. Moreover, (as some writers thinke) the Bishops tooke it, they should do God good service, in providing for the wealth of the Realme, and the advancement of the Church, by their Note this, Perjurie. For, whereas the late deceased King (Henry the first) used him∣selfe not altogether for their purpose, they thought, That if they might set up and create a King chiefely by their especiall meanes and authority, he would follow their counsell better, and refome such things as they judged to be amisse: So He. But this trecherous Act of them, in dis-inheriting Maude, (wherein the Bishop of Wihester was a chiefe Actor, yet afterwards joyned with Maude for a season, and then fell off againe) what Civill Warres, Tumults, Bat∣tailes, evill effects, and blood-shed it occasioned here
in England, to the prejudice of the whole Realme,  all our Chronicles and Historians, in the life of King Stephen, testi∣fie at large. Theobald,THEO∣BALD. Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, his immediate Suc∣cessour Nubrigensis, l. 1. c. 10. An. Eccls. Brit. p. 117.118. Godwin Catalogue of Bi∣shops, p. 85.86. Speedes Hist. p. 496, 497. being summoned by the Pope to appeare at the Councell of Rhemes, the King (at the instigation of Henry Bishop of Winchester his Brother, the Popes Legat and Arch-Bishops opposite) prohibited him to passe beyond Sea, to stay him at home: But he thinking it safer to offend the King then the Pope, resolved to goe; and though all the Ports were stopped, and layd for him, yet over the Seas hee got. The King thereupon seized all his goods and Tempo∣ralties, and banished him the Realme: he like a tall fellow, thereupon interdicted the King, with the whole Realme; and taking advantage of the time, which was very trouble∣some, came home and lived in Norfolke, till by the intercessi∣on of the Bishops he was restored to his Bishopricke. After which, growing into great favour with the King, in a Con∣vocation summoned at London 1152. the King would have constrained the Clergie to make Eustace his sonne, King: which they refusing, and delaying to doe, having a command from the Pope to the contrary, pretending that his Father King Stephen was an Usurper, and perjured Intruder; the King and his sonne caued the doores to bee shut upon the Clergie, where they were assembled, thinking by force and threatning to compell them thereto, before they departed. The greater number seemed to yeeld, but the Arch-Bishop stealing secretly out of the place, tooke his Barge, and row∣ing downe the Hlishd, Vol. 3. p. 57, 59. Thames, got beyond Sea; so that by this meanes the Synod was dissolved. His goods hereupon were presently once more confiscate, and his Temporalties seized into the Kings hands. He thereupon troubled the Realme with Fire, Sword, and bloody Warres, causing Henry Fitz-Empresse to invade the Land, whose Title the Pope favoured, of purpose to strengthen himselfe against King Lewis of France, who had highly offended his Holinesse, by casting his Bulls (whereby he require the Fruites of Vacancies of Ca∣thedrall Churches in France) into the fire, saying, Hee had rther the Popes Bulls should rst in the fire, than his owne Soule shold fry in Hell.
BECKEY. Antiq. Eccls. Brit. p. 118. to 124. Godwins Catal. 86. to 96. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 186. to 206.1036.1390. Speede Hist. p 503. to 5016. Holinshd, p. 69. to 81. Rger de Hveden. Annal. posterior, p. 491. to 534. Matthew Paris, p. 94. to 127. Math. West. An. 1166. p. 48.49.50. Thomas Becket succeeding Theobald, by King Henry the seconds extraordinary favour (though against the Canons, he being both a souldier, a Courtier, and skilled onely in ecular affaires,) to require his Soveraignes extraordinary favour, he first resigned his Bishopricke, which hee had received from the Kings hands, into the Popes in a secret manner, receiving it backe againe as from him; and then looked so narrowly into the Lands belonging to his See, having great authority, and some skill in the Law, That under colour of defending the Rites of his Church, hee tooke violently from every man what he listed: and pra∣ctising Treason secretly, he required of the King the kee∣ping of Rochester Castle, and the custody of the Tower of London; and called Roger Earle of Clare unto Westminster, to doe his homage unto him for the Castle of Tunbridge; which the Earle denyed, through the setting on of the King; so as he provoked many of all sorts of people every where with open mouth to exclaime against him, and to make their complaints thicke and three-fold to the King; be∣tweene whom and the King there arose a great quarrell up∣on this occasion. The Clergie by their flattery, policy and Canons, having exemped themselves from secular Juris∣diction, and presuming upon Beckets power, grew strangely impudent and disorderly; insomuch, that theNeubrigensis Hist. l. 2. c. 16. Speedes Hist. l. 9. p. 503.504. Bi∣shop Iwel, De∣fence of the A∣pologie, par. 2. c. 18. Divis. 1. p. 295, 296. Chiefe Ju∣stice declared in the Kings presence, how that Clergie men had committed above an hundred murthers since his raigne; wherewith the King highly offended, he became some∣what too vehement in punishing them; but the blame of the Kings over-much earnestnesse must lye on the Prelates, inasmuch as they gave the cause thereof: For whereas sa∣cred Canons ordaine, that Clerkes found guilty, not onely of hainous and grievous sinnes, but also of lesser, should be degraded, and thousands of such were then in the Church of England, like inumerable chaffe among a little good Corne, yet very few such for many yeares had beene then deprived. The Prelates, forsooth, while Lo th Picture of our late times, and the cause of the inrease of scandalou Mi∣nisters they bestirred themselves rather to uphold the liberties and dignities of Clerkes, than to chastise and cut off their vices, thought they did God and his Church good service, in protecting from publicke Discipline such heinous offenders, whom by
duty of their places they ought to correct according to the Canon censure; whereby they thrugh their impunity, having liberty to doe what they listed, had neither feare of God, (whose Judgement they thought to be a farre off) neither of men in authority; sith on the one side their Pre∣lates neglected to reforme them, and on the other side they were thus exempt by their order from secular Juris∣diction. This being the state of the Church and Realme, where in some were so injured without remedy, and others so injurious without coertion, as if neither sort were in condition of Subjects; the king thereupon tooke speciall care of quickning the publicke Discipline, and the rigour of ancient awes which thus lay neglected, and thereupon would, that all such of the Clergie as were deprehnded in any Robbery, Murther, Felony, burning of houses, and the like, Roger Hveden, An. 1163. should be tryed and adjuged in his tem∣porall Courts as Lay men were: Against which the Arch-Bishops resolution was: That Clergie-men so offending should be tryed onely in the Spirituall Courts, and by men of their owne Coat: who, if they were convict, should at first be onely deprived of their Ofice and Benefice, but if they should againe be guiltie of the like, they should be adjud∣ged at the kings pleasure. In this maine controversie be∣tweene the Crowne and the Mitre, the Arch-Bishop stood so peremptory on the immunities of his Clergie and See, as that he challenged from the Crowne (to the Kings great offence) the custody of Rochester Castle and other Forts, which the King for securing his State, had resumed into his owne hands. The King finding himselfe to be hereby but a demi-king, deprived of all Soveraignty over one halfe deale of his Kingdome, and perceiving Beckets stiffe∣nesse in thus contesting with his Soveraigne, to be no wayes mollifiable by whatsoever his old favours or fresh perswasions, notwithstanding resolved to put nothing in execution which should not first be ratified and strength∣ned with the consent of his Bishops: Who thereupon assembling at Westminster, the King tooke both offence there at the Arch-Bishops thwarting his desires and occa∣sions to establish sundry Articles, which hee called his Grandathers Customes, peremptorily urging Becket to
yeeld thereunto, without any such reservation, (as saving in all things his order and right of the Church) wherewith hee would have limited his assent. The points in those ordinances which he principally stucke at, as appeares by his owne Let∣ter to the Pope, were these: 1. That none should appeale to the Bishop of Rome for any cause whatsoever, without the Kings license. 2. That it should not be lawfull for any Arch-Bishop or Bishop to depart the Realme, or repaire to the Pope upon his summons, without the Kings license. 3. That no Bishop should excommunicate any man holding of the King in chiefe, or put any other of his Officers under interdict, without the Kings license. 4. That Clerkes criminous should be tryed before secular Iudges. 5. That it should not be lawfull for a Bishop to punish any one for perjury, or faith-breach. 6. That the Laity, whether the King or other, should hold pleas of Churches and Tithes, &c. These points so neerely touched the Papall Soveraigntie and Church-liberties, that the resolute Metropolitane mainely opposed his whole power against them. The King being as resolute to enforce him to subscribe to them, both to nlarge his Soveraigne authority, and to exempt his estate by degrees from dependancie on any externall Go∣vernment, as lineally claiming from absolute Soveraigne Antecessors. At last Pope Alexander very desious to keepe the Kings love, though secretly wishing well to Beckets attempts, sent one Philip his Almoner to compose the controversie; by whom the Pope and Cardinalls re∣quired the Arch-Bishop to promise the King to keepe his sayd Ordinances absolutely; without any savings or exceptions. Whereupon Becket seeing his Scrupulo∣sitie thus disapproved by his Soveraigne, by all his Brethren the Bihops, and the Court of Rome it selfe, hee rode to Woodstocke to the King, and there pro∣mised that he would keepe the sayd Lawes Bna fide, and without male engin. The King thereupon supposing now all contradictions would cease, called an Assembly
of the States at Claendon, to collect and enact those Lawes; where Becket relapsing from his former promise to the King, sayd, He had grievously sinned in making that absolute Oath, and that he would not sinne any more. At which the King was so vehemently inflamed, that hee threatned banishment and destruction to him and his. But at last the Arch-Bishop being overcome by perswasions of divers Nobles and Bi∣shops sware before the King, Clergie and people in the word of a Priest, and sincerely, that he would observe the Lawes which the King intituled, Avitae: And all the Bi∣shops, Abbots, Priors, and whole Clergie with all the Earles, Barons, and Nobilitie did promise and sweare the ame faithfully and truly to observe and performe to the King and his Heires for ever. But when the King not so contented, would have him to subscribe and fixe his Seale to an instrument, in which these Customes and Lawes were comprised, as every one of the other Bishops had done b∣fore him; he once againe starting from his faith, did ab∣solutely refuse it; alledging, that hee did promise to doe the King some honour in word onely, but not with an in∣tent to confirme these Articles, being 16. in number; nei∣ther would he subscribe or seale them, unlesse the Pope by his Bull did first confirme them. The King hereupon sent two Embassadours to Rome to the Pope, to crave his allow∣ance of those Lawes, and to pray that the Legantine power of England might bee committed to the Arch-Bishop of Yorke; Becket being so farre from seeking to pacifie the Kings displeasure, as dayly hee provoked him more and mor The Pope knowing the cause to bee his owne more than Beckets, rejected both these suites; Becket having dealt so with him beore-hand, that hee would doe nothing to his prejudice; and withall absolved him and the other Bishops from their Oath of Allegeance to their Prince: Whereup∣on the King commanded Becket to bee condemned in dam∣mages or a Manor which Iohn de Marshall claimed, and in the Parliament of Northampton demanded an accoun of him of 30000. pound, which came to his hand during his Chan∣cellorship; which hee excusing, and refusing punctually to answer, the Peeres and Bishops condemned all his movables t the Kings mercy: After which, the Prelates hemselves
by a joynt consent, adjudged him guilty of perjury, for not yeelding tempoall obedience to the King according to his Oath, disclaiming all obediene to him thence forward as to their Arch-Bishop: Becket the next day, whiles the Bishops and Peeres were consulting of some frther course with him, caused to be sung before him at the Altar: The Princes sit and speake against mee, and the ungodly persecute me, &c. And forthwith taking his silver Crosier in his owne hands (a thing strange and unheard of before) enters armed therewith into the Kings prsence, though earnest∣ly disswaded by all that wished him well: Wherewith the King enraged, commanded his Peeres to sit in judgement upon him, as on a Traytor and perjured person, and accor∣dingly they adjudged him to be apprehended and cast in prison as such a delinquent. The Earles of Cornewall and Leicester (who sate as Judges) citing him forthwith to heare his sentence pronounced; hee immediately appealed to the See of Rome, as holding them no competent Judges; whreupon all reviling him with the name of Traytor and perjured person, he replyed; That were it not for his function, he would enter the Duell or Combat with them in the field, to ac∣quit himselfe from Treason and perjury: and so speeding from the Court departed into Flanders (disguised under the name of Dereman) in a poore Fisher-boate, accompanied onely with Servitors: The King thereupon seized all his Goods and Temporalties into his hands, and sent Ambassa∣dours to the Earle of Flanders, the French King, and the Pope, praying them in no wise to suffer or softer within their dominions, one that was such a notorious Traytor to him. The French King, thinking that this disagreement betweene the King and the Arch-Bishop would breed some stirre in England, dealt with the Pope, that as hee loved the Roman Church, and the ayde of France, so hee would support Beckets cause against the King; with whom though hee had amity before, yet at Beckets instigation, as is pro∣bable, (whose whole life was nothing else but a continued act of Rebellion, Treachery, and Disobedience against his Soveraigne Lord) he presently fell to invade the King of Englands Dominions, and tooke by Assault certaine Holds of his in Normandy. The Arch-Bishop also about the same
time growing in great savour with the Pope, whom the King by all his friends and Agents could not move to any thing against him, sent out particular Excommunications against all the suffagan Bishops of his Province, and all such as had obeyed, defended, or occasioned the sayd Lawes and A vitall customes, and against some of them by name; which Excommunications he published at Vizely in France on A∣scension day, when the Church was most full of people, getting into the Pulpit thee; and solemnely accursing them with Bell, Booke and Candle, threatning the like thunder∣clap against his owne Royall person: Whereupon the King receiving such a foile from the Pope, and such an affront from the Arch-Bishop, directs his Writs to the Sherifes of England, commanding them to attach all such who appea∣led to the Court of Rome, with the Fathers, Mothers, Bro∣thers, Sisters, Nephewes, and Neeces, of all the Clergie that were with the Arch-Bishop, and to put them under sureties; as also to seize the Revenues, Goods, and Chat∣tels of these Clergie-men. And by other Letters to Guil∣bert Bishop of London, he sequestred the profits and Livings, which within his Diocesse did belong to any of the Cler∣gie who were fled to Thomas; and signified to his Justices by a publicke Decree, that no man should bring any Let∣ters or Commandment from Pope Alexander, or Thomas Arch-Bishop of Canterbury into England, containing an In∣diction of the Realme, upon peril to be apprehended and pu∣nished as a Traytor to the King, and an enemy to the Realm. And that they should safe keepe whosoever did bring any Interdict into England, till the Kings pleasure were further knowne; causing all the Arch-bishops goods to be confi∣scated, and banished out of the Realme all the Arch-Bishops kindred, Man, Woman, Child, and sucking Babes; forbid∣ding hee should be any longer mentioned publikely and prayed for in the Church, as Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; and to vexe him the more, because he knew hee was much delighted in the Monastery of Pontiniac, an Abbey of Cir∣stercian Monkes, he signified to all the Monkes of that Or∣der in his Dominion, that he would banish them every one, if they would not procure the Arch-Bishop to bee thrust out of that Monastery; which for feare of so great calamity
to so many men of their Order, was effected. And be∣cause Pope Alexander, Beckets surest Card, was ferrited much in like sort by Fredericke Barbarossa the Emperour, the King therefore determined to joyne in league with him, being a prosessed enemie both to the French King and the Pope, sending Ambassadors to him for that purpose; which the Pope having notice of, began presently to quaile, promi∣sing speedily to end all Controversies betweene him and Becket to the Kings liking: Whereupon at the pro∣curement of Iohn of Oxford, two Legates were sent into England to reconcile the King and Thomas; but the Pope hearing when they were gone, that they were resolved utter∣ly to confound the Arch-Bishop, sent Letters after them to rebate their absolute power, who when they came to Thomas he absolutely refused to put their cause unto them, but upon such conditions, as neither they nor the King would brooke. The passages betweene the King, and the Pope and Becket, and his Complaints to the Pope against the King, too tedi∣ous to recite at large, you may reade at leisure in Holinshed, Vol. 3. p. 70. to 75. wherein he desires the Pope to use his rigour both against the King, and the Prelates that sided with him, and to constraine them to amendment. After this, the Pope moved the French King to mediate a Peace betweene them: For which purpose, both the Kings and the Arch-Bishop were brought together at Paris; where suite being made to the King in his behalfe, That he might returne, be re∣stored to his goods and revenues arising during his absence, and like∣wise to the Kings favour, upon his humble submission: The King answered, That for the rest he was contented, but that he could not allow him the profits of his Arch-Bishoprick since his Banishment, for that he had already given them to others; yet he would give him such recompence for them, as the French King, or the Senate or Students of Paris should thinke meete. Whereupon Becket being called for, and advised by his frieuds to submit him∣selfe in the presence of both Kings, without any more reservations, he falling downe humbly upon his knees, used these words: My Lord and Soveraigne, I doe here commit unto your owne judgement the cause and controversie betweene us, so farre forth as I may, saving the honour of Almighty God: The King much offended with his last exception, turned him
about unto the French King, and telling how much hee had done for the Arch-Bishop, and how ee had used him, sayd, I am so well acquainted with the Trickes of this Fellow, that I cannot hope for any good dealing at his hands: See you not how he goeth about to delude me with this clause, (saving the honour of God?) for whatsoever shall displease him, hee will by and by alleadge to be prejudiciall to the ho∣nour of Almighty God. But this I will say unto you, where∣as there have beene Kings of England many before mee; whereof some were peradventure of greater Power than I, the most part farre lesse; and againe, many Arch-Bishops before this man, holy and noable men; looke what duty was ever performed by the greatest Arch-Bishop that ever was, to the weakest, and simplest of my Predecessours, let him but yeeld me that, and it shall abundantly content mee. Hereunto the Arch-Bishop answered cunningly, and stoutly; That his Predecessours Note this po∣licie and auswer. who could not bring all things to passe at the first dash, were content to beare with many things, and that as men they fell, and omitted their duty oft times; that that which the Church had gotten, was by the constan∣cie of good Prelates, whose example he would follow thus farre forth; as though he could not augment the priviledges of the Church in his time, yet he would never consent they should be diminished. This answere being heard, all men cryed shame of him, and generally imputed these stirres unto him; and King Lewis offended with his Answere, asked him, Whether he thought himselfe to be greater or holyer than Saint Peter? And the Peeres of both Nations accused him of arrogance, as being himselfe the wilfull hinderer of his owne and the Churches Tranquillity. Notwithstanding, the Pope forgot not faithfull Thomas; and thereore, after hee had graced him with a Confirmation of all the Pri∣viledges and Powers which any of his Predecesors in that See did enjoy (to the daring and defiance, as it were, of the Kings utmost indignation) the King sent a Letter into Germany, declaring, That hee would forsake Pope Alexander, and joyne with the Emperour and Anti-Pope. The King doubting what might become of these broyles, caused his Sonne Henry to bee Crowned King in his owne life time, to assure him of the Succession:
Afterwards comming into France againe, Becket and hee were upon the point of reconciliation, but the casting out some word or other, as before, maried all; At length the King and hee were made Friends, but his full restitution referred till he had behaved himselfe quietly a while at Can∣terbury, which he promised to doe: But hee was so far from performing that promise, as he sent into England before him divers Excommunications, which the Pope had granted out long before, and committed to his discretion. Amongst o∣ther the Arch-bishop of Yorke, the Bishop of London and Sa∣lisbury were named in them, together with so many as were doers in the Coronation of the young King, which the Arch-Bishop sayd might not be performed by any but by his ap∣pointment. The men thus strucken with this holy fire, hasted them over into Normandy, to make their complaint to the King, who infinitely grieved at this kinde of dealing, cursed the time that ever he had made him Arch-bishop, and resto∣red him to his place againe, adding, It was his chance ever to do with unthankefull men, otherwise some or other would long ere this have made this proud Priest an example to all such troublesome perturbers of his Realme and State. It hapned among other, foure Knights, to wit, Reynald Fitz-Vrse, Hugh de Morvill, William de Tracie, and Richard Briton, to be present at this speech of the Kings; who gathered thereby, they should do a deed very ac∣ceptable unto him, if they killed the Arch-Bishop, who in the meane time was come to Canterbury, and was received there with great joy: whence he went to London, and so to Woodstock wher the young King lay. But before he could get to the Kings presence, word was brought him, the Kings pleasure was, hee should first goe to Canterbury, and revoke those Excommuni∣cations, before the King would talk with him; whereupon he returned to Canterbury, without seeing the King at all: where the foure Knights before mentioned arrived upon Innocents day; who comming to the Arch-Bishop, told him, the Kings pleasure was, First, That he should goe to his Son, and reverently make offer of doing homage and fealty unto him for the Barony of his Arch-Bishoprick: secondly, That he should cause al the strangers he brought into the Realm with him, to be sworn to his obedience: third∣ly, That he should revok those Excommunications which he he had caused to be denounced against the Instruments of the young King
Coronation. To which demands he answered, That neither the King nor any other mortall man should extort from him, or any of his, by his consent, any unjust or unreasonable Oath: And as for the Bishops and others excommunicate concerning the Coronation, it was indeed (quoth he) a thing done in my behalfe, for an injury of∣fered to my Church, but it was the Act of the Pope. If therefore they will sweare, they shall be ready to make me amend at the Popes discretion, I will absolve them, otherwise not: And whatsoever you say, it was the Kings pleasure I should take my best course for the re∣dresse of this abuse by Ecclesiasticall authority. Many other words then passed betweene them, they breathing our terrible threates, and he continuing still the same man, without yeel∣ding one jot. At last the Knights departed, giving the Monkes charge in the Kings name, to see the Arch-Bishop forh-comming, and not to suffer him to escape away. At Evening Prayer time, the same day, they came suddenly into the Church with their Swords drawne, crying, Where's the Traytor? Where's the Traytor? The Arch-Bishop, who was then going up the steps towards the Quire, hearing the noyse, turned backe unto them, and every one of the foure striking mainely at him, upon the third or fourth greice of those steps he was slaine. His body these Knights determi∣ned to have cast into the Sea, or else to have hewen into a housand peeces; but the Prior and Monkes doubting some such thing, buried it immediately in the Under-Craft; whence shortly it was taken up, and layd in a most sumptu∣ous Shrine, in the East end of the Church. The Pope hearing of this Massacre of this his grand Champion,Roger de Hveden Anal. pars. poste∣rior, p. 529.530.531 Matthew Paris, p. 25. Sylvester Giraldus Cambrensis of the Conquest of Ie∣land. l. 1. c. 39. In Hlinsh. Tom. 2. p. 25. im∣mediately excommunicated all that were either authors or consenters to it. The King was aine to purge himselfe thereo by Oath, and yet could not be absolved, before he had done certaine strange Penance: as first, That hee shold pray devoutly at the Tombe of this new Martyr; That hee should be whipt in the Chapter-House, receiving of every Monke one Lash; That he should maintaine two hundred Souldiers for the space of one yeare, at Hierusalem; and lastly, revoke the Declaration published at Clarindon, that origi∣nally gave the occasion of this Murther, with other particu∣lars recorded by Master Fox. All which (such were those times) the King was faine to performe; to such slavery
were Kings and Princes then brought, under the Popish Clergie: who Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 204, 205. Speedes Hist. p. 1042. sect. 100. Godwin, p. 99 See Surius, Ribade∣neira, and Ead∣merus in his life. preently Canonize this Arch-Traytor for a Saint, write large Volumes of his Prayses and Mira∣cles, pray unto him Morning and Evening in their solemne publike Mattins and Vespers, in elegant Rymes and Poems composed by Thomas Aquinas, in a more elegant style, to de∣light and ravish the Auditors; honour his Shine with in∣finite Oblations, Pilgrimages, and Gifts: who was so much honoured an visited in times of Popery, that whereas in the Cathedrall Church of Canterbury, there were three princi∣pall Images; on, consecrated to Christ; another, to the Virgin Mary; and a third, to Thomas Becket; their Annuall Oblations to Thomas Becket, were commonly 1000. pound, or more to the blessed Virgin 200. pounds; but to our blessed Saviour some yeares 6. pounds, 13. shillings, 4. pence; some yeares 3. pounds, 6. shillings, 8, pence; and, Hoc Anno Nihl, some yeares just nothing: as Apolog. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 12. Bishop Mortn hath re∣corded out of their owne Register of Canterbury. So that they preferred this Traytor and Rebell, in their blinde devotion, at least one thousand times more than Christ himselfe: and, which is yet more abominable, advanced his blood above our Saviours; praying even to Christ himselfe, to save them, no by his owne, but by this Arch-Rebels blood (as if his owne were not sufficien) as these two blasphemous Verses, inserted into their Psalters, evidence. Hoa beatissima Vrginis Maria secundum usum Sarum, Parisiis, 159. fol. 12. Bishop Iewel, De∣fence of the A∣pologie, par 2. c. 18. Divis. 1. p. 295, 296. Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit, Fac nos Christe scandere quo Thomas ascendit. O Christ, by Thomas blood he for thee shed, Make us ascend whither he ascended. Had he beene quartered, and then hanged up for a Traytor on some high Pinacle, as he deserved, I should have liked the Prayer well; thinking it just that all who durst honour such a Traytor, or pray unto him as a Saint, deserved to have their quarters elevated as high as his. But in that sense they tooke it then, and many have used it since: yea, some at this very day: It is no lese than Blasphemie and High Treason against Christ himselfe: Especially,
i wee consider what they there annex to these Verses, Gloria & honor Coronasti eum Domine, R. Et constituisti eum super opera manuum tuaru; attributed unto Christ himselfe, Heb. 2.7, 8. 1 Cor. 15.27. Roger Walden Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, in a full Convocation held at Pauls in London, Anno Domini 1098. (if Constitut. f. 149 150. Aton mistake not) ordained, That a solemne Commemoration should be kept on Wednesday every weeke throughout the yeare, if it were possible, for this Arch-Traytor Thomas; in which Constit∣tion there is this passage: And although we ougt to honour all and singular constituted in the heavenly Kingdomes with solicitous endeavours, and to advance them with loud prayses; yet wee ought to extoll with highest acclamations our mst glorious Bishop and Martyr, Saint Thomas, both the Master and Patron of our Me∣tropoliticall Church, who is knowne to have shed his blood for the defence of the Churches libertie, by whose both Merits and Passion our whole Province of Canterbury is illustrated, and the universall Church adorned; and it is meete to personate him with supre∣mest prayses, and to worship him with spirituall honours. This Traytor shortly after became so eminent,Giraldus Cambi∣nis of the Con∣quet of Ireland, l. 2. c. 33. p. 52. that divers Kings Embassadors, Bishops, and others, came on Pilgrimage from orraine parts, to visit his Tombe at Canterbury. And though he Trayterly Prelates, Monkes, and Clergie, thus Deified him for a Saint and Martyr (as many now account him) yet the Peeres and Nobles about the King, gave it out in strict charge, upon paine of death, and confiscation of all their goods, That o man should bee so hardy as to name Thomas Becket to be a Martyr, or to preach of his Miracles. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 1035, 1036. And King Henry the eight; after he had beene a long time Canonized for, and adored as an Arch-Saint, declared him in his Injuctions, published Anno 1539. to have beene a Re∣bell and Traytor to his Prince; and therefore straightly char∣ged and commanded, That from thenceforth he should not be esteemed, named, reputed, or called a Saint, but Bishop Becket; That his Images and Pictures throughout the whole Realme should be plckt downe and avoyded out of all Churches, Chappels, and other places; and that the Dayes used to be Festivall in his name, should bee no more observed, nor the Service, Offices, Antiphones, Collects, and Prayers in his name read, but rased and put out of all the
Bookes upon paine of his Majesties indignation, and im∣prisonment at his Graces pleasure. After which, Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 1390. Stephen Gardiner, Bishop o Wincester, and Lord Chncelour in Queene Maries dayes, with his other fellow Bishops (who were much in love with this Traytor, being such them∣selves) caused the Image of this old Romish Traytor Becket to be set up over the Mercers Chappell doore in Cheapeside in London, in forme of a Bishop, with a Miter and Crosier; but within two dayes after, his two blessing-fingers were first broken off, and on the seventeenth day of February his head strucke off: whereupon arose a great stirre, and many suspected for doing it, were committed to Prison. Which being againe set up the second day of March, at the suspected parties cost, and strictly watched with a Guard each night, for feare it should bee re-demolished; on the fourteenh day of the same Moneth, the head of this Tray∣terous Beast was once more broken off, but the Agent not discovered; though there was a Proclamation made in London the next day, That whosoever would reveale the Party, though of Counsell and privity to the Act, should have his Pardon, and an hundred Crownes of Gold, with hearty thankes: So zealous were our Trayterly Bihops for this their Brother Arch-Traytor; whose very Crosier staffe some of late adored in the Tower, and have likewise Printed his Life. Speeds Hist. p. 554, 555, 564, 565. Holinshed, p. 157, 158, 159 162, 168, 169. Hubert the 42. Arch-Bishop of Canterbury,HUBERT. a man that swayed the Kingdome in King Richard the first his dayes; and after that advanced King Iohn to the Crowne, ptting by Arthur Duke of Britaine, right Heire to the Crowne, being Sonne to Geffrey, elder Brother to Iohn; which occa∣sioned many Warres, and the losse of Normandy: Hee fin∣ding the King not so tractable as hee supposed to his will, did under-hand bolster up the Clergie, to affront him in the election of the Bihop of Norwich, repenting more now than any thing he did in all his life, that he had so advanced King Iohn to the Crowne, shewing such slender respect to his Soveraigne, that being prohibited by Fitz-Peter, the Kings great Justiciarie and Minister (in the Kings absence) of Regall Command, from holding a Generall Councell of his Province, (never used to be held but by Soveraigne
permttance) his pleasure scorned to take any counte∣mand: after which, hee spared not to out-brave his Sove∣raigne himselfe. For having notice, the Feast of the Na∣tivitie then approaching, that the King intended with his Queene at Guilford to keepe that festivall with great Mag∣nificence; hee, whose Palace ordinarily for splendour, multitude of attendants, and sumpuous entertainments, did strive with the Kings; thought this a fitting time to shew forth his great State, and little regard of his Princes discountenance, by See Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 143, 144. Mat. Paris, An. 1201. p. 198. Matth. West. An. 1201. p. 77. parallelling to the Kings his owne sumptuous preparations, with rich Attires and costly Gifts for his attendants at Canterbury. The King, as Kings brook not to be braved by their subjects (nor is it wisedome for dis-favorites to doe it) moved with great indignation, thought the man had too much Riches, and too little dis∣cretion, (which seldome lodgeth in the Braine, where Pride dwells in the Heart) and therefore to abate some∣what the one, and learne him more of the other, hee kept his Easter at Canterbury, at the Costs of Hubert the Rch; and not to spare him who spared not himselfe; hee there increased that great expence, with a greater of his and his Queenes solemne Crowning againe on Easter day in the Cathedrall Church: where, in lieu of his ex∣pence, Hubert had the formall Honour to set on their Crownes, but yet not the grace to sit neere the Kings heart. Such being the first overtures of heart-burnings betwixt the King and his Clergie; they afterwards by addiament of dayly fuelling, burst forth into a more feare∣full ame. For Hubert, bearing too much good will to the French King, and in very deed e Hlnsd, p. 168.169. repenting himselfe of no∣thing so much, as for that hee had commended King Iohn to the Noblemen and Peees of the Realme, since hee proved another manner of man then hee looked to have found him; the King having prepared a Royall Hoast and mighty Navie to revenge his forraine losses and wrongs on the Freh King, Hubert the Arch-Bishop (who con∣ederated with the Pope and French King against his Sove∣aigne,) came with sundry others to Portesmouth to the King, and Lo the pride of a Prelate mix∣ed with Treche∣y. ly forbids the King to proceed in the Voy∣age, (in trth, for feare hee should hinder King Philip from
ayding the Pope against Otho the Emperour.) Whereupon the King dismd his Forces; Hubert being the instru∣ment, that so resolute Projects, so inestimable Charges, so necessary an Action of the Kings fell suddenly to the ground: whereby, besides the selfe-mischiefe which there∣with fell on the King, many fresh grudgings accrued unto him, for suffering himselfe to bee thus violently repulsed from so behoofefull a purpose. The King the next day checking himselfe, for over-prizing the command of any man above the value of his Kingly Honour and Estate, re∣solved to collect his disparkled Troupes, and to put forth to Sea. To which end, taking order with his Nobles to follow him, they gave him leave with a small company to wat up and downe two dayes, in expectance of their at∣tendance; till seeing them more obsequious o Hubers command than his, (the Arch-Bishop also sending his inhibition after them on the Sea, to stop their passage with the King) hee was forced to come againe to Land. The King hereupon put many of his Earles, Barons, Knights, and Clergie-men to a grievous pecuniary Re∣demption, for thus refusing to follow him, for re∣covering his Inheritance. Mat. Pari Hist. Major, p. 264. The Arch Bishop, though their Ring-leader, might well have beene exempted from this Judgement, by his passage to an higher, dy∣ing the same weeke, either of Griefe, or of a Feaver, which killed him in foure dayes: But the King forth∣with in person going to Canterbury, seized upon all his Wealth and Possessions, shewing himselfe right joyull, that now hee was rid of him, whom men suspected of too familiar practising with the French King, Mat. Paris, In. 1205. p 204 Antiq. Ecls. Brit. p. 144. H∣linsh. p. 169. Speed, p. 565. saying, Hee was never a King till now; by reason of Huberts too presumptuous daring to crosse his Royall Resolutions, as of late hee did. This Holinshed, p. 15, 15. . Anal pars ps∣rir. p. 767, 768.769. . Eccl. Brit. p. 138. o 144. Speeds Hist. p. 550. Hubert, being Chiefe Justice and ArchBishop in Richard the first his tim, Anno 1198 the Monkes of Christs Church in Canterbury exhibited this Complaint against him to Pope Innocent: That their Arch-Bishop Hubert (contrary to his Order and Dignity) exerci∣sed the Office of High Iustice, and sae in Iudgement of Blood, being so encumbred in Temporall matters, that he could not ave time to discharge his Office, touching Spirituall Cause
Whereupon the Pope sent to King Richard, admonishing him, not to suffer the sayd Arch Bishop to be any longer troubled with Temporall Affaires, but to discharge him thereof, and not to admit Note this. any Spirituall person from thenceforth unto any Temporall administration. He fur∣ther prohibited, by vertue of their obedience, all manner of Prelaes, and men of the Church, that they should not pre∣sume rashly to take upon them any manner of Secular Function or Office. Whereupon the Arch-Bishop was dis∣charged of his Office of Chiefe Justice, and Geffrey Fitz-Peter succeeded in government of the Realme in his stead. Afterwards, this Arch-Prelate being made Lord Chancellor of England by King Iohn, Anno. 1199. and uttering some words unadvisedly, that shewed how hee inwardly rejoyced at the Kings favour towards him in the gift of this Office,Hoveden, An. pars posterior p. 793.794. and so gloried in the Honour whereto hee was preferred, (which he would never have done, if he had weighed of worldly pompe, as by his Profession hee ought, and as one asketh the question in the same case, Dic mihi, nunquid, Corporibus prosunt? Certe nil: dic, Animabus? Tantundem &c.) The Lord Bardolfe sayd unto him, yet not so sotly in his eare, but that some over-heard it: My Lord, to speake and not offend you: surely, if you well consider the Honour and Dignity of your Calling, you would not willingly yeeld to suffer this yoake of Bondage to be layd upon your shoul∣ders: For we have oftentimes heard of a Cancellour made an Arch-Bishop, (as was Thomas Becket, who Mat. Paris Hist. Major. p. 94. An. Eccles. Brit p. 122 Godwins Catal. of Bishops, p. 88 upon his in∣stalment in the Sea of Canterbury, immediately resigned his Lord Chancelours Office, sending his great Seale to the King then in Normandy, with a Letter, wherein he certified him, That hee could not serve the Church and the Court both at once, and that this moved him to resigne his Chancelourship, as incompatible wih his Arch-Bishopricke) but wee never heard of an Arch-Bishop made a Chancelour till now. Such an See a Breviate of the Prelates intolerable Usur∣pations, the Epi∣stl to the King. un∣seemely and unlawfull thing was it then reputed for Bishops to intermeddle with Temporall Offices and Affaires, which are incompatible with their Spirituall Function, and are sel∣dome managed by them, but to the great oppression, the ru∣in of the People and State.
Hubert being dead Mat. Par. Hist. Major, p. 204.205, 213. to 278. sparsim. Antiq. Eccles. Brit and Godwins in the life of Steph. Langh. Mat. West An. 1207.1208. to 1214. Speed, How Holinshd, Hove∣den, Hutingdon, Grafton, Caxton, Polychronicon, Fa∣bian, Martin, and others in the life of King Iohn. Mr Tindalls Practise of Popish Pre∣lates, p. 374, 375. Doctor Barnes his Sup∣plication to King Henry the 8. p. 189. Mr. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 226. to 234. the Monkes of Canterbury secretly at midnight elected Reginald their Sub-prior,REGI∣NALD. for his Suc∣cessour, taking an Oath of him, not to make his Election knowne to any, till he came to the Popes presence, whi∣ther he was advised to post with all speed. The Oath hee violates as soone as ever he had crossed the Sea, bearing himselfe every where as Lord Elect, shewing withall the testimoniall of his Election to divers; which so incensed his Brethren the Electors against him, as they presently re∣solved to become suiters to the King or pardon of their fault, in chusing him without his license, and also that hee would permit them to make a new Election, supposing the old frustrate by the Elects perjury: They did so, and ob∣tained their request, the rather because they made shew of readinesse in satisfying the Kings desire, who wished them to elect Iohn Gray Bishop of Norwich: him they sent for in all haste to Canterbuy where they solmnly elected him for their Arch-Bishop, publishing his Election in the Church before the King and an infinite number of people, placing him in the Bishops Chaire. The King putting him in possession of his temporalties orth-with. These two E∣lections being presented to the Pope, hee adjudged them both voyd, and making use of the Monkes debate (he grea∣ter part being then at Rome, some of them avouching their first Election as good, others importunately seeking to have the latter confirmed) he secretly practised with them, and at last perswaded them to elect Stephen Langhton an English man, and Cardinall of Rome, of singular gifts and Learning: which done, the Pope with his owne hands gave him Con∣secration at Viturbium; and well knowing how haynosly the King would take the matter, he writ Letters unto him sweetned with many intreaties, large praises of the new Arch-Bishop, and seasoned now and then with some tou∣ches of doubtfull threatning, if hee should oppose himselfe against that was then done. This notwithstanding, the King in great indignation, as hee had just cause, banished and drove out all the Monkes of Canterbury by force (who were entertained in forraigne Monasteries) seized upon all their goods, lands, and forbad Stephen Langhton entrance into the Realme: The Pope hearing this, sends his Mandates unto
William Bishop of London, Eustace Bishop of Ely, and Mau∣ger Bishop of Worcester, wherein hee willed them first to admonish and perswade the King to restore the Monkes their goods and place, and to give the Arch-Bishop pos∣session of his Temporalties by a day: then if he refused so to doe, to interdict the whole Realme. They durst not but obey, and finding the King resolute in his determina∣tion, at the time appointed, they published the Popes In∣terdiction, interdicting the whole Realme: And as well foreseeing the ensuing trouble to come, as their present danger, got them out of the Land, together with Ioceline Bishop of Bath, and Giles of Hereford. The King immedi∣ately seized all their Goods and Temporalties into his hands, and moreover banished all the friends and Kinsfolks of these Bishops, that were likely to yeeld them any com∣fort or reliefe. During the time of this Interdict, Oh the impie∣ty of Popes and Prelates, thus to preferre their wills before Gods Service & the peoples soules. all Di∣vine Service ceased throughout the Realme (Gods Service giving place to the Popes pride and malice) except onely Baptisme of Children, Auicular Confession, and the Ad∣ministration of the Sacrament unto such as lay upon the point of death. The Pope seeing this Curse prevailed not; at the instigation of the Arch Bishop and other Prelates, proceeded to a particular Excommunication of the King, and not long after deprived him (by a Judiciall sentence) of his Crowne, Kingdome and all Regall authority; a thing till that time in no age ever heard of. For the better exe∣cuting which sentence, he writes to Philip the French King, to expell King Iohn out of his Kingdome, promising him re∣mission of all his sinnes, and giving the Kingdome of Eng∣land to him and his successors for this his good service; and withall sends orth his Bulls to the Nobles, Knights, and Souldiers in divers Countries, that they should signe themselves with the signe of the Crosse, to cast the King of England out of his Throne, and revenge the injury of the Universall Church, by ayding King Philip in this Catholike Warre, promising them all as large and ample indulgences in all things as those enjoyed, who visited the Lords Se∣pulcher at Hierusalem: whereupon the French King prepared a great Armie both by Sea and Land, to expulse King Iohn; who made himselfe so strong by Sea and Land in a short
time, that he had farre more Ships and Land-Souldiers than Philip; which Pandolfe the Popes Legate perceiving, and doubting of the successe, willingly repaires into England, tells King Iohn, in what danger he and his whole kingdome were, how much Christian blood he was like to cause to bee spilt to prevent all which inconveniences, hee counsels him to resigne his Crowne and Kingdome to the Pope, and then to receive it from him againe; which he yeelded to at last. See now to what extremities this poore King was brought by these rebellious and traytorly Prelates meanes, Matth. Paris, Ann. 1208. who refused to appeare before him when he sent for them; his whole Land was under Interdiction, and so remained for 5. whole yeares, like an Heathenish Nation, without the celebration of Divine Service and Sacraments. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 229. to 234.409.719. Iohn him∣selfe was by Name Excommunicated, and had so remained for divers yeares. dem Ann. 1209. All his Subjects were released & freed a Regis fidelitate & subjectione, from owing either fidelity or subjection to him, yea, they were forbidden, and that un∣der paine of Excommuniation,Idem Ann. 1212. so much as to company or converse with him, either at Table, or a Councell, or in speech and conference. Further yet, Mat. Paris, Hist. Min. Iohn was deposed from his Kingdome, and that judicially, being in the Ro∣mane Court deprived of all right to his Kingdome, and ju∣dicially condemned; and Mat. Westn. Hist. 1213. and Mat. Paris, An. 1213. that sentence of his deposition and deprivation was solemnly denounced and promulgated before the French King, Clergie, and people of France; Mat. Paris. loc. cit. p. 310. Nei∣ther onely was Iohn thus deposed, but his Kingdome also given away by the Pope, and that even to his most mortall enemie; for the Pope to bring his sentence to execu∣tion, Mat. Westm. loc. cit. ex part Dom. Papae Regi Francrm al isq injurun & idem nit Paris. p. 311 writ unto Philip the French King, perswading, yea, enjoyning him, to undertake that labou of dethrning Iohn actually (as judicially hee was before) and expelling him from the Kingdome, promising him not onely re∣mission of all his sinnes, but that hee and his Heires hould for ever have the Kingdome of England; with∣all, Paris. loc. ct the Pope writ Letters to all Nobles, Souldiers, and Warriors in divers Countries, to signe themselves with the rosse, and to assist Philip for the dejecti∣on of Iohn. Paris. & Westm. loc. cit. Philip was not a little glad of such an offer, b hereupon gathered Forces and all things fit
for such an expedition, expending in that preparation no lesse than 60. thousand pounds: all Paris. An. 1213. these things being notified to King Iohn, did not a little daunt him, and though he was too insensible of the impendent calamities, yet to strike a greater terrour into his amazed heart, and make a more dreadfull impression in his minde of the dangers which now were ready to fal on his head, Pandolph was sent from the Pope unto him to negociate about the resigning of his Kingdome; to which if hee would consent, he should finde favour, protection, and deliverance at the Popes hands. Pandulf by a crafty kinde of Romish Oratory, at his com∣ming to the King, expressed, yea painted out in most lively colours all the difficulties and dangers to which the King was subject; Paris. in loco cit. dum autm, &c. the losse of his Crowne, the losse of his ho∣nour, the losse of his life; that there was no other way in the world to escape them, but by protection under the Popes wings. Matth. Wstm. Paris. lo. cit. Holinshed, p. 177.178. Iohn seeing dangers to hang over him on every side, by the French abroad, by the Barons at home: and being dejected and utterly dismayed and confounded with the ponderation of them, resolved for saving his life, to lose his liberty and honour, and to save his Kingdome from his open Adversary, to ose it and give it quite away to his secret but worst enemie that hee had, and to take an Oath of sealty to the Pope, recorded in Holinshed, p. 178. doing herein as if one for feare of being slaine in the open field, should kill himselfe in his owne chamber. It was not piety, but extreame misery; nor devotion, but feare onely and despaire, that caused and even orced Iohn against his will being then drowned in despaire, to resigne his Crowne, and to make two severall grants thereof to the Pope. The Mat Paris, and Mat. West. An. 1217. Doctor Craking ther p upon the Popes Temporall Mo∣narchy, p. 245. to 48. first Charter was made to Pandulph the Popes Legae, on the 15. day of May in the 14. yeare of King Iohns raigne, the Copie whereof is set downe in Matthew Paris, Matthew Westminster. The second Charter was made to Nichols Bishop of Tusculum the Popes Legae, for the Popes use, in Saint Pauls Church in London, the 3. of October in the 15. yeare of King Iohn, An. Dom. 1213. agreeing verbatim with the former, differing onely from it in this; that the first was sealed with Wax, the second with Gold: which seve∣rall Grants were so detestable to the whole world, that it
made all men exclaime against and detest King Iohn. How much the Barons disliked this Grant of King Iohn, his Vrbae Epist. Ioh ad Innoc. cin in resp. ad Apoll. Bellar. c. 3. See Holins. p. 177.178. owne words to Pope Innocentius, as also the Popes answere, do wit∣nesse Our Earles and Barons, saith he, (and the Pope writes the like) were devout and loving unto us, till we had subjected our selves to your Dominion, but since that time, and specially even for so doing, they In illum insu∣gunt postqum Ecclesia satisfecit ui assistbant dem quando Ec∣clsiam offndbat. in Epist. Innoc. 3. apud Mat. Paris. An. 1217. Innoc. p. 356. all rise up against us. The manifold Drisionibus muplicatis subsannando dix∣run Mat. Paris, An 1215.  practis. Idem An. 1216. Honsh p. 186. opprobrious speeches used by the Barons against King Iohn, for subjecting himselfe and his Kingdome to the Pope, doe declare the same. Iohn (say they) is no King, but the shame of Kings; better to be no King, than such a King: behold a King without a King∣doe, a Lord without dominion. Alas thou wretch, and servant of lowest condition, o what misery of thraldome hast thou brought thy self? Thou wast a king, now thou art a Cow-heard, thou wast the highest, now the lowest: Fie on thee Iohn, the last of Kings, the abominaton of English Princes, the confusion of English Nobility Alas England, that thou art made tribuary and subject to the rule of base servants, of strangers; and which is most miserable, subject to the servant of servants. Thou Iohn whose memory will be wofull in future time; thou of a most free King, hast made thy selfe tributary, a farmer, a vassall, and that to servitude it selfe: this thou hast done, that all might be drowned in the Hell of Romish Avarice. Yea, so detestable was both this Fact of Iohn, and dealing of the Pope, that Philip the French King, though the mortall enemie of King Iohn, heaing thereof, even upon this very point, That the Barons and State did no consent to that Act, did proclaime both the absolute freedome of the Kingdome of England, nowihstanding this grant of Iohn, and declaime also against this Pope, for seeking to enthrall Kingdomes unto him. As the King, by the Treason and trechery of these Prelates, and especially of the Iti communs conjura & con∣fadrati capita∣lem censentnum haurunt, & ju∣raverunt omnes in prasentia Archi∣piscopi, quod viso emper e congruo, propriis libertati∣bus, si necesse fu∣rit, dcrtabunt uqu ad mortm. Idm. Arch-Bishop, was thus enforced most ignominiously to resigne and prostitue his Crowne and Kingdome to the Pope, to the losse of his Kingly honour, and the hearts of all his Barons and Subjects; so he was faine to receive the Arch-Bishop, and re∣store the other Bishops, Monkes, and banished Rebels against him to their Bishoprickes, Goods, and Revenues; and to give them such Dammages and Recompence, as the Pope should thinke . For this King, Anno Domini 1213. intending a Voyag into Guien, his Realme standing as
yet Holined, p. 180, 181, 182. interdicted, his Lords refused to goe with him, un∣lesse the interdicting might be first released, and he clearely absolved of the Popes Curse, to the end that Gods wrath and the Popes being fully pacified, hee might with better speede move and maintaine the Warres: whereupon he was constrained to alter his purpose; and comming to Winchester, dispatched a messenger with letters, signed with the hands of twenty foure Earles and Barons, to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Lincolne, and Hereford, then sojourning in France; requiring them, with all other banished men, to returne into England; promising them by his Letters Patents, not onely a sure Safe-conduct for their comming over, but that hee would also forget all passed displeasures, and frankely restore unto every man all that by his meanes had beene wrongfully taken from them, and as yet by him detained. Hereupon the Arch-Bishop, and other Bishops, with all speede came into England, with the other exiles, and went to Winchester, where the King then remained: Who hearing that the Bishops were come, went forth to receive these Traytors; and at his first Oh, to what base slavery was this King brought by these Trayterly Pre∣lates? meeting with the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the King kneeled downe at his feete, (who should have rather kneeled to the King) and asked him forgivenesse, and that it would please him and the other Bi∣shops also to provide for the miserable state of the Realme: requiring of the Arch-Bishop (having as then the Popes power in his hands, as being his Legat) to be absolved; pro∣mising upon his solemne received Oath, That he would be∣fore all things defend the Church, and the Order of Priest∣hood, from receiving any wrong: also that he would restore the old Lawes made by the ancient Kings of England, and namely those of S. Edward, which were almost extinguished and forgotten; and further, that he would make recompence to all men whom he had by any meanes endammaged. This done, he was absolved by the Arch-Bishop, and shortly after sent his Orators to Rome, to take off the Interdict. The Pope hereupon sent the Cardinall of Tusculum into England, to com∣pound the differences and dammages betweene the King and the Bishops, and then to release the Interdict. Who, after a Convocation summoned, and sundry meetings had at London, Reading, Wallingford, and elsewhere, & some messages to Rome
ordered the King to pay 40000. Markes dammages to these rebellious Prelates; which done, the Interdict was solemnly released by the Legat, in the Cathedrall of Pauls in London, Iune 29. 1214. after the terme of 6. yeares, 3 moneths, and 14. dayes, that the Realme had beene shaken with that dreadfull Dart of Correction, as it was then esteemed. After this, King Iohn raysed an Army, intending to goe against those Lords who refused to follow him to Poictou. But the Arch-Bishop meeting him at Northampton, sought to appease him but hee marching on to Notingham, there with much adoe, the Arch-Bishop following him, and threatning to excommunicate all those that should ayde him, enforced him to desist his Enter∣prise. This done, he thought all troubles at an end, but the worst were yet behind. For the King having wound himselfe into the Popes favour, by this his Resignation, and holding his Crowne from him as his Feudatarie, began to curbe the Arch-Bishop and his Faction; who finding the King stronger in the Popes favour than they, Mat. Paris, p. 244, 230. Speed l. 9. . 8. sct. 55. p. 582, 584. thereupon stirred up the Barons to rebell and take Armes against the King, who had lost their hearts by his Resignation: In this Rebellion and Conspiracie,Allgabat Archiepispum Cantariensem Regis Anglia h∣stem esse ubli∣cum, ut qui Bar∣nibus Angliae in∣contium cntra Regm undem prbuit, & consen∣sum; quodqu psi∣us favore & n∣sili iim Barn dictum Rgm  sl dpllr mo∣lirtr. &c: Matth. Paris, Hist. Major, p. 261, 263. Stephen Langthon the Arch-Bishop was the Ring-leader, yea, the principall Abettor, Conspirer, chiefe Agent, and Counsellor (as Matthew Paris, Wendover, Speed, Ho∣linshed, and other our Historians testifie:) The Pope hereupon excommunicates the Barons, and all other English or French, who impugned King Iohn, even in the generall Councell of Lateran, then held and the Bishop of Winchester, and Pandulph the Popes Legat (who solemnly denounced the Popes Curse against the Barons) did likewise suspend the Arch-Bishop from all his Episcopall authority: who thereupon repairing to Rome for absolution, was in the Councell of Lateran accused and convict of Conspiracie and Treason against the King, and contempt against the Pope and Churches Censure: for which, the Pope resolving to depose him from his Sea and dignity, by the Cardinals intercession for him (hee being their brother Cardinall) was intreated to deale somewhat milder, but yet confirmed his suspension from his Bishopricke by publik sen∣tence; commanding by his Letters, all his Suffragan Bishops to withdraw their obedience from him and for a further revenge whereas Simon Langthon, his brother, by his procurement
had beene elected to the Sea of Yorke, (a strange example, to have an whole Kingdome ruled by two Brethren, of so turbulent humors:) the See here the doubling and juggling of the Pope. Pope not onely did cassate his Election, but likewise made him uncapable of any Episco∣pall Dignity, placing in that Sea Walter Gray (a trustie riend to the King, and a professed enemie to the Langhtons) whose Pall cost him no lesse than a thousand pound. King Iohn ha∣ving thus procured all his Barons to be excommunicated, and the City of London (siding with them) to be interdicted, and the Arch-Bishops suspension to be confirmed; the Ba∣rons and Arch-Bishop held these Censures in such high contempt, that they decreed, neither themselves nor the Ci∣tizens should observe them, nor the Prelates denounce them; alledging, that they were procured upon false sug∣gestions, and that the Pope had no power in Secular matters from Christ, but onely in Spirituall, and that Prelates had nothing at all to doe with Warres; and thereupon sent for Lewis, the Dolphin of France, to receive the Crowne of England: Who not so voyd of Ambition, as to lose a Crown for want of fetching, was not long behind, landing here in England, in despight of the Popes inhibition, and threats of Excommunication to hinder him, with a great Army, and Fleete of sixe hundred Boates. After which, he repaires to Lndon, electing Simon Langhton for his Chancelor, the Arch-Bishops Brother, the Arch-bishop being the chiefe man in this Rebellion and Treaon against King Iohn; by whose Counsell and Preaching, the Citizens of London, and Barons, though all excommunicated by the Pope, did celebrate Di∣vine Service, and drew on Lewis to doe the like. King Iohn levying a great Armie, and hasting to give Battaile to those Rebels and Enemies, comming to Swinshed Fo Acts and Monuments, p. 719. with the Authors thre ci∣ted, and Speeds Historie of Great Brittain, l. 9. c. 8. sect. 63. p. 578, 588. Abbey, was poysoned in a Chalice, by a Monke of that House; who went to the Abbor and shrived himselfe, telling him, how he intended to give the King such a Drinke, that all England should be glad and joyfull thereof: at which, the Abbot wept for joy, and praysed God for the Monkes constancie; who being absolved before-hand by the Abbot, tooke the Cup of Poyson, and therewith poysoned both the King and himselfe, to doe the Arch-Bishops and Prelates a fa∣vour; since this Holinsh. p. 196, 204, 205. King could not abide the pride and pre∣tended
authority of the Clergie, when they went about to wrest out of his hands the Prerogative of his Princely Go∣vernment. He dying, Henry his young Son was received to the Kingdome, Lewis forsaken, the Barons absolved by the Pope and Clergie-men too, after a composion payd by them. After this, Stephen Langhton enshrines his Predecessor Becket (as great a Traytor as himselfe) in a very sumptuous Shrine (the King and greatest part of the Nobility of the Realme being present at the solemnity:) which done, this Arch-Traytor, after he had endeavoured to raise a new Warre be∣tweene the King and the Nobles, dyed himselfe, Iuly 9. 1228. To obscure whose Treasons and Rebellions, our Monkes, who writ the Histories of those times, have raised up many slanders and lyes of this poysoned King Iohn, to his great defamation. Mat. Paris, An. 1231. p. 355 Mat. Parker, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 158. Gdwin p. 110, 111. Holinsh. p. 213. Richard Wethershed,RICHARD. the very next Arch-Bishop, with∣stood King Henry the 3. who in Parliament demanded Es∣cuage of those who held any Baronies of him; maintaining that the Clergie ought not to be subject unto the judge∣ment of Laymen, though all the Laitie and other of the Spiritualty consented to the King. After this, hee had a great controversie with Hubert de Burgo, Earle of Kent, con∣cerning some Lands of the Earle of Gloucester, the profits whereof the Arch-Bishop challenged as due unto him in the minority of the sayd Earle. The Arch-Bishop com∣plained of the pretended wrong to the King (with whom Hubert was very gracious, for the good service he had done him in defending Dover Castle against the French,) and finding no remedy answerable to his minde at the Kings hands, who answered him truely, That the Lands were held of him in capite, and so the wardship of them belonged to himselfe, not to the Arch-Bishop; hee thereupon excom∣municated all the Authors of this his supposed injury, the King onely excepted, and then gat him to Rome (the com∣mon Sanctuary and receptacle for all Rebellious, Traytorly Prelates,) this being the first Excommunication that was pronounced against any man for invading the Temporalties of the Church. The King hereupon sends divers to Rome, to stop the Arch-bishops proceedings, and defend his Roy∣all Prerogative. The Pope notwithstanding delighted
much with the eloquence, gravity, and excellent behavi∣our of the Arch-Bishop, granted presently all his demands, even in prejudice of the Kings Crowne and Right. Little joy had he of his Victory, for being but three dayes in his way homeward, he fell sicke at Saint Gemma, and dyed. See Holinsh. p. 114. Mat. Paris, Ann. 1232. In this Bishops time, the Italians had gotten many Benefices in England, who being much spited at, certaine mad fel∣lowes tooke upon them to thresh out their Corne every where, and give it unto the poore, as also to rob and spoyle them of their money and other goods, after which the Itali∣ans were not so eager upon English Benefices. EDMUND.Saint Edmund Arch-Bishop of Cantebury had many bicke∣rings with King Henry the third,Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 159. to 171. Godwyn, 112.113. Fox Acts and Monu∣ments, p. 321 409, 533. Hlins. p. 222 223, 225. hee was baptized in the same Font that Thomas Becket his Predecessour was, and somewhat participated of his disposition: Being consecra∣ted Arch-Bishop, he presently fell into the Kings displea∣sure, by opposing himselfe against the marriage of Elianor, the Kings Sister, with Simon Mounfort, Earle of Leicester, because upon the death of the Earle Marshall her first Hus∣band she had vowed Chastitie; to have which vow dis∣pensed withall, the King procured the Pope to send Otto his Legate into England, betweene whom and the Arch-Bi∣shop there were many quarrels: This Arch-Prelate refused to appeare upon summons before the King, went to Rome where he made many complaints, not onely against Otto, but against the King himselfe, or certaine injuries received at his hands; yet with ill successe, and was foiled in two severall suites, both with the Monkes of Rochester and the Earle of Arundel, to whom he was condemned in a thou∣sand Markes, to his great disgrace and impoverishing. Hee Excommunicated the Monkes of Canterbury, for chusing a Prior without his consent. The Popes Legate absolving them for money, h excommunicated them afresh, and in∣terdicted their Church, till Otto decided the Controversie; which Otto excommunicated Fredericke the Emperour, first in the Monastery of Saint Albanes, and then publickly in Pauls Church, and collected infinite summes of money here in England to maintaine the Popes warres against him, which the Emperour tooke very ill at the Kings hands. This Arch-Bishop, for a great summe of money, obtained a
Grant fom the Pope in derogation of the Kings Suprema∣cie, that if any Bishopricke continued voyd by the space of sixe moneths, it should bee lawfull for the Arch-Bishop to conferre it on whom he list, which the King procured the Pope immediately to revoke. Lib. 7. c. 35. f. 305. Fx Acts and Monuments, p. 254.255, 321, Polichronicon writes, that hee called a Councell of the Prelates together, how hee might relieve the holy Church that was made subject and thrall. It was consulted, that the King and all other men that were Rebels should be warned, and if they would not amend, then the wrecke of censures of holy Church should not sleepe. The holy man (Edmund) assented, and went to the King with the other Bishops, who threatned to Excom∣municate him, if he would not reforme the things they de∣manded, and put away his evill Councellors. The King asked avisement, and he abode, but all for nought: There∣fore the King was spared alone, and all other that were Re∣bells were denounced accursed: But thereby would they not be amended. This Arch-Prelate, at last, being conti∣nually vexed, thwarted and disgraced both by the King, the Pope his Legates, and others with whom he contested, ta∣king his leave of the King, departed into voluntary exile, and there bewailing the misery of his Country, spoyled and mi∣serably wasted by the tyranny and strange exactions of the Pope, spent the rest of his time in continuall teares, and through extreame griefe, sorrow, and fasting, fell into a Consumption and dyed, being afterwards canonized for a Saint by Pope Innocent the fourth. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. Bonifaciu, p. 171. &c. Godwin. p. 114. to 119. Arch-Bishop Boniface,BONI∣FACE. his immediate successor, raised ma∣ny commotions and stirs both in Church and State, hee was the Kings instrument for polling of England, and brought him much money; he was also a great warrier, better skil∣led in Military than Church affaires. Not to mention this Arch-Prelates Antiq. Eccle. Brit. p. 185. Stow, p. 188. combat with the Prior and Monkes of Saint Bartholmewes, which put the whole City of London into an uproate, and made much worke both at the Kings Court, and at Rome: Or how he Holinshed, p. 238. procured a Grant from the Pope to receive one whole yeares profit of all Livings and Cures that should fall voyd within his Province for 7. yeares space, to the value of 10000. Markes At which the King at first was sore offended I shall only recie some traytorly and Anti-mo∣narchicall constitutions made by him & his fellow Prelates in
a Synod held at Westminster, 1270. to the great impeachment of the Kings Prerogative, and affront of his Nobles, Judges, and Temporall Courts of Justice. First, they decreed, Ioh. d Aton. Cnstit. Lgitima Ecclsiae, ttuisque Regionis Angliae, (stiled in the Title, Divinum opus) f. 138.139, 140, 141. Gul. Lindwode Provinc. l. 5. Tit. de Pnis, f. 226.227.228. l. 2. De Fore Compe∣tenti f. 67. &c. That no Arch-Bishop, Bishop, or inferior Prelate and Clergi-man, should eiher by the Kings Writ, or any other Noblemans, or secuar Officers warrant be called to answer before any secular Court or Judge, for any cause which they there determin to be meerely Ecclesiasticall: Or for any extravagances and undue proceedings in their Ecclesiasticall Courts: And that no Cler∣gie-man should presume to appeare upon such Writ or sum∣mons before any temporall Judge or Court, under paine of Ex∣communication; because no Lay power hath any authority to judge the Lords Anointed, whom they ought of necessity to o∣bey. And to take away so great abuses, & preserve the liberties of the Church, we decree and ordaine (say they) that the sayd Archbishops & Bishops, and other Prelates shall not appeare though they be called & summoned to do it as aforesaid. Yet to preserve the Kings onour, the greatest Prelates shall goe or write to the King, and shew that they cannot obey such his Royall Mandates without the perill of their Order, and the subversion of their Eccle∣siasticall Liberty. And if the King desist not, the Bp. whom it con∣cernes, shal admonish the King the second time, that he looke to the salvation of his soule, and altogether desist from such Mandates. And if he desist not at the denuntiation of the Bishop, the Arch-Bishop, or else the Bishop of London as te Deane of the Bishops, calling to him two or three Bishops, or more, whom he shall thinke meete, shall goe to the King und admonish him more seriously, requiring im to supersediate his Mandates. And if the King after such ex∣hortations and monitions shal proceed to attachments and destresses by himselfe or others, then the Sheriffes and all other Baylifes who pro∣secute the Bishops to attach them, shall by the Diocesans of the places be driven away in forme of Law by the sentence of Excommunication and interdiction. The like shall be done if the Sheriffes or Bayliffes proceed to Attachments or Distresses, pretending the foresayd moniti∣ons to be made to our Lord the King as afore-sayd: And if the She∣riffes or Baliffes shall persevere in their obstinacie, the places wherein they live, and the Lands they have within the Province of Canterbury shall be interdicted by the Dicesans of the places, at the denuntiation of the Bishop in whose Diocesse such Distresses shall be taken. And if such Attachers be Clerks Beneficed, they shall be suspended from their Office; and if they persevere in
their malice, they shall be compelled to desist and give satisfa∣ction by substracting the profits of ther benefices. And if they be not Beneficed, in case they be presented to any Beneice, they shall not be threto admitted or five yeares space. And the Clerkes who shall dictate, write, or signe such Attachments or di∣stresses, or give any counsell or advice therein, shall be Canonically punished, and if any Clerke be suspected of the premises, e shall not be admitted to any Ecclesiasticall Benefice, untill he shall Canonically purge himselfe thereof. And if our Lord the King, or any other secular power competently admonished concerning this, shall not revoke such distresses or Attachments, the Bishop distrained shal put under Eccle∣siasticall interdict the Lands, Villages, Townes and Castles, which the King himselfe, or other secular person so distrainig shall have with∣in his Bishopricke. And if the King, or any other secular power con∣temning such penalties, shall persevere in their obstinacy; then the Arch-Bishop, or the Bishop of London, at the denunciation of the Bishop complaining, calling to him two Bishops, or more, whom he shall thinke meete, shall repaire to the King, and diligently admo∣nish and require him to supersede from the foresaid Mandates. And if our Lord the See the Pre∣lates insolency here against their Kings. King having heard these admonitions and exhor∣tations, shall proceed to Attachments or distresses by himself or others, then the other two Bishops, reputing this distresse as a common injury to the Church, by the authority of this present Counsell, shall put un∣der Ecclesiasticall interdict all the Demisne Lands, Burroughes, Ca∣stles, and Townes of the King himselfe, or any other great man, be∣ing within the Precincts of their Diocesse. And if the King, or other great Man, shall not within 20. dayes after revoke the said Distresses or Attacments, but shall for this bandy against the Church, being with Pharaoh made more obdurate amidst the strokes of punishments, then the Archbishop shall put his whole Diocesse under inerdict. The same shall be done to the Castles, Lands and Burroughes of great men, who have Royalties within the said Province. And if any Bishop shall be found negligent or remisse in the exeutions of the said penalties in such cases, he shall be sharpely reprehended by the Metropolitan. Afer which they in the same Councell, decree the like Interdicts, Ex∣communications, and Proceedings against all such who shall in∣trude upon the possessions of the Church; against Clerkes who receive Churches by Lay-mens power; against such Judges and others, who shall release excommunicate persons ou of prison without the Bishops consent; against Lay-men, who
shall apprehnd Clergy-men for civill crimes; against such who obtaine or grant Prohibitions to their Courts; against the King or his Officers, who grieve or waste Churches possessions du∣ring their vacancy; against Judges and other Officers, who by a Quo Warranto question the Liberties which any Church or Pre∣lae hath long time enjoyed, though without any Charter; against secular Judges, who shall judge any Charters made to the Church voyd for uncertainey; against Lords, who shall en∣deavor to enforce Clergy men to make suit to their secular Courts, contrary to the Liberties of the Church; and the like. In all or most of which, if the King upon notice and monition conforme not to Prelates desires, and stop not all proceedings and judgements in his Courts against them, his Judges and Of∣ficers shall be excommunicated, and their Lands, together with the Kings, and the whole Province of Canterbury inter∣dicted as aforesaid This Arch-Prelate and hs conederates, thus trampling upon the Kings Crowne, Royalties, Judges, Courts, Nobility, Subjects, and the Lawes of the Kingdome; the King to stop their encroachments, was enforced to send forth Writs of Ad jura Regia, and Prohibitions to inhibit their proceedings; Wherein he thus complained, Regist. of Writs, par. 2. f. 27. to 65. Turbaur, nec immerito & mo∣vmu, &c See the Breviate, p. 6, 97 15, 16. We ae trou∣bled, not without cause, and moved, while we behold those who live under our Dominion, and are there honored with Benefi∣ces and Rents, by reason whereof they ought to assist us in the defence and tuition of the Rights of our Royall Crowne, with neckes lied up against us, endeavouring to the uttermost of their power to impugne the said Rights, to the GRIEVOVS PREIVDICE AND HVRT OF OVR ROY∣ALL DIGNITIE AND CROWNE, and in con∣tempt of us: Wherefore we, who by the bond of an Oath, are obliged to the unwounded Observance of the Rights of our Crowne and Dignity, prohibit you, that you presume not to attemp any thing in the promises, which may any way dero∣gate from the Right of our Crowne and Dignity, and if any thing in this kind hah beene unduely attempted by you, that you cause it to be revoked without any delay, left we proceed o apprehed you in a grievous manner, as the violaters of the Rights of our Crowne and Dignity. Ths Boniface, at last know∣ing himselfe very ill beloved, boh of the King and of all the Commons and Clergy in generall, and being commanded by
the King to give over his Bishopricke, he thereupon elled his Woods, let Leases, forced from his Tenants and others, what moneys he could possibly, and having gathered great sums, one way or other, carryed it all with him over Sea into Savoy, where he dyed. Iohn Peckam,JOHN PECKAM. the next Arch-Bishop of Canterbury but one, was created Bishop of that See by the Popes meere Antiqu. Eccl. Brit. p. 201, 202 205, 206, 207. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 320, 321. Goodwin his Ca∣talogue of Bi∣shops, p. 123. Authority, against the Monkes and Kings consents; whence in his Letters to the Pope, he usually stiled himselfe his creature, though he made him pay foure thousand Markes for his Creation: And to hew himselfe his creature in good earnest, he upon the Popes most insolen Letter to him (recorded at large by Matthw Par∣ker, in his life) to prohibit King Edward the first from collecting the Tenths granted to him in England by the Clergy, for the re∣covery of the Holy Land rom the Sarazens, which the King collected by his owne Officers, and laid up in such places as he thought meet without the Popes speciall license, not without great sinne aginst the divine Majesty, and high contempt of the Apostolicke Sea went to the King immediately, being then in the confines of Wales, and there publikely before all his No∣bles by vertue of the Popes command, admonished the King: First, within one moneths space to restore all the Monies col∣lected, and to send it to the places formerly appointed for its custody, with so great promptitude of devotion, as might ex∣piate the former blot of removing it thence. Secondly, that he should or time to come, wholly desist from such attempts, ad∣ding, that althogh the Apostolicall clemency did yet embrace him as one of her deare Sonnes: yet if he should hereafter chance to be found guilty of such offences, that she neither would, nor yet could substract the Rod of Correction from him, left by spa∣ring man, she should consent to those Divine injuries which she corrected not. Thirdly, that he should neither molest nor grieve any of the Keepers or Depositaries of the said Monies upon this occasion. To which insolent Demands the King gave a very mild Answer. This Lordly Prelate, was very stately in his gesture, gate, words, and outward hew; he very often opposed himselfe a∣gainst King Edward the first in Parliament, in right of his Church, denying to grant him Tenths; conesting with him often about certaine Liberies pertaining to the Crowne, touching Church
matters. Anno 1279. he held a Ioha de Atn Constitut. 130. Councell at Reading; where∣in he enjoyned all Priests every Lords day, to excommunicate (among others) those who impetrated Letters or Writs from any Lay Court, to hinder the proceedings of the Ecclesiastickes in Causes pertaining to them by the holy Canons. He held his Prebendary of Lions in France, in Commendam, and would not part with it by any meanes; because he looked every day to be driven out of England by the King (whom he stiffely opposed and resisted to his face in many things) and then he should have no othr home to take to: Hee promptly obeyed the Popes commands against the King, not to pay him any Subsidies, or give him any aide without the Popes consent, and oft admo∣nishing the King before his Nobles, to obey he Popes Man∣dates in derogation of his Crowne, and tending to the great oppression of his Subjects. Hee called another Councell a Lambeth, Holis. p. 280. b. Anno 1280. in which he went about to annihilate certaine Liberties belonging to the Crowne, as the taking knowledge of the Right of Patronages, and the Kings Prohi∣bitions, In placitis de catallis, and such like, which seemed meerely to touch the Spiritualty. But the King by some in that Councell, withstood the Arch-Bishop openly, and with me∣naces, stayed him from concluding any thing that might preju∣dice his Royall Liberties, and Prerogatives. After which he held another Councell at Reading, Anno 1290. where he and the Bishops purposed to draw the Conusans of Advowsons and Patronages of Churches, belonging time out of minde to the Kings Temporall Couts, to the Ecclesiasticall Consistories, utterly to cut off all the Kings Prohibitions to these Courts, in suites concerning Goods, Chattels and Debts, so that the Ecclesiasticall Judges should not from thenceforth be prohibi∣ted to proceed on in them: But the King hearing of this their designe, and encroachment on his Royall Crowne, prohibi∣ted them to proceed therein under paine of his indignation; whereupon the Councell was dissolved, and the ArchBishop and other Prelates frustrated of their hopes. Who yet pro∣ceeding to encroach upon the Kings Royalties in their Ecclesi∣asticall Courts, Hee thereupon sent forth Writs to restraine them, to this effect: Regist. of Wits par. 2. f. 61, b. 62.646. Rex Archiepiscopis, &c. The King to the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Deanes, Arch-Deacons, Chancellours, Praecentors, Provosts, Sacrists, Pre∣bends
in Cathedrall and Collegiate Churches, and to all other Ecclesiasticall Persons, constituted in what-ever Dignity or Of∣fice; as also to publike Notaries, and all others, greeting. It behoveth us so much the more carefully to doe our endeavour, and more soliciously to extend our hand to our Royall Pre∣rogatives, lest they hould utterly perish, or by the undue U∣surpations of any, be in some ort substracted, by maintaining them as farre as we lawfully may; by reducing them to their due state if any of them have beene substracted and seized on; as likewise by bridling the impugners o our said Royall Juris∣dictions, and by punishing them as it is meet, according to their demerits: And so much the rather, by how much we are knowne to be obliged to doe it by the Bond of an Oath, and behold more men from day to day to impugne the same Rights, to their utmost power; whereas we have recovered in our Court be∣fore us, by consideration of the said Cour, our Collation to the Prebend of S. in the Church of Saint Peters in Yorke, &c. And now we have understood, that certaine men endeavouring with all thr might to impugne our Royall Right, and forsai Judgement, as likewise our Collation made to our said Clerke, have made and procured to be made certaine Provocations, Ap∣peale, Indictions, Inhibitions, &c. by the which if they should proceed, our Royall Right, and foresaid Judgement, and the effect of our Collation should be annulled, which might many wayes generate prejudice and exheredation to us and our Crowne. We desiring by all meanes we may, to preven such prejudice and exheredation, and to restraine the unlawfull en∣deavours of all the impugners of the Rights of our Crowne, strictly prohibite you and every of you, that you doe not, by pretext of any Commission made, or hereafter to be made to you, or any of you, presume by any Authority, without our advice, to attempt, or by others in any so cause to be attem∣pted, any thing which may tend to the derogation of our Roy∣all Right, or annulling of the oresaid Judgement rightly gi∣ven, or the weakening of our said Collation; knowing, that if you shall doe otherwise, we will proceed to apprehend you in a grievous manner, Tanquam violatores Iuris nostri Regii, as violaters of our Royall Right. By these Writs the Usurpations of this Arch Prelate and the Bishops, on the Kings Royall Prerogative, and Courts of Justice, were somewhat re∣strained;
otherwise, they had in time made themselves absolute Kings, and the Kings of England meere Cyphers, and onely ex∣ecutioners of their Papall pleasures. ROBERT WINCHELSY. Antiq Eccles. Brit. Robertus Winchelse, p. 209, to 223. Godwin P. 125, 126, 127. Wal∣singh. Hist. Angl. p. 34, 35.46.63 Math. West. An. 1294.1295, 1296, 1300.1301, 1305. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 320, 321, 337. Holinsh. p. 301, 302. See 393. a. Robert Winchelsie, his Successour, exceedingly opposed his Soveraigne King Edward the first: Who having spent an infinite summe of Money in the Warres of Scotland, summo∣nd a Parliament at Barwicke; wherein, when the Tempo∣ralty contributed liberally toward the charge of that Warre, the Clergy alledging the Canon of the late Councell of Lyons, wherein it was decreed, That no Clergie-man should pay any Ayde or Subsidie to any Temporall Magistrate, without the Popes licence, (which Canon the Arch-Bishop alledged against the Subsidie, granted by the Clergy two yeares before in his absence, cau∣sing them then to set it downe for a Canon, afterwards to be kept inviolably) refused to grant the King a Subsidy, without the Popes consent; and would then give no Subsidy nor sup∣ply at all to the King, though at the same time they readily granted three Subsidies to the Pope, towards his Warres a∣gainst the French. The King would not take this for pay∣ment; and therefore presently tooke order, That all Barnes of these undutifull rebellious Clergy-men should be locked up, and by Proclamation put all the Clergy from out of his pro∣tection, so that hereafter it should be lawfull for any man to sue them for any Cause, but they might not commence Suite a∣gainst any man; holding a See Bishop Iewels defence of his Apologe, pa. 6. c. 2. p, 521, 522 Cromptons juris∣diction of Couts, f. 19. Parliament with his Temporall Lords and Commons onely, and shutting the Bishops and Cler∣gy out of the Parliament house. This constrained some of the Clergy, after much contest, (though animated and sollicited by the Arch-Bishop still to resist) to submit to the King at last, and to be content to grant him such a proportion of their goods (though it were the fifth part of their Revenues) as he should like of; onely the Arch-Bishop, the Head of this acti∣on, continued obstinate, making no other answer to the King but this: A dutifull An∣swer of an Arch Prelate to his Prince. Under God, our universall Lord, we have two o∣ther Lords, a Spirituall Lord the Pope, and a Temporall Lord the King; and though wee be to obey both, yet rather the Spirituall Lord then the Temporall: When therefore he saw all the rest inclining to yeeld, using no other words then this; Salvet unusquisque animam suam, Let every man save his owne Soule, (as if Rebellion against his Prince were the only meanes
to save his soule) and pronouncing all those excommunicated that contributed any thing to the King, he rose up, and sud∣denly departed out of the Convocation House. The King for this his contumacy, seized all his Lands, and commanded all such Debts of his as were found in the Rolls of the Exchequer, to be leed with all speed on his Goods and Cattell, which he seized into his hands, and made shew of great displeasure. Notwithstanding, shortly after being to make Warre with the French King in France, hee thought good before his departure to receive this Arch-Rebell to favour againe, who had caused the King to be cited up to the Court of Rome, and there su∣spended. But this grace endured not long: for presently up∣on his returne, the King laid divers high Treasons to his charge; as, That he had dehorted his Subjects, in his absence, from paying their Subidies; See Holinsh p. 313, Ann 1305 That he went about to trou∣ble the quiet state of the Realme, and to defend and succour Rebellious persons; That he had conspired with divers of his Nobility, to deprive him of his Kingdome, (though the best Prince that ever England had before) to commit him to perpetuall Prison, and to Crowne his Sonne Edwad King in his stead; and that he was the Ring-leader and Authour of this Conspiracy. The Arch-Bishop no able to deny these Treasons, and being suspended from his Office by the Pope, till he should purge himselfe of these things, he See Mat. West. An.  305. p. 452 453. An. 1306. p. 457. fell downe on the ground at the Kings feete, craving pardon of his hey∣nous offences with teares and howling, calling the King then his Lord, which he never did before, neither with his month, nor in his Letters. Thus this proud Prelate, excrable both to God and man, who had twice a little before prohibited the King, in the Popes name, to make Warre with the rebellious and treacherous Scots, his Enemies, who had invaded his Kingdome in his absence, because the Pope had taken them into his protection; who had defiled and infected the whole Priest-hood and Clergy of England with his pride, exercised an unheard of Tyranny over the people; being now depre∣hended by the King in his wickednesse, terrified and dejected with the guilt of his sinne, and feare of punishment, lay now prostrate on the ground before the King, offered him his Pall, and subited his person and goods to his mercy. To whom the King gave this answer: I will not punish thee my selfe,
let I should seeme rather to have respect to my owne Revenge, though most just, then to thy Order. And although thou art altogether unworthy of thy Order and my Grace, yet I will re∣ferre the matter to thy fellow Bishops, and the Pope of Rome, that thou mayest be tryed by thy Peeres, lest thou shouldest thinke me an unjust Judge; though the Conusans of Treason, the highest Crime in a Sbject, belongs without doubt to my Tribunall, not to theirs. Moreover (added the King) I have knowne thy hatred and malice towards me, not onely in the greatest things, but even in the smallest and in matters of least moment, in which by thy authority thou hast over-much abu∣sed my patience; depriving my Clerkes in thy visitation, not∣withstanding my Letters to the contrary, and their just ap∣peales; both which thou hast contemned, together with my Royall Authority. The Arch-Bishop troubled and confoun∣ded in minde at these things, craved a Blessing from the King; who replyed, That his Blessing would rather become him, then his the Arch Bishop. The King hereupon complaines of him to the Pope, That he had troubled the peaceable and safe estate of the Kingdome in his absence, and stirred up the Nobles to a Rebellion and Conspiracy against him, &c. And notwithstanding his submission, cited him to appeare at Rome, banished him the Realme, seized upon all his goods moveable and unmoveable, forbidding all his Subjects, under a great paine, to foster him: Yet the Monkes of Canterbury secretly harboured him for a time, furnished him with necessaries, and conveyed him beyond the Seas. Which the King afterwards understanding, seized on all their Goods and Lands, banished them the Monastery, turning fourescore Monkes a begging, for∣bidding any to harbour them; and kept them in that miserable estate, till afterwards he was pleased, upon their submission, to restore them. After which, the Bishop of Winchester interceded to the King for this Arch Traytor, calling him his Lord: with which the King being greatly offended, put this Bishop out of his protection, and confiscated his goods, because he acknowled∣ged another then the King to be his lord; even such a one, who being guilty of Treason & manifest contempt against the King, had lost the very right of a Subject in his Kingdome. While the Arch-Bishop was thus in exile, before any hearing of this
Cause at Rome, the King deceaseth; who, as Pag. 316, 293. Holinshed writes was an earnest enemie of the high and presumptuous insolencie of Priests, which he judged to proceede chiefely of too much Wealth and Riches; and therefore hee devised to establish the Statute of Mortmain, to be a bridle to their inordinate lusts and riotous excesse: which Statute they la∣boured to repeale, and purchase out, by giving large Subsi∣dies to that end. His Sonne Edward the second succeeding him, out of an over-indulgent pitty, calls home this Arch-Traytor by his Letter, writes to the Pope to discontinue his Fathers Suite against him, and to send him over with all speed to Crowne him: Who glad with the newes, and unable to make haste home, as was requisite, by reason of his crazie body, sent a Commission to the King, with the names of three Bishops in it, giving him liberty to elect which of the three he desired, to Crowne him in his behalfe; who made choyse of the Bishop of Winchester, who set the Crowne on his head. The King upon the Arch-Bishops returne, restored him all his goods, and every penny received of his Temporalties during his two yeares exile, (a good reward for a Traytor) whereby he became the richest Arch-Bishop of many before and after him. He was no sooner come home, but a new danger encountred him, by his owne wonted boldnesse. The King, by the counsell of Piers Gave∣ston, had committed the Bishop of Coventry to Ward, at York: A Convocation shortly after being assembled, the Arch-Bishop would not suffer any matter to be debated in the House, till the Bishop were set at liberty; which the King was contented to beare withall at that time. This Bishop (saith Antiq. Eccls. Bri. p. 219, 220 229. Matthew his Successour) though he were reported to be a stout Governour of the English Church, and a De∣fender of its Rites, yet he was too excessive in this, and ever opposite to the King, attributing that to the Pope, with whom he was most strictly linked, which he derogated from the King; seeking not so much the Liberties of the Realme, as the encrease of the Popes power, and deminishing the Kings Authority, that he might transferre it to the Pope. He was a great enemie to Prohibitions, labouring the ad∣vancement of the Ecclesiasticall Courts Jurisdiction, and the eclipsing of the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Kings
Courts. He was the Author of Articuli Cleri, and Walter Raynolds his Successour, procurer of the Kings answere to them in Parliament. Which Articles, though they bee commonly taken for a Statute, yet in truth they are M. 19. E. 3. Fitz. Iurisdicti∣n, 28. none, but a meere Answere of the King in Parliament, to Ar∣ticles exhibited to him by the Clergie, made by the advice of his Councell, but not of the Commons and whole Parliament; and a particular Grant of the King onely, not of the Parliament: as appeares by the seve∣rall Answeres to each of those Articles, but especially to the last. Finally, he ever sided with the Pope for the Liberties of the Church, and with the Barons also, against the King. He opposed himselfe against Piers Gaveston, the Spensers, and other Favouries and Corruptors of the young King, very boldly; and enforced Iohn War∣ren, Earle of Surrey, to forsweare the Company of a certaine beautifull Harlot, with the love of whom hee was greatly bewitched. And afterwards, when notwith∣standing his Oath, he returned to her company, and got Children upon her, hee accused him to the Convo∣cation both of Adultery and Perjury, and a last made him to leave her. Hee excommunicated Walter, Bishop of Coventry, for revoling from him and the Clergie, and adhering to Piers Gaveston; who appealed unto the Pope, and was by him absolved. Which last Acts of his are commendable, though they proceeded rather from the stournesse and haughtinesse of his Spirit, then the Pietie of his Heart: How ever, his former are most execrable. WALTER RAYNOLDS. Fox Acts nd Monuments, p. 342. At. Ecls. p. 226.227. God∣wins Gatal. p. 129.130, Wal∣singham. Hist. Angl. p. 98.99, 101, 103, 104, 105. Speed, hist. l. 9. c. 11. p. 667, 677, 679, 680, 681, 685. Hlin. p. 335. Walter Raynolds, his next Successor, advanced and pre∣ferred onely by King Edward the Second to that Sea; when the King, after the Barons Warres ended, had done execution upon divers of the Nobls that had reblled, Adam Tarltn Bishop of Hereford, by the Kings direction, in a Parliament holden at London, Anno Dom. 1324. was apprehended and brought to the Ba, to be arraigned for the like faults of Rebellion and High Treason against his Soveraigne; to wit, for ayding, succouring, and maintaining the Morimers and other Rebels: who having nothing to say in defence of himselfe, against the Crimes objected unto him, at first dis∣dained
to make any answere at all; and when he was in a man∣ner forced thereto, standing mute a long space, at length hee brake out into these words, and flatly told the King: A dutifull speech of a Pre∣late. My Lord and King, saving your Reverence, I am an humble Minister and Member of the Holy Church of God, and a consecrated Bishop, though unworthy; I neither can nor ought to answere to such high matters, without the connivence and consent of my Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, my direct Iudge next after the Pope, and of the other Fathers, the Bishops, my Peeres. At which saying, the Arch-Bishops and Bishops there present, rose up and inter∣ceded to the King, for their Colleague: and when as the King, would not be entreated, the whole Clergie challenged the Bishop as a Member of the Church, and so exempt from the Kings Judicature (as if Lay men were not Mem∣bers of the Church too, as well as Bishops and Priests, and so, by this reason, exempt from Secular Jurisdiction.) The King forced thereunto with their Clamours (though for a very Traytors rescue) committed him to the Arch-Bishops custody, to answere elsewhere for these Crimes. But within few dayes after, when the King called him againe before his presence, to make answere to the matters layd against him, and there arraigned him before his Royall Tribunall for his Treasons, all the Bishops of England almost being then at London, the The presump∣tuous dmeanour of Preate. Arch-Bishops of Canterbury, Yorke, and Dublin, accompanyed with ten other Bishops, and a great troupe of men, hearing of Tarlons Arraignment, in great haste hyed them thither; and having their Crosses borne before them, entred the Court by vio∣lence, tooke the Prisoner from the Barre before hee had made any answere, chased away the Kings Officers by force, and carryed him away with them from the Barre, (the highest affront that ever was offered to publicke Justice in the Kingdome; and that in open Parliament, in case of High Treason against the King,) and withall they proclaimed, That no man should lay violent hands on this Traytor whom they had rescued, upon paine of Excommunication. The King being exceedingly moved with this unparalleled insolence of the Clergie, as he had reason, commanded an Inquest to bee impanelled, and a lawfull inquiry to bee made of the Treasons committed by him, in his absence.
The Jury, without feare of the King, or any hatred of the Bishop, according to the truth of the matter, finding the Bishop guilty of all the Treasons and Rebellions whereof he was indicted: the King hereupon Hanging was too good for him and his complices. banished the Bishop seized upon his Temporalties, Lands, and Goods; but the Bishop himselfe, by the consent of all the Arch-Bishops and Bishops, was by strong hand kept safe in the Arch-Bishop of Canterburies custodie, notwithstanding his proscripion, who at last reconciled this Traytor to the King. So indu∣strious have the Bishops beene, not onely to plot and exe∣cute Treasons, but likewise to defend and intrcede for Traytors of their owne Coat, to keepe them from execu∣tion, and to get them againe into favour, that so they might more boldly proceede on in their intended Trecheries and Rebellions, being sure to escape unpunished, by meanes of their fellow Bishops, how ever other Traytors speede. After this, the King demanded Subsidies of the Clergie, towards his Warres; which they at first stiffely denyed to grant, without the Popes Licence first obtained; which the King was enforced to procure: and notwithstanding it, they stood off a while, alledging, That the Pope had of late yeares received so many Subsidies and Procu∣rations from them, that they were not able to give the King so much as one Subsidie; who could readily grant the Pope so many: At last, upon this condition, That the King should augment and confirme those Ecclesiasti∣call Priviledges they claymed, they granted him a Sub∣sidie; and he thereupon gave the Answeres, to Articuli Cleri, and granted the Clergie to be free from Purveyances. Af∣ter this, the Queene, with Edward the third, her Sonne, went into France, to make Peace betweene France and Eng∣land; where, by the French Kings perswasions, being her Brother, she continued, refusing to returne againe into England: The King hereupon banisheth her and her Sonne; great Warres and stirres arise hereupon: divers of the Nobles, together with the Bishops of Lincolne, Here∣ford, Dublin, and Ely, side with the Queene, and levie a great summe of Money for her: The Arch-Bishop, though ad∣vanced meerely by the King, who highly favoured him, secretly joynes with the Queene against his Soveraigne, in his
greatest necessiies, and sent the Queene both See Holinsed, p. 338, 339, 340, 341. monies and supplies secretly, yet keeping in with the King in outward shew, the better to betray him and his secrets. And Bishop Tarlton whom he had formerly rescued from his Arraigne∣ment, and reconciled to the King, became the chiefest stickler and Incendiary against his Soveraigne, and the Au∣thour of his subsequent murther. The King what with warres and Papall exactions, was brought to such penurie, that he was forced to borrow 260. pounds even of the Popes Collectors of Peter-pence. The Queenes side and Fores at last prevailing against the King, who was glad to lurke in Wales like a fugitive, the Arch-Bishop openly re∣volts from him, and the King by his and other the Bishops meanes, being deposed in Parliament, Edward the third his Sonne was unanimously elected King by all the people. The Arch-Bishop of Canterbury with all the Prelates (here all Arch-traytors) consented to the Election, and the Arch-Bishop taking this Theame, The voyce of the People is the voyce of God, made a speech to the people, exhorting them to pray to the King of Kings for the new Elected King; who out of his filiall duty refused upon any termes to accept the Crowne, without his Fathers consent: where∣upon three Bishops, with others, were sent to the King to Kenelworth where he was imprisoned, to get his consent; which being implyedly obtained, the Arch-Bishop Crownes his Sonne King in his stead, at Westminster (the very height of Treason.) This Arch-Bishop much hindered the course of Prohibitions from the Kings Court to the Ecclesiasti∣call. At last hee was commanded by the Queene to con∣secrate one Iames Barkely Bishop of Exeter, which hee did, but for his labour was so threatned, taunted, and revied by the Pope, who had reserved the Donation of this Bishopricke to himselfe, that for very griefe hee dyed. Antiq Eccls. Brit. p. 236. to 258. Godin, p. 132. to 137. Walsing. p. 136. s. 147. Fox Acts & Monuments, p. 349, 350, 409. Iohn Straford,JOHN STRATFORD. his very next successour, being made Bi∣shop of Winchester by the Popes provision, against King Edward the seconds liking, who would have preferred Ro∣bert Baldocke his Chancellour to that See, had no sooner set sooting into this Bishopricke, but the King caused all his Goods to be seized, and his Livings to be sequestred to his
use, besides, he caused him to be summoned to answer to severall Actions, so as for feare hee was faine to hide him∣selfe: Whereupon Proclamation was made, that no man should dare to harbour or give him entertainement, by meate, drinke or lodging: At last, after much adoe, the Arch-Bishop made his peace, and brought him into favour with the King, who dying King Edward the third advanced him to the See of Canterbury. The King going into France with a great Armie, and laying claime to that Crowne, commit∣ted the Government of the Realme here at home to the Arch-Bishop. He, besides other promises of faithfull dili∣gence in the trust committed to him, assured the King hee should want no money to expend in this exploit, whereunto all kindes of people shewed themselves so willing to yeeld what helpe they possibly might, as hee tooke pon him to discerne, the King might command of them what hee lit. No sooner was the King over Seas, but infinite summes of Money were collected with the very good liking of all the people: This Money which men thought would have maintained the Warres for two or three yeares, was spent in lesse than one. The King wanting Money, puts the Arch-Bishop in minde of his promise, calling continually on him for more Monies. The Arch-Bishop blames his Officers beyond the Seas for ill managing of his Treasure, ad∣vising him to make peace with the French upon reaso∣nable conditions, sending him no more Money. The King grew exceeding angry with the Arch-Bishop for this Motion and usage, and his Souldiers calling for Mo∣ny, he told them that the Arch-Bishop had berayed him to the French King, who no doubt had hired him to de∣taine their pay in his hands; and to satisfie his Souldiers needes, was enforced to take up what Monies he could at hard rates from Usurers. And though some excuse the Arch-Bishop in this, yet Sped, hist. l. 9. c. 12. Sect. 64, 65 p. 69. Fox Acts and Monumnts p. 350. others thinke him guilty of practising against the Kings further good ortunes in France; because Pope Benedict the Twelfth was displeased much therewith, as pretending it was pernicious to Christendome, and thereupon put Flanders under Interdict, for leaving the French King, and adhering to King Edward; and therefore the Arch-Bishop to please the Pope (whom hee obeyed
more than the King) who had written a Leer to the King and him, to desist from that Warre, thus thwaed the Kings deignes, by not sending him such supplies of Money as hee promised and in moving him to peace. Antiq. Eccels. Brit. p. 239. H∣linsh. p. 361. The King taking it very hainously to be thus dealt with, and that his brave be∣ginnings and proceedings in France should bee thus crossed; hereupon steps suddenly over into England, and cas the Bi∣shop of Chichester, then Lord Chancellour, and the Bishop of Liheld, then Lord Treasurer, prisoners into the Tower, whither he intended to send the Arch-Bishop. But hee ha∣ving some inkling of the Kings intention, got him to Can∣terbury, and there stood upon his guard, being accused by Hey Bishop of Lincolne, and Gregory Scrope then Lord chiee Justice of England, of Trechery and Conspiracy with the French, and of High-treason, the whole blame, by the generall voyce of all men, lying on him: Sir Nicholas Cantilupus here∣upon ollowed him to Canterbury, with Iohn Faingdon a pub∣like Notary, who required him to make present payment of a great summe of Money which the King had taken up of out-landish Merchants upon the Arch-Bishops credit, or else to get him over Seas immediately, and yeeld his body prisoner to them till he debt was discharged, for that the King upon his promise had undertaken hee should so doe. The Arch-bishop sayd, he could give no present answere, but would take time to advise thereof, writing divers Letters to the King, not to hearken to Flatterers, and those who defamed other mens action, and to make choyse of bet∣ter Counsellour, and not to disturbe the peace at home, whiles he made waes abroad. After which hee called the Clergie and people into the Cathedrall Church of Canterbury, and made an Oration to them, taking Ecclesi∣astius 48.10. for his Theame, He feared not any Prince, neither old any bring him into subjection no word could o∣vercome im, &c. In which Sermon, hee highly com∣mended and approved Thmas Becket Arch-Bishop of Canterbry, who I wish our present scular Prelates would observe this. with-drew himselfe wholly from all Secular Affaires, and betooke himselfe onely to the Government of the Church, and blamed himselfe much, for that hee had left the care of the Church, and wholly, yea, dayly iployed himselfe in the managing the
Kings affaires; for which he now received no other re∣ward for his merits towards the King and Kingdome, but envie, and the danger of his head, promising with teares, that hereafter hee would be more diligent in the Govern∣ment of the Church; Which Sermon ended, to keepe off all Royall violence from him, he published certaine Ar∣ticles of Excommunication after the horrid Popish man∣ner, with Tapers burning, and Bells ringing; In which An insolent act of a Trayterly Prelate. Articles hee Excommunicated all those who disturbed the peace of the King and Kingdome, all Lay-men who should lay violent hands on the Clergie, or invade their Lands, Houses, Goods, or violate the Liberties of the Church, or Magna Charta, or forge any crimes o any one, but especially every one that should draw himselfe or any Bishop of his Province into the Kings hatred or displea∣sure, or should falsely say they were guilty of Treason, or worthy of any notable or capitall punishment. Having published these Articles in the Church of Canterbury, hee commanded the Bishop of London, and all the Suffragans of his Province, to proclaime them in their Churches and Diocesse: The King hearing of this strange insolencie, writes to the Bishop of London, acquaints him how treche∣rosly the Arch-Bishop had dealt with him, and how by these Excommunications hee thought to shift off his cal∣ling to an account; and therefore commanded him not to publish them Afer which, the King sent Ralph Eale of Stafford with two Notaries to the Arch-bishop, to summon, him in the Kings Name without delay to appeare before him, to consult with his other Nobles and Prelates concer∣ning the affaires of England and France: The Bishop gave no other answere but this, That he would deliberate upon it Soone after there came certaine Messengers from the Duke of Brabant, desiring to speake with the Arch-Bishop, who refusing to speake with them, they cited him by Writings, which they hanged on the High Crosse at Canterbury, to make payment of a great summe of Money which the King of England had borrowed of him. The King after this sends some Letters to the Prior and Covent of Canterbury, who shewing the Letters to the Arch-Bishop, he on Ash-Wednesday goes up into the Pulpit in the Cathedrall
Church, and there calling the Clergie and people to him, spake much to them concerning his fidelity and integrity in the Kings businesse: after which hee commanded the Kings Letters to be read, and then answered all the Crimes and Calumnies (as he earmed them) layd against him in those Letters, and putting his Answere, which he there uttered, into Writing, he published it throughout his whole Provinc. The King hereupon makes a Reply to his Answere; shewing therein, how treacherously and un∣faithfully the Bishop had dealt with him: how hee refused to come to his Answere, but in full Parliament; and would not appeare before him, upon generall Summons, though he offered him Safe-conduct, under his Great Seale: how hee undutifully rayled upon him and his Councell, in his Excommunication, Letters, and Answers, calling the King himselfe an Oppressour of his people, against Justice; and how he endeavoured by his strange practises, to stirre up the People to Sedition and Rebellion. Which Letters (at large recorded by Ant. Eccles. rit. p. 241. to 255. Walsing. p. 138. s. 144. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 339, 350, 351. Matthew Parker and others, with the Bishops Answeres to them) the King commanded to bee published every where. The Arch-Bishop thereupon pub∣lisheth a large Answere to them; in the beginning whereof he affirmes, the Not this proud inolent An∣swere. Bishops Authority to be above the Kings: and therefore, that the Kings Highnesse ought to know, that hee ought to be judged by the Bishops, not they by him, nor yet to be directed at his pleasure. For who doubts, that the Priests of Christ ought to be accounted the Fahers and Masters of Kings, Princes, and all faithfull peo∣ple? And therefore it would bee a strange madnesse, if the Sonne should endeavour to subjet the Father, or the Scho∣lar the Master, to their Censures. After which hee sheweth, That Popes and Bishops have excommunicated and judged divers Emperours and Kings, and therefore they ought not to judge Bishops; (by which kind of Logicke, Bishops and Clergie-men must be Judges of all other men, yea, of Kings and Emperours, but no men else Judges of them or their Actions) concluding, That he had So his present Successour and our other Pre∣lates argued in Dr. Bastckes cse. received no ho∣nour or advancement from the King, but onely from God; and that he would give an account in no Court, and to no person, but i Parliament. The King hereupon writes
his predecessours, who were wont to honour and love their Princes, and to make prayers and supplications for them, and to instruct them with the spirit of meekenesse, begins against us and our Counsellors in the spirit of pride, a thread of rash faction, and perverse invention, by prolonging his iniquity, and seeking the consolation of miserable men, namely, to have many Consorts in punishment; And which is worse, hee endeavours all hee may to precipiate into our ontempt and irreverence with lying speeches his Suffragans in sinne, with other devout people, and our loyall Subjects. And albeit with God not the highest degree, but the best life is most approved, yet hee glorying in the altitude of his State, requires reverence to be given to him, which yet he renders not to us, though it be due from him to us. For whereas hee and other Prelates of this Kingdome, who receive the Temporalties of their Churches from us, out of the debt of sworne fidelity, ought to render us fealty, honour and reverence; e alone, is not ashamed, Profide PERFIDIAM to render us perfi∣diousnesse in stead of Loyalty, Contumely in stead of Honour, and Contempt in lieu of Reverence. Whereupon albeit wee are and alwayes have beene ready to reverence Spirituall Fathers us is meee; yet we ought not with conniving eyes to passe by their offences, which we behold to redound to the perill of Vs and Our Kingdome. But the same Arch-Bishop complaines, that cer∣taine crimes in our fore-sayd Letters of excuse were objected a∣gainst him being absent, unheard, and undefended, and that he was judged guilty of capitall crimes; as if we, as he foolishly pretendeth, ad proceeded against him criminally to the utter∣most, which is not true, whereas we onely acted the part of an ex∣cuse, compelled by necessitie, lest we should seeme to neglect our Reputation. But let this calumnious Reprehender see if this com∣plaint may not justly be retorted on his owne head, who falsely and maliciously with assertive words hath described Vs his King, and our Counsellours, (being absent, unheard, undesended, not convicted) to be Oppressors and Transgressors of the Lawes; when as he is deser∣vedly blame-worthy, who incurs the crime reprehended by himself, and condemnes himself in that, wherein he judgeth another, whiles himselfe is found guilty of the same, &c. But because it becomes us not to contest with a contentious man, nor to consent to his per∣versenesse, we firmely enjoyne and command you in the Faith and Love wherein you are obliged to us, that notwithstanding any Mandate of the Arch-Bishop himselfe, to which you ought not to
yeeld obedience in derogation of our Royall honour against the Oath of Allegeance made unto us, that you proceede to the publi∣shing of those things contained in our fore-sayd excusatory Letters according to their order: And because we are, and ought to bee principally carefull of the conservation of our Royall Rights and Prerogatives, which the worthily to be recognized Priority of our Progenitors, Kings of England, hath magnifically defen∣ded, and the sayd Arch-Bishop to stirre up the Clergie and peo∣ple against us, and to hinder the Expedition of our Warre, which we have principally undertaken y his Counsell, hath made, and by others caused to be made and published certaine Denunciati∣ons and Publications of sentences of Excommunications, and in∣jurious Monitions, prejudiciall to the Right and Royall dignity of our Crowne, and by them endeavours in many Anticles to take from us the Iurisdiction notoriously knowne to be competent un∣to us, of which since we are an unconquered King, we are known to be capable, and which we and our Progenitors have peaceably used from old time, both with the knowledge and sufferance of the chiefe Pontifs, and of the Prelates and Clergie of our Kingdome, to the wounding of our Majestie, and the manifest derogation of our Rights and Prerogatives Royall: Wee strictly command you under the perill that shall ensue, that you doe not at the sayd Arch-Bishops command, or any others, in any sort by you or others, make, or as much as in you is, suffer to be made by others, these undue Denunciations, Publications, or Monitions, derogatory and prejudiciall to our Royall Rights, and Prerogatives, or any things else, whereby our Liege people may be stirred up against us, or the Expedition of our Warre by any way hindered, to the subverion of us and our Liege people, which God forbid: And if any thing hath beene attempted by you in this kinde, that you spee∣dily revoke it. By which we see what a loyall Subject this Arch-Prelate was: Who to adde to his former contempts, Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 409. Edit. 1610 being required by King Edward the third to come to him at Yorke, out of his obstinate disloyall humour would not ap∣peare, by reason whereof, Scotland, the same time was lost;SIMON ISLIP. Yet was he suffered, though for this he deserved to lose his head. The two next Arch-Bishops, Iohn Vfford, and Thomas Bradwardyn (swept away with the Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 26.6 Fox Acts and Monu. p. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 68.  274. Plague within one yeares space before their instalments) had neither time nor opportunity to contest with their Soveraigne; But their next Successour Simon Islip, as he had gret conests with
the Bishop of Lincolne about the University of Oxford, and with the Arch-Bishop of Yorke about Crosse bearing, which troubled the King and Kingdome much (of which more here∣after in a peculiar Treatise of our Prelates Schisms:) So he got a grant from the Pope to receive a Subsidie of all the Clergie of his Diocesse (to wit, foure pence out of every Mark) to defray his Archie piscopall charges under pretext of which by mis∣interpreting the Popes Bulls, hee exacted from them a whole Tenth. He endeavoured to exempt Clerkes from Temporall Jurisdiction and Courts in cases of Felony; which being ob∣tained, divers Clerkes abused their Priviledges, committed many hainous crimes, so as the Bishops at the Kings and No∣bles earnest request, were enforced to make a strict Decree for their future punishment and restraint. Besides, he accom∣panyed Thomas Lile Bishop of Ely to the Barre, where he was arraigned and found guilty of Murther, yet admitted his appeale to purge himselfe before him as his Metropolitane after the Jury had found him guilty, in affront of Law and Justice: After which, Ely breaking prison, fled to Rome, caused the Kings Judges to be Excommunicated, together with their servants, and their Lands to be Interdicted; and such of them as dyed Excommunicated, he caused to be un∣buried, and to be digged out of their Graves in Church-yards, and cast into Mires; which caused great stirres in Eng∣land. At last this Arch-Bishop riding to Magfield, fell into a Mire himselfe with his horse; in which fall, the horse stri∣ving to recover himselfe, he was plunged over head and eares and drenched in the Myre; and comming all wet into Magfield, fell into a sleepe before his clothes were put off, and so into a Palsey, and there dyed. A just punishment for his cruelty to the dead Corps o those Excommunicate persons. In his time there was a great mortalitie, especially among Clergie-men, 7 Bishops dying in one yeare, Anno 1345. and 2. the next. SIMON LANGHAM.Simon Langham, his next Successour, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 275. to 282. Walsing. Hist. Angl. Ann. 1371. p. 181. Et Ypodigma Neu∣st, p. 132. was successively both Chancellour and Treasurer of England, and in his time all publike Offices of the King and Kingdome were admini∣stred by Clergiemen, for this Arch-Prelate was Chancel∣lour; Iohn Bishop of Bath, Treasurer David Wollor, Priest, Master of the Rolls; William Wickham Arch-deacon of Lin∣colne, Keeper of the Privie Seale; Iohn Troy, Priest; Treasurer of Ireland: Robert Caldwell, Clerke, Treasurer of the Kings
House; William Bugrig, Generall Receiver of the Dutchie of Lancaster; William Asheby, Chancellor of the Exchequer; Iohn Newnham, one of the Chamberlaines of the Exchequer, and one of the Keepers of the Treasury and Kings Jewels, and William de Mulso the other; Iohn Ronceby, Clerke of the Houshold, and Surveyor, and Comptroller of the Kings workes; Roger Barnburgh, and 7. more Clergy-men, Clerkes of the Chancery Richard Chesterfield, the Kings under Trea∣surer; Thomas Brantingham, the Kings Treasurer in the parts of Guines, Marke, and Calice: All which Clerkes abounded likewise with Ecclesiasticall Benefices and Dignities; some of them possessing at least 20. Benefices and Dignities by the Popes owne license, and having further liberty to retaine as many Livings as they could get: This was in the yeare 1367. But not long after Anno 1371. upon a complaint of the No∣bles in Parliament, all Clergie-men were thrust out of Tem∣porall Offices, and Lay-men put into their places. See Holinsd, p. 406. Caxton 7. part. An. 46. Ed. 3. Holinshed out of Caxton saith that the King this yeare in Parliament de∣manded a subsidie of 50000. pound of the Laity, and as much of the Clergie. The temporall men soone agreed to that payment, but the Clergie excused themselves with faire words, and shiting answeres, insomuch that the King tooke displeasure with them, and deposed certaine spi∣rituall men from their office of dignity, as the Chancelour, the Privy seale, the Treasurer, and such other, in whose roomes he placed temporall men: where as Caton in truth saith, that this subsidy was raised by the Clergie by good avisement out of their Lay Fee, and that this their removall from Lay Offices was at the request and asking of the Lords in hatred of men of holy Church; with which Walsingham accords. This Arch-Prelate being very ambitious, was without the Kings pri∣vity, created by Pope Vrban Cardinall of S. Sixtus with which newes the King being much offended, seised on his Tempo∣ralties: At which the Arch-Bishop nothing troubled, did at last with much difficulty obtaine leave from the King to goe to Rome destitute of his Family, and stript of all his Archi∣episcopall Ensignes, where he shortly after dyed. William Witlesey,WILLIAM WITLESEY. who next enjoyed this See, had some See Antiq. Eccles. rit. p. 282. differences with the King about granting Subsidies. At last he and the Clergie condescended to grant an Annuall Tenth upon condition that the King would free them from the in∣tolerable
yoak of the Popes opprions; But Wil. Courtney thē Bp o Hereford, after Arch-Bp of Cant.) standing up stoutly in the midst o the Synod, sayd with a loud voyce; That neither he nor the Clergies of his Diocesse would give any thing to the King, beore the King had remedied those calamities under which the Clergie had long time suffered: Whereupon, the King sent Mes∣sengers to the Pope to Rome, to take away Provisions, Reser∣vations, and other Exactions wherewith the Clergie and peo∣ple of England were grieved; and put the Statute against Pro∣visions in execution. SIMON SUDBURY.Simon Sudbury, who next succeeded him, about whose E∣lection there was much Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 283. to 205. debate, was not long after his In∣stalment made Lord Chancellour of England, and sundry other Clergie-men formerly put from the Administration of Temporall Offices and affaires, by his example and meanes were restored to them againe; those Lay-men who managed them being disgracefully thrust out thereupon: Wakefeld Bishop of Worcester, being made Lord High Trea∣surer. This Arch-Bishop in the insurrection of Iacke Straw and Wat Tyler (stirred up by Iohn Ball a seditious Priest) was by this Vulgar rout (who purposed to destroy all Bishops and Abbots) proclaimed an enemie both to the King and people; who were so incensed against him as their greatest enemie, that apprehending him in the Tower of London, where the King then was, even whiles he was saying Masse; they drew him out thence, and with an Axe cut off his head like a Traytor. The manner of which Execution is thus described by Walsing. Hist. Angl. An. 1381. p. 261, 262, 263. Ypodigma Neust. p. 139. Godwins Cat. of Bihops, p. 102.103. Graftn, p. 336. Waligham, Godwin, and others. These Rebels in all haste came to the Tower, where the Court then was, requiring with great out-cries the Arch-Bishop. The Arch-Bishop, then Lord Chancellour, having had some inkling thereof the day before, had spent all that night in prayer, and just when they called for him was saying of Masse in the Chappell of the Tower. That ended, and hea∣ring of their comming, Let us now goe (saith he unto his men) surely it is better to dye, seeing to live it can be no pleasure. With that, in came these murthering Rebels, crying, Where is the Traytor, Where is the Traytor? He answered, I am the Arch-Bishop, (whom I thinke you seeke) but no Traytor. With great violence then they drew him out of the Chappell, and car∣ried him to the Tower Hill seeing there nothing but
swords and weapons; and hearing nothing but, Kill, kill, away with the Traytor, &c. yet he was not so amazed, but with great eloquence he could goe about to perswade them, not to imbrue their hands in the blood of their Arch-Bishop, their chiefe Pastor: assuring them, that all the Realme would be interdicted or it, and the fact must needes be punished first or last by the temporall Law. And lastly, though these failed, God the just Judge would revenge it, either in this, or in the world to come, if not both. But these Varlots were so eagerly bent, that the very songs of the Syrens would nothing have moved them; seeing therefore nothing but death before his face, with comfortable words forgiving the executioner (that scarce ever requested him so to doe) with a very cheerefull countenance he kneeled, and yeelded himselfe to their fury; once he was stricken in the necke so weakely, as that notwithstanding, he kneeled still upright, and putting his hand up to the wound, he used these words; A ha, it is the Hand of God. Hee had not remooved his hand from the place, when a second stroake cut off his fin∣gers ends, and felled him to the ground: with much adoe, having hacked and hewed his necke with eight blowes, they got off his head, upon Fryday Iune 14. 1381. All which day, and a part of the next, his body lay there headlesse, no man daring to offer it buriall: as for his head, they nayled his hood upon it, and so fixing it upon a pole, set it on London Bridge. By all which it appeares, that he was very odious to the people, and no other but a Traytor in their estima∣tion. William Courtney,WILLIAM COURTNEY, next Arch-Bishop to him in succession, as he Ant. Eccles. Brt. p. 282.284. opposed the grant of a subsidy to the King whiles he was Bishop of Hereford, as you heard before, in the Acts of Whitlesey; so in the yeare 1376. when hee was Bishop of London, when King Edward the third desired a pecuniary ayd to helpe to supply his wants, and defray his Warres, this proud Prelate withstood these payments, com∣plaining, that many injuries were done to him and to William Wickam Bishop of Winchester, which put into wri∣ting, he tendred to the Synod, and requested that nothing might be granted to the King before he had made satisfacti∣on to them for these injuries, which the Synod assented
to and thereupon Wickam, formerly banished by the King, was restored to his Bishopricke, and admitted into his Synod. Antiqu. Ecl. Brit. p. 296, to 300, &c. Holin. p. 475, 476. Hee received his ArchBishopricke by pro∣vision from the Pope against the Law, and made great scru∣ple whether he might have his Crosier borne before him, or whether he might marry the Queene of Boomia his Sister, to King Richard the second, before he had received his Pall from he Pope; which ye he did at last, interposing this wary Protestation, that hee did it not in contempt o the Court of Rome. He excommunicated the Bailiffes o Can∣terbury, for pnishing adultery and other crimes, which were to be punished by the Prelates; who neglected for to doe it. After which he excommunicated one Richard Ismonger of Ailsford in Kent, because he corrected criminals by Lay Authority, which were to be punished by the Prelates, and so violated the priviledges of the Church: he humbly desi∣red to be absolved, promising by oath, never hereafter to violate the Ecclesiasticall Jurisdiction, and that he would un∣dergoe any punishment for his former contumacy and rash∣nesse that the ArchBishop should impose upon him; who enjoyned him this punshment: First, that in the Market place of Westalling in the greatest assembly of the people, he should for three Market dayes together be stript naked, and bastinadoed with clubs; and after that he should undergoe the same punishment as often both at Maidstone and Canter∣bury, and that ater his last castigation at Canterbury, he should enter into the Cathedrall Church there, naked, and offer a Ta∣per of five pound weight at Thomas Beckets shrine: which pu∣nishment if he refused to performe, he should relapse into his former state of excommunication: a strange punishment for the Kings Officer to undergoe, onely for executing justice upon delinquents in the Prelates defaults. This Arch-Prelate so farre incensed King Richard the second, that he comman∣ded his goods, and temporalties to be feased, and the Bishop himselfe was glad to hide his head in secret corners, with a few attendants till he had made his peace with the King. In this Arch-bishops time, there were great contests betweene him and his Suffraganes, who opposed him in his Metro∣polticall visitation, and in levying the taxe of foure pence the pound on the Clergy within his Province, which he to
their great opprssion had procured from the pope: He had a great contestation with the Earle of Arundell, whose ser∣vants he excommunicated for fishing in one of his Ponds in the Mannor of Southmalling in Chichester Diocesse; whereup∣on the Earle complained to the King, who hearing the cause, commanded the excommunication directed to the Bishop of Chichester, to be revoked. In this Arch-Bishops time, the Statute of Provisions and Premunire was enacted; which the Pope and Prelates laboured forthwith to cause the King to repeale, to which the Nobles and Commons would by no meanes consent. Ann. Dom. 1387. when divers causes of high Treason were debated in Parliament,Ant. Eccl. Brit. p. 299, 300 the Arch-Bishop with his Suffraganes who by Law could not be present in the House, in debating causes of blood, departing the House made this Protestation: In the Name of God, Amen. Where∣as of right and by the custome of the Realme of England, it appertaines to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury for the time being, as also to his Suffragans, his Brethren and fellow Bishops, Ab∣bots, Priors, and all other Prelates whatsoever, holding of our Lord the King by Therfore they sit there only by their Tenure, as Barons, not as Bishops. Barony, to be personally present in all Par∣liaments of the King as Peeres of the said Realme, and there of the businesses of this Kingdome, and other things there usually hand∣led, with the est of the Peeres of  said Kingdome, and others having right to be there present, to consul, and handle, ordaine, decree, and define, and to doe other things, which are there ready to be executed in time of Parliament, in all, and every of which, we William Courtney, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, &c. for us and our Suffragans, fellow Bishops, and Confreers, as likewise for the Abbots, Priors, and all Prelates aforesaid, protest, and every one of them here present by himselfe or his proxie, publicke∣ly and expresly protesteth, that we and every of us, intend and in∣tendeth, will and willeth to be present in this present Parliament, and others as Peeres of the said Realme, after the usuall manner, to consult, handle, ordaine, decree, and define, and to exercise other things with others who have right to be present in the same, our state and order, and each of them in all things alwayes saved. But because in the present Parliament some matters are handled, at which by the derees of sacred Canons it is not lawfull for us, or any to be any wayes personally present, for those things we will and every of them protest, and every of them here present protesteth like∣wise;
that we neither intend nor desire, as by Law we neither can nor ought, neither doth any of them intend or desire to be present any way in this present Parliament, whiles such matters are or shall be in debate, but we and every of them will in this part wholly ab∣sent our selves. And we further protest, and every of them protesteth that for this our absence we neither intend, nor will, nor doth any of them intend or will, that the Processe made, or to be made in this present Parliament, as the which we neither may, nor ought to be present, as farre as it concernes us or any of them, shall in future times be any way impugned, debilitated or infringed. Which I re∣cite to shew, that Parliaments may be held and decree things without Bishops, and to checke the pride of those Prelates who this Parliament pleaded hard to be present at the debate of the Lord Straffords Cause. I cannot here pretermit the tre∣cherous and bloudy practice of William Courney against the true Saints of God, and the Kings most loyall Subjects, for he being not content solemnely to Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 404, &c. See Walsing. Hist. Ang. p. 300, to 330. Holinshd, p. 482, &c. excommunicate and per∣secute Iohn Wiclife, Iohn Ashton, Nicholas Herford, and Philip Repingdon, both at Pauls-crosse and at Oxford, for the true profession of the Gospell, did moeover by all meanes possi∣ble solicite King Henry the fourth, to joyn with all the pow∣er of his Temporall Sword, for that he well perceived, that hitherto as yet the Popis Clergy had not authority suffici∣ent by any publicke Law or Statute of this Land, to proceed unto death against any person whatsoever, in case of Religion but onely by the usurped tyranny and example of the Court of Rome: Where note (gentle Reader) for thy better un∣derstanding, the practise of the Romish Prelates, in seeking the Kings helpe to further their bloody purpose against the good Saints of God. This King being but young, and under yeares of ripe judgement, partly induced, or rather seduced by importune suite of the foresaid Arch-Bishop; party also either for feare of the Bishops, (for Kings cannot alwayes doe in their Realmes what they will) or else perhaps inticed by some hope of a Sublidy to be gathered by the Clergy, was content to adjoyne his private assent (such as it was) to the setting downe of an Ordinance, which was indeed the very first Law that is to be found made against Religion and the Professors thereof, bearing the name of an Act made in the Parliament, holden at Westminster, Ann. 5. Rich. 2. c. 5. com∣monly
intituled, An Act against the Lollards (the Contents whereof you may read in the Statutes at large, and in Ma∣ster Fox.) This Act, though it beares the name of a Sta∣tute both in written and Printed Bookes, yet it was fraudu∣lently and unduly devised by the Prelates onely, and a meere pernicious forgery to advance their owne Episcopall power and Jurisdiction, invade the Subjects liberties, tread downe Religion, and shed our Martyrs blood; with which the Com∣mons were so highly offended, as they had just cause so to be, that in the Uas of Saint Michael next following, at a Par∣liament summoned and holden at Westminster, the 6. yeare of the said King, among sundry petitions made to the King by the Commons, whereunto he assented; there is one in this forme, against this spurious Act of theirs See Master Fullrs Argu∣ment, p. 8, 9. Item, prayen the Commons, that whereas an Estatute was made the last Parliament in these words: It is ordained in this present Par∣liament, that Commissions from the King be directed to the Sheriffes and other Ministers of the King, or to other suffici∣ent persons, after, and according to the Certificates of the Pre∣lates thereof, to be made unto the Chancery from time to time, to arrest all such Preachers, and their Fautors, Maintai∣ners, and Abettors, and them to detaine in strong Prison, un∣till they will justifie themselves according to reason, and Law of holy Church. And the King willeh and commandeth, that the Chancellor make such Commissions at all times, as shall be by the Prelates or any of them certified, and thereof re∣quired, as is aforesaid. The which was Note here the Prelates forgery of an Act of Parliament. never agreed nor granted by the Commons; but whatsoever was moved there∣in was without their assent. That the said Statute be therefore disannulled. For it is not in any wise their meaning, that either themselves, or such as shall succeed them, shall be further justifi∣ed or bound by the Prelates, then were their Ancestors in former times: whereunto is answered, Il plest an Roy. i. e. The King is pleased. This supposed Statute, thus fraudulently devised by the Prelates onely, was in like manner most injuriously, and unorderly executed by them; for immediately upon the publishing of this Law, without further warrant either from the King or his Councell, Commissions under the Great Seale of Englnd, were made in this forme, Richard, by the Grace of God, &c. Witnesse my selfe at Westminster the 26. day
of Iune, in the 6. yeare of our Rigne. Without more words of Warrant under writen, such as in like cases are both usuall and equisite, viz. Per ipsu Regem, per Regem & Concilium; or Per breve de privato Sigillo. Al, or any of which words being utterly wanting in this place, as may be seene in the Kings Records of that time; it must therefore be done either by warrant of this fore-said Statute, or else without any warrant at all. And whereas the said Statute appointed the Commissi∣ons to be directed to the Sheriffe, or other Ministers of the Kings, or to other sufficient persons, learned for the arrest∣ing of such persons: they fraudulently procured the said Commissions to be directed to the Arch-bishop and his Suf∣ragans, being both Judges, Accusers, Witnesses, and Parties in the Case, authorizing them further, without ei∣ther the words, or reasonable meaning of the said Statute, to imprison them in their owne houses, or where else plea∣sed them: Yea, such was this Arch-Bishops, and the other Pelates Treachery and villany in this particular, notwith∣standing this unjust and spurious Law was repealed upon the forementioned Petition of the Commons, and the fraud of the framers thereof sufficiently discovered; yet such meanes was there made by the Prelates, that this Act of re∣peale was never published, nor ever since imprinted with the rest of the Statutes of that Parliament. Insomuch as the said repeale being concealed,Note here the injustice, trea∣chery, and bloo∣dy practises of the Prelates. like Commissions and other Processe were made from time to time, by vertue of the said Bastard Statute, as well during the Raigne of this King, as since against the Professours of Religion; as Master Fox in his Acts and Monuments, both shewes, and proves at large. Now what is this noorious forgery, this unjust and frau∣dulent execution of this pretended Act of Parliament, even after its repeale, by this Arch-Bishop and his Brethren, but the very heighth of Treachery, Villany, Schisme, and Sedition; yea, an Inernall policy, to advance Episcopall Jurisdiction, erect a bloudy Inquisition, and shed our Mar∣tyrs blood, contrary both to the Lawes of God and the Realme? To end with this Prelate, Thomas Walsin. ist. Aug, p. 348 Anti. Ecl. Brit. p. 300. Amm. 1385. this King called a Parliament at London, wherein the Laity gran∣ted the King one Quindisme and a halfe, upon condition that the Clergy would give him one Disme and a halfe.
This Arch-Bishop stiffely opposed this condition saying, That it ought not to be made, especially seeing the Church ought to be free, and no wayes to be taxed by Lay-men; adding, that he would rather endanger his head for this cause, then suffer the Church of England to be so much in∣slaved. Which Answer so moved the company of Com∣mons, that the Knights of the Counties, with certaine of the Nobles of the Kingdome, with great fury petitioned, that the Temporalties of the Ecclesiastickes might be taken away, saying, That the Clergy were growne to such ex∣cessive pride, that it would be a worke of piety and charity, by the taking away of their Temporalties, which did puffe them up, to compell them to be more humbly wise. These things they cryed out, these things they presented to the King in short writings, thinking to bring this Petition to effect. The Arch-Bishop to prevent the danger, con∣sulting with his Clergy, granted the King one Tenth ve∣ry willingly; which the King accepted of, and so for the present the unsatiable covetousnesse of the E∣nemies of the Church (saith Walsingham) was frustra∣ted, and this Clause of the Laity obliterated out of the Bill. Anti. Eccle. Bri. p. 303, to 311. Godwin p. 152, &c: Fox Acts & Monuments, p. 533 Grafton p. 390, 391, Holin. p. 488. &c. to 514. Polychroni∣con, l. ult. c: 8. Walsingham hist. An p: 397, to 403. Thomas Arundell his immediate successour,THOMAS ARVNDEL by provision from the Pope, against the Law, as he resigned his Chancel∣lourship of England, so soone as ever he was made Arch-Bi∣shop, as incompatible with his function (as Thomas Becket, Walter Reynalds, Iohn Stratford, with other his predecessors had commendably done before, witnesse Matthew Parker, Godwin, and Fox, in their lives, which I wish our secular Pre∣lates would now imitate, though not in resuming this office againe, as he did at last:) so he was scarce warme in his Seat, when by King Richard the seconds displeasure, he was dis∣possessed of the same, for not onely the Arch-Bishops Bro∣ther the Earle of Arundell, was attainted and condemned of High Treason against the King in full Parliament, for which he was presently executed; but the Arch-Bishop himselfe was by Sir Iohn Bushy, in the behalfe of the Commonalty, accused of high Treason, for that hee had evill counselled his Majesty, and induced him to grant Letters of Pardon to his brother the Earle of Arundell, being a ranke Tray∣tor.
After which he was found guilty and condemned of High Treason, adjudged unto perpetuall exile (for conspi∣ring to take the King, the Dukes of Lancester and Yorke, pri∣soners, and to hang and draw the other Lords of the Kings Councell,) and commanded within forty dayes to depart the Realme, under paine of death. He thus banished got to Rome, and found such favour with the Pope, as that he first writ ear∣nestly to the King for his Restitution: the King writes a sharpe Letter against him to the Pope, wherein he sheweth, That he plotted Treason against him, and endeavoured to take away his life; that he deserved rather to be quartered and executed as a Traytor, then banished; that the whole Kingdome wondred and were offended, hee had dealt so mildly with him, and not executed him as he deserved; that hee was a man impatient of peace, of a Trayterous and se∣ditious spirit, so as he could not restore him, or re-admit him into the Realme without danger of his Life and King∣dome; and therefore, though all the World consented to his Restitution, yet hee would never doe it whiles he brea∣thed. Upon which Letters, the Pope not onely refused to restore him, but at the Kings request, made Roger Wal∣den Arch Bishop in his stead. The Pope hereupon conferred the Arch-bishopricke of St. Andrews in Scotland, with other livings here in England, by way of provision, upon Arundel who confederating afterward with Henry Duke of Lancaster, against King Richard, they le∣vyed what forces they could, and landed with them in England so that at last King Richard upon parly with this Arundell, whom he had banished, was forced to resigne his Crowne, and to render himselfe prisoner to the Duke of Lancaster, with promise of saving his life onely: Hereupon the Arch-Bishop after the Resignation made in parliament, See Fabian, par. 7, p. 351. Crowned the Duke King, and made a Briefe Collation on these words, 1 King. 9. A man shall Raigne over the People; Tending wholly to the praise of the new King, and disparagement of the old; Recorded at large by Holinshed: After which hee thrust Walden out of his See, and got restitution of it againe, the Pope confirming his Restauration, and declaring Walden to be an intruder; who after a while was made Bishop of London. This Arch-Bishop thus restored to his See, and in
high favour with the King, Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 474. to 540. proved a bloody persecutor and butcher of Gods Saints; to which end following the steppes of his predecessour Courtney, he, with the rest of the Bishops, fraudulently and surreptitiously procured by crafty meanes and subtile pretences, the cruell bloody Statute Ex Officio, as Master Fox doth stile it (to wit, 2. Hen. 4. c. 15.) to passe the Upper House of Parliament as a Law, without the Commons assent or Privity, whose assent they yet foisted into the written and Printed See Iannes de Aton. Constit. Prov. f. 104. Coppies of that Act, to blind the world withall, and give it the colour of a Statute, though it be not to be found in the Parliament Roll the Commons never consenting to it, as Mr. Fox hath shewed at large in his Acts and Monuments, p. 539.540. and the Statute of 25. Hen. 8. c. 14. witnesseth: which ba∣stard Statute, by colour of which alone most or all our En∣glish Martyres were afterwards imprisoned, burned, tor∣tured, and put to death) being thus unduly obtained, this bloody Arch-Prelate, forthwith caused many godly Martyres to be burnt to ashes, and the Worthy honourable Lord Cobham with sundry others to be put to death; by rea∣son whereof the Kingdome of the Pope, and of the Pre∣lates his members here in this Realme, began to be so strong, that none durst stirre or once mutter against them. The Bishops having the King so full on their side, ar∣med moreover with these two forged Lawes, with im∣prisonments, sword, fire, and faggot, raigned and ruled as they listed, as Kings and Princes within themselves: So strong were they of power that no humane force was able to stand against them, so exalted in pride and puffed up in glory, that they thought all things to be sub∣ject to their reverend majesties. Whatsoever they set forth and decreed, though in their owne names, rites, and by their owne authorities, it must of all mn bee received and obeyed. And it was their Superstitious blindnesse, and curious vanity, that whatsoever oy came once in their fan∣tacy, it was straight-way determined and established for a Law of all men to be observed, were it never so rivilous or superstitious; yea such was the pride, vaine-glory, and insolency of this Arch-Bishop Arundel, (who stuffed the Church with Ceremonies, and vaine Traditions of men
as his Successors doth now) that he in great snuffe suspen∣ded all the Churches in London, not onely with the Steeple and Bells, but also with the Organs, (because they did not ring he Bells for a triumph at his comming, when he pas∣sed by the high streete of London, with his Crosse carryed in pompe before him,) till the Ministers and Officers of the sayd Churches should doe penance, and give him compe∣tent satisfaction for this indignity. Now what shall wee thinke or conclude of these two last Arch-Bishops, Court∣ney and Arundel, who thus tooke upon them to forge even publicke Acts of Parliament for the advancement of their own Antichristian Hierarchie, the suppressing of the Gospel, the murthering and destroying the Kings best Subjects, and the effusion of so much Martyres blood, but that they were monsters of Trechery, Tyranny, inhumanity Tray∣tors and enemies both to the Church and Common-wealth, yea the very Divels and Popes Arch-agents to effect their wills. But God was even with the latter of them, Arun∣del, who shutting up the mouthes, and silencing the tongues of many faithfull Ministers, his owne Tho. Gascon. in Dict. Theol. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 311. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 276. the old Edi∣tion. Godwin, p. 110. Tongue at last by Gods just judgement swelled so big in his mouth, as hee was able neither to eae, drinke, no speake in many dayes, and so dyed of hunger after he had starved so many poore Chri∣stian Soules, and burned their bodyes into ashes. In the yeare 1403. King Henry the fourth, intending to goe into North Wales to chasten the presumptuous doings of the unruly Welsh-men, and wanting money to wage his Soul∣diers, there were some that counselled him to be bold with the Bishops,Holinshd p. 24. and supply his wants with their super∣fluity. But as it fortuned, Arundel Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury was there present, who in the name of all the rest boldly made answere,It was spoken like a Prelate. that none of his Province should bee spoyled by any of those naughty persons; but that first with hard stripes they should understand the price of their harsh enterprise. But the King neverthelesse used the matter so with the Bishops for their good wills, that the Arch-bishop at length to pleasure him, calling the Clergie together, got a grant of one Tenth, towards the Kings necessary charges. And thereby secured their tem∣poralities for that time. Thomas Walsing. Hist. Aug. An. 1414.414.415. Holind, p. 526. The next yeare following, a Par∣liament
being called to Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 282. p. 308. Speed. p. 775. Walsingham Ypdig. Nustr. p. 166. consult how the King might be re∣lieved with money for defence of the Realme against the Scots and Welshmen at home, and the Brittaines, Flemmins, and Frenchmen abroade, it was thought most expedient, that the spirituality should be deprived of their temporall possessions to relieve the Kings necessity. Hereupon rose great alteration betweene the Clergie and the Laity, the Knights affirming, that they had often times ser∣ved the King, not onely with their goods, but also with their persons in very great dangers and jeopardies, whilst the spiritualty it at home, and helpe the King nothing at all. Whereupon this Arch-Bishop stoutly answered, That the Clergie had alwayes given to the King as much as the Laity had done, considering they had oft∣ner given their Tenthes to him then the Laity their Fifteenes: also, that more of their Tenants went to the Kings warres, than of the Tenants of them of the Lay fee: besides this they prayed day and night for the Kings good successe against his enemies. When the Speaker named Sir Iohn Cheinie, in replying by plaine speech, seemed but little to esteeme such prayers of the Church, the Arch-Bi∣shop was set in a great chafe, and with sharpe words declaring what hee thought must needes follow both of the King and Kingdome, when Prayers and Suf∣frages of Church-men came to bee so little set by, hee grew to such impatiencie, that hee flatly told the Speaker,He spake like  Lord. That although hee seemed little to esteeme of the Religion of the Clergie, ye hee would not have him to thinke that hee should thus take away the possessions of the Church, without finding such as would seeke to withstand him: For if (sayd hee) the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury may live, thou shalt have o taking away any manner of thing that is his. After this when the Arch-Bishop perceived that the King winked at these matters, hee rose from his place, and comming before the King he kneeled downe, and besought him to consider, how through the Grace and favour of Almighty God, hee had ob∣tained the Kingdome; and therefore ought to re∣member his first purpose and intent, which was, to
give to eery man his right, so farre as in him say he willed him likewse to have in consideration the Oath which he so willingly had received, that is, that hee should advance the Honour of the Church, and the Ministers thereof cherish and maintaine; Also to have in minde the danger and dishonour that redounded to such as brake their oathes; so that he besought him to permit and suffer the Church to enjoy the priviledges and Liberties, which in time of his Predecessours it had enjoyed, requesting him to stand in awe of that King by which all Kings did ragne, and to seare the censures and condemnations that those in∣urred, which tooke or bereft rom the Church any good or right belonging to it, who most certainely (sayd hee) are accursed. When the Arch-Bishop had used this or the like speech, the King commanded him to goe to his seate againe, assuring him, that his intent and purpose was, to leave the Church in as good state or better than hee found it. The Arch-Bishop herewith turning to the Knights and Bur∣gesses of the Parliament, sayd unto them, You and such others as you be, have given counsell unto the King and his Predecessours to confiscate and take into their hands the goods and possessions of the Cells which the Frenchmen and Normans possessed here in England, and affirmed, that by the same he and they should heape up grat riches; and indeede those goods and possessions were worth many thousands of gold, and yet it is most true, that te King this day is not one halfe pound of silver better thereby, for you have beg∣ged and gotten them out of his hands, and have appropriated the same to your selves, so that wee may conjecture very well, that you request to have our Temporalties, not to advance the Kings profit, but to satisfie your owne greedy covetousnesse; for undoubtedly if the King (as God forbid hee should) did accomplish your wicked purposes and mindes, he should not be one farthing the richer the yeare next after: and truely sooner will I suffer this head of mine to be cut off from my shoulders, then that the Church should lose the least right that appertaineth to it. The Knights sayd little, but yet they proceeded in their suite to have their purpose for∣ward. Which the Arch-Bishop perceiving, (as another Argus having his eyes on every side, to marke what was done) laboured so to disappoint their doings, that he wan the favour of certaine of the Temporall Lords to assist him,
who constantly avouched by their consents, that the Church should never be spoyled of her Temporalties; and herein they acquitted the Arch-Bishop and Prelates, one plea∣sure for another, which they had done for them before, when the Commons in this Parliament required, that all such Lands and revenues which sometime belonged to the Crowne, and had beene given away by the King, or by his predecessors King Edward or King Richard, should be resto∣red againe to the Kings use; unto which request the Arch-Bishop and other the Prelaes would in no wise consent. Thus by this Arch-Bishop Arundel, that Petition of the Commons the pirituall Temporalities came to naught. Afterwards, in an Tho. Waldens Hist. Ag. 410. p. 422. Ypodig. Neu. p. 174. Hlin. p. 536. Fa∣bian, Ann. 1410. part. 7. p. 386, 387. other Parliament Anno 1410. the Commons of the ower House exhibited a Bill to the King and Lords of the Upper House, containing in ef∣fect as followeth. To the most excellent Lord our King: and to all the Nobles in this present Parliament assembled, your faith∣full Commons doe umbly signifie, that our Soveraigne Lord the King might have of the Temporall possessons, Lands, and Tene∣ments which are lewdly spent, consumed and wasted by the Bishops, Abbots and Priors within this Realme, so much in value as would suffice to finde and sustaine an 150. Earles, 1500. Knights, 6200. Esquires, and 100. Hospitals more than now be: which is more largely and particularly related in Fabian. The King (as some write) mis-liked the motion, and therefore commanded, that from thenceforth they should not pre∣sume to study about any such matters. Another thing the Commons then sued to have granted to them, but could not obtaine: That Clerkes convict should no thence∣forth bee delivered to Bishops Prisons: Moreover they de∣manded to have the Statte either revoked or qualified, which had beene enacted without their consent in the Se∣cond yeare of this Kings raigne, against such as were repu∣ted to be Heretickes or Lollards. But the King seemed so highly to favour the Clergie, that the Commons were an∣swered plainely, that they should not come by their purpose, but rather that the said statute should be made more rigorous and sharpe for the punishment of such persons: and all this by meanes of this bloodly Arch-Bishop Arundel, of whom we have heard sufficient.
HENRY CHICHLY.Henry Chichely, being elected Arch Bishop by the Monks of Canterbury with the Kings consent, immedialy after Arun∣dels death,Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 312.315 Godins Catal. p. 159. Walsingh. Hist. Aug. p. 432. hee refused to accept of this their Legall election; and against the expresse Statutes of the Realme, touching Provisions and Premunies, accepted of the See onely by Collaion from Pope Iohn the 23. in affront both of the King and those Lawes, which the Pope endeavored in vaine to get repealed, and therefore opposed in point of practise all that he might, reserving by a Decree of the Councell of Con∣stance all vacancie to his own dispoall, bestowing all the Bishoprickes of England as soon as they were voyd at his own pleasure, by the Arch-Bishops connivence, in affront of the Lawes and the Kings royall Edicts. Antiq. Eccls. Brit. p. 317. to 322. where the opes Bll and he Arch-Bi∣hops Lettersare t large recited. This Arch-Prelate published throughout his Province Pope Martins Bulls, for the extirpation of the Wicklevists and Hussites by force of armes, and promised the same Indulgences to those who should take up the Crossado and warre against them, as those enjoyed who went to the holy Land to fight against the Sa∣recens. For which good service the same yeare (Anno 1429.) he received the Title of the Cardinall Presbyter of S. Euse∣bius rom Pope Martin the 5. who also created him his Legate here in England, without the Kings privity, and contrary to Law. Antiq. Eccls. Brit. p. 322. But to colour the businesse, lest he should seeme to receive that power Legatine without the Kings permission and Licence, against the Lawes and Customes of the Realme; one Richard Condray was made the Kings procurer, that hee might appeale to the next generall Councell from all inju∣ries, grievances, and prejudices offered or to be offered by the Pope or Court of Rome to the King and the Kingdome. Thereore as soon as it was known that the Arch-Bishop had received this Legatin power without the Kings privity or li∣cence, Condray made this appeale to Humfrey Duke of Gloster Lord Protector, and others o the Kings privie Councell, in writing. In which he expressed, that no Legate of the Sea Apostolicke ought to come into the Kingdome of the King of England or other his Lands or Dominions, but at the vocation, petition, requisition or intreaty o the King of England for the time being, the Roman Pontifex tolerating and consenting thereto, as well tacitely as expresly: in which appeale notwithstanding, if the sayd Arch Bishop, not as a
Legate but as a Cardinall would say, open, or propound any thing from the Pope to the King, it might be lawfull for him to doe it. In which the King would so farre assit as he migh doe it by the Lawes and Priviledges of his roy∣all Crowne, and of his famous Kingdome of England. The appeale being read, the Arch-Bishop in the presence of the Prelates and Nobles there present, confessed and protested That it was not, nor is, nor should be his intention by his entring into England, nor by any things done or to be done by him, spo∣ken or to be spoken, for to exercise the Legatine power which hee had undertaken, without the Kings permission, or to derogate in any thing from the rights, priviledges, liberties, or customes of the King or Kingdome, or t contradict hem, but to preserve, defend, maintaine, and roborate all and every of them. By this device he deluded both the King, Counsell, and Lawes: how well hee kept this his protestation, his subsequent Acts will evidence. For immediately after hee made a Synodicall Constitution, Lindwood Pr∣vinc. Const. 3. Tit. de Clericis conju∣gatis p. 94.95. That no married man or Lay man should exercise any Eccle∣siasticall jurisdiction, or be Iudge or Register in any Ecclesiasticall Court in causes of correction of the soule, under paine of incur∣ring the greater excommunication ipso facto, if they offered to intermeddle in any of the premises contay to the Councels pro∣hibition; which further makes voyd all citations, processe and Acts whatsoever, had and made by Laymen in the Cases aforesayd, and suspends all Ordinaries from the exercise of Ecclesiasticall jurisdi∣ction, and ingresse into the Church, who should grant any married or Lay man power to exercise any Ecclesiasticall Office or authority under them. What the true intent of this Arch-Prelates Constitution was, and how farre this Decree intrenched upon the Kings Prerogative Royall, appeares by the Sta∣tute of 37. H. 8. c. 17. (made purposely to repeale this Constitution) which I shall here insert. 37. H. 8. cap. 17. intituled, A Act that Doctor of Civill Law, be∣ing married, may exercise Ecclsia∣sticall Iurisdiction. In most hum∣ble wise shew and declare unto your highnesse your most faith∣full, humble, and obedient Subjects the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, aud the Commons of this present Parliament assem∣bled, that whereas your Majesty is, and hath alwayes justly beene by the Word of God supreame head in Earth of the Church of England, and hath full power and authority, to correct, pu∣nish, and represse all manner of Heresies, errours, vi∣ces, abuses, Idolatries, hypocrisies, and Superstitions springen
and growing within the same; and to exercise all manner of Iurisdictions, commonly called Ecclesiasticall Iurisdi∣ction. Neverthelesse, the Arch-Bishop of Rome and his Meaning our Englih Pre∣lates. adherents minding utterly as much as in him lay, to Note this. abolish, obcure, and delete such power given by God to the Princes of the earth, whereby they might ga∣ther and get to themselves the government and rule of the world; have in To wit, under Henry Chichly, fore-cited. their Councells and Synods Pro∣vinciall made, ordained, and established, and decreed divers ordinances and constitutions, that no Lay or mar∣ryed man should or might exercise or occupie any Juris∣diction Ecclesiasticall, nor should be any Judge or Re∣gister in any Court commnly called Ecclesiasticall Cour, Not this. lest their alse and usurped power, which they preten∣ded and went about to have in Christs Church, should decay, waxe vile, and of no reputation, as by the sayd Councels and Constitutions Provinciall appeareth: which standing and remaining in their effect not abolished by your Graces Lawes, did seeme to appeare to make greatly for the sayd usurped power of the sayd Bishop of Rome, and to be directly repugnant to your Majesties Title of supreame head of the Church and prerogative Royall, your Grace being a Lay-man: and albeit the sayd Decrees, Ordi∣nances and Constitutions by a Statute made the 25 yeare of your most noble raigne be utterly abolished, frustrate and of none effect, yet because the contrary thereunto is not u∣sed nor put in practise by he Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Deanes, and other Ecclesiasticall persons, who have Where then is ur Bishops pre∣tendd Superio∣rity and Jurisdi∣ction by Divine right no manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiasticall, but by, under, and from your royall Majesty, it addeth or a the least may give occasion to some evill disposed persos to thinke and little to regard the proceeding, and censures Ecclesi∣asticall made by your Highnesse and your Vice-gerent, Officialls, Commissaries, Judges, and Visitators be∣ing also Lay and married men, to be of little or none effect or force, whereby the people gathereth heart and presump∣tion to doe evill, and not to have such reverence to your most godly injunctions and proceedings, as becommeth them. But forasmuch as your Majesty is the onely and un∣doubtedly supreame head of the Church of England, and
also of Ireland, to whom by Scripture all authority and po∣wer is wholly given to heare, and determine all causes Ecclesiasticall, and to correct all vice and sinne whatso∣ever, and to all such persons as your Not th Bi∣shops. Majesty shall ap∣point thereunto; that in consideration thereof, as well for the instruction of ignorant persons, as also to avoyd the occaion of the opinion aforesayd, and setting forth of your prerogative royall and supremacy, It may therefore please your Highnesse, that it may bee ordained and en∣acted by authority of this present Parliament, that all and singular aswell Lay as those that be married now, or hereafter shall be married, being Doctors of the Civill Law, lawfully create and made in any University which shall be made, ordained, constituted, and deputed to bee a∣ny Chancellour, Vicar Generall, Commissary, Officiall, Scribe, or Register by your Not by Bi∣shops. Majesty, or any of your Heires, or Successours to any Arch-Bishop, Bishop, Arch-Deacon, or other person whatsoever, having To wit, by speciall Patet which Bishop hen had, and none have o. au∣thority under your Majesty, your Heires and Successours, to make any Chancellour, Vicar Generall, Commissary, Offciall, or Register, may lawflly execute and exercise all mannr of Jurisdiction commonly called Ecclesiasti∣call Jurisdiction, and all Censures and Corrections apper∣taining o any wise belonging unto the same, albeit such person or persons be Lay, married, or unmarried, so that they be Doctors of the Civill Law, as is aforesayd, any Law, Constitution, or Ordinance to the contrary notwih∣standing. By this Act it is apparent, that the end of the former Constitution was trecherously to undermine and a∣bolish the Kings Prerogative Royall in causes Ecclesiasticall, and to make the Pope and our Prelates absolute Monarches, and our Kings meere Cyphers to execute their Mandates, when by the expresse words of this Law, with that of 1. Ed. 6. c. 2.26. H. 8. c. 1.1. Eliz. c. .5. Eliz. c. 1.8. Eliz. c. 1. and 1. and 2. Phil. and Mry c. 8. it is most clearely resolved, that our Arch-Bishops and Bishops, have no manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiasticall over other Ministers by any divine right, (as they now See Bishop Halls 3. late ookes of Epis∣copacy. vainely, if not trayterously pretnd) but by, from, and under our Kings, in whose name and right, and under whose Seale
alone all their Ecclesiasticall processe ought to issue, as hath beene See the Brevi∣ate of the Pre∣lates intolerable Usurpations, both upon the Kings Prerogative Royall, and the Subjects Liber∣ies. elsewhere plentifully manifested, it being no lesse than a Premunire, by the Statute of 1. Edw. 6. c. 2. or any Bishops or Ecclesiasticall Judges to issue out processes in their owne names, and under their owne Seales, as now our Prelates doe. This Law of Premu∣nire, was such a curbe to our usurping Prelates, that this Arch Prelate Chichely, in the last Synod hee held Anno. 1439. without delay or difficulty granted King Henry the sixt a Tenth, and promised him large supplyes from the Clergie in all things, if he would abrogate those hard Lawes of Premunire, where-with the Clergie were very falsely accused and oft taken and ensuared as in unjust sares; (whereas in truth those Lawes were the principall safety both of King and people, to preserve and free them from the unjust incroachments of Popes and Prelates, upon their Liberties, Lawes, and Estates, which made the Pope and them so frequently to sollicite their repeale.) And by his countenance Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 323. and Lidwood his Epistle Dedica∣tory before his Institutions. William Lindwood collected and set out the Provinciall Constitutions of the Arch-Prelates of Canterbury in their Synods, in affront of the Kings pre∣rogative Royall and the Lawes of the Realme, dedicating them to this Arch-Prelate, and entreating him to put them in due Execution being neglected, and quite dis∣regarded formerly, both by Prelates, Judges, and people, as he complaines in his Epistle Dedicatory to him. In briefe, when Fabian. part. 7. p. 390.139. Hall. An. 2. H 5. f 35.36. &c Holins. p. 54.547, &c. 583. in the Parliament held at London, Anno 1414. under King Henry the fifth, the Commons re∣viewed their former Petition in Parliament made to King Henry the fourth but foure yeares before, to seize the Bishops and Abbots Temporalities, shewing how ma∣ny Earles, Knights, and Esquires they would maintaine; The Bishops and Abbots whom it touched very neare, much earing the issue determined to assay all wayes to put by, and overthrow this Bill, and minding ra∣ther to bow than breake, they first agreed to offer the King a great summe of money, to stay this new moven Demand. The cause of this offer seemed to some of the wise Prelates neither decent nor convenient, for they well oresaw, and perfectly knew, that if the
Commons perceived, that they by rewards or by offer of money would resist their request and petition, that they stirred and moved with a fury, would not onely raile and despise them as corrupters of Princes, and enemies of the PublickeWealth, but would so cry and call on the King, and the emporall Lords, that they were like to lose both worke and oyle, cost and lining. Wherefore they determined to cast all chances, which might serve their purpose, and in speciall, to replenish the Kings braine with some pleasant study, so as that hee should neither phantasie nor regard the serious Petition of the importunate Commons. Wherefore on a day, when the King was present in Parliament, this Henry Chichely Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, after low Obeysance made to the King, made a publicke Oration in Parliament beore the King, and Peeres, wherein hee shewed the Kings un∣doubted Title to sundry Provinces and the whole Realme of France; with the injustice and nullity of the Salicke Law, the onely Obstacle to his Title, stirring up the King and Nobles by force of Armes to regaine the same: and with∣all declared that his loving Clergie and subjects of the spi∣ritualty, to shew their willingnesse and desire to ayde his Majesty for the recovery of his ancient Right, and true In∣heritance, had in their Convocation, granted to his High∣nesse such a Summe of money as by Spirituall Persons, never was to any Pince thorough the whole Christian World, before those times, given or advanced: By which device seconded by the Duke of Exeer, he diverted and shifted off the Petition of the Commons, and engaged the King and Kingdome in a long, bloody, and costly Warre. The King himselfe professing on his death Bed, that before the beginning of the same Warres, hee was fully perswa∣ded by men both Wise, Pious, and of great holinesse of life, that in prosecuting his just Title, he might & ought both begin the same Warres, and follow them till he brought them to an end, justly and rightly, and that without all danger of Gods displeasure, or perill of soule. Such an incendiary of war, was this Arch-Embassadour of peace that should be. Antiq. Eccls. Brit. p. 325. to 330. Iohn Stafford,JOHN STAFFORD. preferred to the Bishopricke of Bath and
Wells by provision from Pope Martin the fifth, contrary to the Lawes enacted against Provisions from Rome, immedi∣ately after Chichelyes death, was in farther affront of the sayd Lawes promoted to the See of Canterbury, by Pope Eugenius; that prohibited usurpation of Papall Provisions, deended by so many Lawes and Statutes, being no whit abated, through the Popes industry, and the Prelates Trea∣chery and ambition, who would rather incurre the danger of these Lawes, and dis-savour of their Princes, then want a far Bishopricke, though they paid Popes dearely for it. This Arch-Prelate in the first Synod held under him at London, Anno. 1444. confederating with the rest of the Clergie, when a Subsidie was demanded of them, petitio∣ned, that the Statutes of Provisors, and the Writs or Actions of Praemunire, which by the crafty and malicious interpreta∣tion of the Lawyers, as they alsely urmised, were turned to the destruction of the Clergie, and disturbance of Ecclesiasti∣call Discipline, might be either wholly abrogated, or their ri∣gour moderated and that Lay-men for suing Clergie-men falsly in Temporal Courts, might have some severe punishment inflicted on them by a Law. But this their motion vanishing into smoake, and the Judges restraining their extravagant proceedings in Ecclesiasticall Courts by Prohibitions, and bringing them within the compasse of the Statutes against Provisions, and in the danger of Premunire's, which did much terrifie them; hereupon the Arch-Bishop and Pre∣lates in their next Synod at London, An. 1446. presented a new Petition to the King in the Name of the whole Clergie of England, wherein they grievously complained of the Lay-Judges, who were ever very troublesome and despightfull to Clerkes; desiring that the Statutes of Provision and Praemunire might be more equally expounded in favour of the Prelates by the Parliamen, than it was by the Lawyers, and that they might be restrained from granting Prohibi∣tions to, and exercising any Jurisdiction over Spirituall Judges; But this Petition proved ineffectuall; it being provided by Statute, that no spirituall Law shall have place contrary to a Common Law or Act of Parliament. And this were not (as the Lord Stphn ardi∣r his Letter from the Fleete to the Lord Pro∣tector, Oct. 14. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 741. in the old Edition, quite omitted i the ne. Audley Chancellour of England,
once told Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester in the Par∣liament House, who thought it strange, that Bishops au∣thorized by the King could fall in a Praemunire) the Bi∣shops would enter in with the King, and by meanes of his Supremacie order the Lairy as they listed; but wee will provide, quoth he, that the Praemunire shall ever hang over your heads, and so we Laymen shall bee sure to enjoy our inheritance, by the Common Lawes and Acts of Parliament. After this, the Pope exacted of the Clergie of England a Tenth of all their Revenues, and sent Nuncioes to the Arch-Bishop with Bulls to collect it. But the King hea∣ring of this secret fraud, commanded the Arch-Bishop not to obey the Pope herein, who yet was so farre a servant to the Pope, and enemie to the King, that during all his Ar∣chiepiscopall Raigne the Pope made Bishops by Provision, against the Lawes of the Realme. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 330.331 Iohn Kemp,JOHN KEMP. the next Arch-Bishop, elected lawfully by the Monkes of Canterbury with the Kings consent, refused to take his Arch-Bishoprike from the King, but waving his Election, received it by Provision from the Pope, who sent over sixe severall Bulls to this end, the first to the Arch-Bishop himselfe, the second to the Chapter of Can∣terbury: the third, to his Provinciall Suffragans; the fourth, to the Clergie of the City and Diocesse of Canterbury; the fifth, to the people of the same; the sixth, to the Vas∣sals of the Arch-Bishop; by which Bulls the Pope increased much hi Revenues: And o obliege this Arch-Prelate the faster to him, the Pop by another Bull created him Cardinall of Saint Ruffine: But this Arch-Bishop dying within one yeare and an halfe after his Consecration, could doe him but little service. Antiq. Ecles. Brit. p. 334. to 339. Thomas Burgchier,THOMAS BOURGCHIER immediaely succeeding him, by the speciall favour of King Henry the sixth, this ingratefull Pre∣late (made a Cardinall by the Pope) some ew yeeres after (An. 1461.) crowned and consecrated Edward the fourth at Westminster to be King in his stead, during King Henry his life, and in a full Synod procured the Clergie to grant him a Tenth: Afterwards in a Synod at London, An. 1463. he granted him another Subsidie, and obtained a Grant from
King Edward under his Seale, that the Prelates should bri∣dle the malice of those by whom their rights were viola∣ted, as well by old Ecclesiasticall Lawes as by those new Lawes they should make, both in all causes belonging to the Ecclesiasticall Court, as also in the Tythe of great Trees of twenty yeares growth or more, without the feare or penalty of the Statutes of Provisors, or of the Writs or Actions of Premunire, or of any Prohibition, and that they might proceede therein without any consultation ob∣tained: And that if any of the Kings Judges, or other se∣cular Judges should by any Writs or Processe hinder or deterre any Arch-Bishop, Bishop, or Arch-deacon, or their Vicars, Officialls, Commissaries, or other Ecclesia∣sticall Judges: That then upon the monition of the sayd Arch-Bishop, Bishop, &c. so hindered or scared, the sayd Judge should appeare in the Chancery at such day as the said Arch-Bishop or Ecclesiasticall Judge should appoint, on paine of two hundred pound, to answere to the King for this his contempt, and that his Processe against the Ecclesiasti∣call Judge, should by Royall Authority bee rescinded, and pronounced to be voyd and frustrate. In his time there were many Pilgrimages made both by King Edward, the Queene, and others to that Arch-traytor Beckets Shrine at Canterbury, where they offered many rich gifts: Afterwards, Anno. 1469. the Earle of Warwicke conspiring with others to free King Henry the Sixth from the Tower of London; King Edward hearing of it, went in Pilgrimage to Beckets Tombe to Canterbury, and there held a Councell of five Bishops and many Peeres of the Realme, from which the Arch-Bi∣shop being suspected (as trecherous and unfaithfull) was wholly excluded: King Edward deceasing, this Arch-Pre∣late though hee made a Will sequestred all his goods as or∣dinary, and seized the Great Seale, the Privie Seale, and the Royall Signer, which hee detained in his custodie; and whereas Richard Duke of Gloucester had traytorously plotted to murther his Nephewes, Edward the Fifth, and his Brother, this Arch-bishop was imployed by him to goe to the Queene, to Hlin. p. 717. to 722. Hall, in Edw. the 5. . 8. to 14. Speed. p. 90. to 912. get the young Duke of Clarence from her out of the Sanctuary at Westminster, who using many
reasons and flattering words to her in vaine, at last made this deepe protestation: That if she were content to deliver the Duke to him, and to the other Lords present, he durst lay his owne body and soule both in pledge, not onely for his surety, but also for his estate, &c. Whereupon, with much adoe, shee delivered the Duke into his treacherous hands, who forthwith brought him into the Starre-Chamber to his Uncle the Lord Protector Hee having both Brothers now in his power, pretends them to bee illegitimate, proclaimes him∣selfe right Heire to the Crowne, procures first Pinker; and then Holinsh. p. 725. to 728. Speed, p. 918.919. Doctor Shaw (no doubt by the Arch Bishops helpe and privity) in a Sermon at Pauls Crosse (by which Ser∣mon hee lost his honesty, and soone after his life, for very shame of the World, into which hee never durst after to come abroad) to publish to the people, Tat Edward the fifth and his Brother were unlawfully begotten in Adultery, not by the Duke of Yorke, but others; That Richard of Gloce∣ster was right Heire to the Crowne, extolling him to the skies, and slandering King Edward the Fourth with his Queene, as never lawfully marryed to her. Then proceeding treacherously to murther his poore young Nephewes, and usurping their Royall Throne; this Holinsh. p. 733.734. Hall, f. 25.26. Arch-bishop readily crownes him (though a bloody and unnaturall Usurper) as lawfull King of England, and his Lady likewise Queene, the other Bi∣shops and Abbots assisting him in this action, and accom∣panying him in their Pontificalibus. This Usurper being afterward slaine, the Arch-Bishop (ever turning with the yde of things) crownes Henry the 7. likewise King of Eng∣land, and shortly after departed this world, Anno 1486. I finde not (writes Pag. 114. Godwin in his life) that ever any English man con∣nued so long a Bishop, or that any Arch-bishop either before or after him in 800. yeares enjoyed that place so long; for he continu∣ed Arch-Bishop 32 yeares, and lived after the time of his first Consecration and promotion to the Bishopricke of Worcester 51. yeares, and I marvell much, that in all that while he never endea∣voured to leave behinde him any good Deed for the perservation of his Memory. Sure I am, that his Treachery to the young Duke of Clarence, and King Henry who advanced him, and his Treasons in crowning two Usurpers, with his base
temporising, remaine as so many surviing Monuments of his inamie and disloyalty. JOHN MORTON. Hall, f. 30. to 40. Hlinshed, p. 735. to 760. Sped, p. 931.932. to 946. Antiq Eccles. Brit p. 339. to 344. Godwin in his life. Iohn Morton his Successour, whiles Bishop of Ely, was accused by Richard the Third of many great Treasons, and committed by him to the Tower: from whence being removed and committed to the custody of Henry Duke of Buckingham, he by degrees stirred up the Duke to plot the deposing of King Richard the Usurper, and seting up of the Earle of Richmond, for which the Duke not long after lost his head: The Bishop in the meane time disguising himselfe, escaped out of the Dukes custody, fled first to Ely, next to Flanders, after which hee went to Rome, never more intending to meddle with the world. But King Henry the seventh having got the Crowne, married King Edward the fourth his daughter, and so united the Houses of Lancaster and Yorke, (which marriage was first devised by this Prelate) called him home againe, made him Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Chancellour of Eng∣land; whereunto the Pope annexed the honour of a Cardi∣nall, translating him from Ely to Canterbury, by no lesse than sixe everall Bulls, (all against Law) to augment the Fees. In his Speed p. 960. See Hall, Holin∣d, Polydr Vir∣gill, Stow, and Bacon in the life of Henry the se∣venth. time Richard Simon, a Priest, an ambitious wretch, on hope to make himselfe the principall Bishop in England, plotted the advancement of Lambert Synmell; (being his Pupill in the University of Oxford) to the Crowne of England, under the name of Edward Earle of Warwicke; and conveying this Imposter to Dublin in Ireland, hee there cau∣sed him to be proclaimed King of England; Antiq. Eccles. Bri. p. 342.343.344. God∣win p. 117. after this, to land with an Armie in England, where in a Battell at Stocke∣field, in which many were slaine, this Priest and his Co∣erfeit were both taken Prisoners, and attainted of High Treason, yet this Simon (or rather Sinon) out of the ex∣traordinary reverence to his function was not executed, but onely committed to the Arch-Bishop, who imprisoning him some space in his owne Prison, delivering him over to the Major of London, condemned him to a Dungeon and perpetuall shackles. After which this Antiq. Eccles. Bri. p. 342.343.344. God∣win p. 117. Arch-Bi∣shop imposed two great Subsidies on the Clergie of his Pro∣vince to their great oppression, forcing hem by the Popes
authoritie to contribute so largely toward the charges of his tranlation, as of his owne Diocesse onely (which is one of the least o England) hee received 354. pound: sent Pope Innoents Bulls to all the Suffragaes of his Province to pub∣lih and execute, in open affront of the Lawes of he Realme, the King Prerogative Royall, and the Subjects Libeties; for which good Service, the Pope by his Bulls appointed him to be Visir of all the Monasteries and other places exempt from Archiepiscopall and Ordinary Jurisdiction throughout England, and made him Cardinall of Saint Ana∣stasia; he perswaded the King to sue to the Pope, not one∣ly for the Popes canonization of King Henry the Sixth, but likewise for the translation of his dead Corps from Windsor to Westminster Abbey, and that in an unworhy manner, when as the King might have done it by his own meere Roy∣all Authoritie onely. He procured his Rebellios predeces∣sour Anselme, with a great summe of money, to be canoni∣zed at Rome for a Sant; and had many conflicts and con∣testations with the Bishops of London, and other his Suf∣fraganes, abou Probate of Wills and Jurisdiction of their Eccliaicall Cours, which caused Appeales to Rome, whereupon he nferiour Priests, with many others of his Province, ca forh sundry publike calumnies to his dis∣grace; against whom Pope Alexander sent forth a Bull, cruelly fulminating Excommunications against them. And by this meanes the priviledges of the See of Canterbury, oft times called into dout and controversie in former time, were at lat eablish. It seemes the Bishops in his dayes were very much hated by the inferiour Clergie: whereupon in a Synod Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 341.342. at London under him, Anno Dom. 1487. certaine Preachers were sharpely reproved and threated, who in their Sermons, cum plausu populari, eloquentia canina, latran immodestius in Episcopos absentes, did with popular applause, ad doggish eloquence barke immodestly again Bshops that were absent. Halls Chron. An. 15. H. 7, f. 50.51. Holind, p. 78. In the latter end of this Arch-Bishop Mortons rule, one Patricke an Auguine Fryer, had a Scholar called Ralph Wilford, whom e in open Pulpit declaed to be the Earle of Warwicke, and desired all men of helpe: but the head of this sedition was Sommer topped, that it could have no time to spring
any higher, the Master and Scholler being both apprehended, imprisoned and attained, the Scholler was afterwards han∣ged, but the Master (the Grand Traytor) onely condem∣ned to perpetuall Prison: For at that time (writes Hall) here in England so much Reverence was attributed to the Holy Orders, that to a Piest, although hee See Stamord his Plees of the Crowne. l. 2. c. 41. to 51. had commit∣ted High Treason against his Soveraigne Lord, and to all other offenders in murder, rape; or theft, which had received any of the three higher Holy Orders, the life was given and the punishment of death released. The chiefe cause of this favour (saith he) was this, because Bishops of a long time did not take knowledge, nor intermit themselves with the search and punishment of such heynous and detesable offences, by reason whereof they did not disgrade and deprive from holy Orders suh Malefactors and wicked per∣sons, which without that ceremony by the Canonicall Law could not bee put to death. Furthermore, what should a man say, it was also used, that hee that could but onely reade (though he understood not what he read) how heynous or detestable crime soever hee had committed (Treason onely excepted) should likewise as affnes and allies to the holy Orders, be saved, and committed to the Bishops prison. And to the intent that if they should escape, and be againe taken committing the like offence, that their lives should be no more to them pardoned, it was ordained, that Murtheers should bee burnt on the brawne of the left hand with an hot Iron, signed with this letter M, and theeves in the same place with this letter T, so that if they once signed with any of these markes, did reiterate like crime againe, they should suffer the punish∣ments they had deserved: which devise was enacted and established in 4. H. 7. c. 13. Parliament in the fourth yeare of H. the 7. and taken, as I conjecture, from the French Nation, which are won if they take any such offender, to cut off one of his eares, as a sure marke hereafter of hs evill doing. And the charge of keeping such offenders, because it soundeth to spirituall Religion, is committed to the Bishops and Rulers of the spiritualty, with a penalty set upon them, if any such Prisoner doe afterwards escape. The which Act and priviledge did nourish and increase abundantly the Sect and swarme of
Theeves and Murtherers; for after that time there were an hundred wayes practised and invented how at one time or o∣ther to deliver or convey them out of prison, by making their purgation (by what sleight & meanes they care not) of such of∣fences as before they were convicted and found guilty, if no man be present to lay exceptions to the same. For if the party offended and hurt be absent at the day of the purgation making, the theefe or murtherer truely found guilty from the beginning, shall be both excused and set at liberty. And of∣tentimes the sooner, because the Bishop would not lose the sum of an hundred pound for the escape of a poore Knave, scant worth a dandy prat: so Hall; whose words I have re∣cited, to manifest what favorers and Protectors our Bishops have beene of Traytors and Malefactors in all ages, especially of those of their owne Tribe, who by meanes of their Orders, Sanctuaries, Purgations, and other pretended exemptions and devises, were seldome brought to execution for their most horrid Treasons, which made them the more bold and inso∣lent to commit them. And for my part I deeme it true both in Law and conscience, that the Patrons, Receivers, and Re∣sners of Traytors and other Malefactors (as our Prelates have ever beene) are as bad, nay worse, than the Traytors and Malefactors themselves, and worthy more severe punishment than they. But it is time to conclude with this Arch-Bishop. Henry Deane who next injoyed this See,HENRY DEANE. was ormerly made Chancellour of Ireland by King Henry the seventh,Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 345.346.347.348. Godwin p. 118.119. where hee played the Warriour, and drave Perkin Warberke thence, forcing him to fly into Scotland: after this being made Bishop of Bangor, he had many great suites and ontests with divers about the Lands won or taken from his See. And among o∣ther particulars, pretending the Island of Seales betweene Holy-head and Anglesy to be unjustly detained from his Church by the possessers thereof: they refusing to give him possession, the Bishop thereupon brings a great power of armed men and a Navie thither, and drives out the Inhabitants thence by force, annexing it to his See. This Prelate being afterward Translated to Salisbury, and from thence to Canterbury, the Pope sent him a Pall by Adrian of Castello Secretary to his holinesse, upon the receite whereof he tooke this Solemne Oath to the Pope (as his Predecessors and other Bishops for∣merly
used, yet practised in foaine parts) which made him a Traytor, or halfe subject onely, to his King. Are not such then like to prove faithfull Counsellours of State to Princes. I Henry Arch∣bishop of Canterbury from this houre forward shall be faithfull and obedient to S. Peter and to the holy Church of Rome, and to my Lord the Pope and his Successors Canonically entring, I shall not be of Councell nor consent, that they shall lose either life or member, or shall be taken or suffer any violence or any wrong by any meanes. Their Councell to me credied by them, their Messengers, or Letters, I shall not willingly discover to any person. The Pope-dome of Rome, the Rules of the Holy Fathers, and the Regalities of S. Pte, I shall helpe and retaine, and defend against all men. The Legate of the See Apostolicke going and comming I shall honou∣rably entreate. The Rights, Honours, Priviledges, Authorities of the Church of Rome, and of the Pope and his Successours, I shall cause to be conserved, defended, augmented, and promoted. I shall not be in Are not such then like to prove faithfull Counsellours of State to Princes. Councell, Treaty, or any Act, in the which any thing shall be imagined against him, or the Church of Rome, their Rights, States, Honours, or powers, and if I know any such to be moved or compassed, I shall resist it to my power, and as soone as I can, I shall advertise him or such as may give him knowledge. The Rules of the Holy Fathers, the Derees, Ordinances, Sentences, Dispositi∣ons, Resevations, Provisions, and Commandements Apostolike, to my power I shall keepe and cause to be kept of others, Heretickes, Schismatickes, and Rebels to our holy Father and his Successours, I shall resist and perseute to my power. I shall come to the Synod when I am called, except I be letted by a Canonicall impediment. TheLimina or Lumina. Lights of the Apostles on this side the Alpes, I shall visite per∣sonally, or by my Deputy once every yeare, and those beyond the Alpes once every two yeares, unlesse I am there-from absolved by an Apo∣stolicall dispensation. I shall not alien or sell the possessions belong∣ing to my Arch-Bishopricke, nor give, nor morgage, nor infeofe any of them afresh, or any wayes alien them without the Popes Counsell. So God me help and the holy Evangelists. This Oath every Arch-Bishop and Bishop not onely in England,Therefore their owne Kings, if the Pope adjudge them such. but likewise in Spaine, France, Germany, and other Kingdomes, used to take to the Popes unholinesse. No wonder therefore if they were such Traytors, Rebels, and Conspirators against their Kings, such sticklers or the Pope, such Champions or his unjust usur∣pations upon thir Soveraignes Prerogatives, and so forward to twhart and discover al those designes o their Princes, which
were any wayes displeasing or disadvantagious to the Pope; who as long as this Oath continued, and Bishops that tooke it bore sway in our Kingdome (being both Privie Counsellers of State, Lord Chancellours, Lord Privie Seales, Lord Trea∣surers, or other great Officers) never lost his hold or usurped power among us, which he still kepes, onely by meanes of Bishops in other Kingdomes, where the Prelates Mauritiu de Alzedo, de Prae∣cellenia Epis. dignitatis, l. 1. sect. 8. yet take this Oath of Alleagiance to him. But this Oath which like a mystery of Iniquity was concealed from our Princes, be∣ing discovered to King Henry the eighth in the twenty fourth yeare of his raigne,Fo Acts and Monuments, p. 961. Halls Chro∣nicle, A 24. H 8. f. 205.206. D. Burnes his Suppli∣ation to King Henry the 8. p. 85. to 201. this wise Prince considering the disloyalty and mischiefe of it, sending for the Speaker and Commons House of Parliament spake thus unto them, Welbeloved Sub∣jects, We had thought the Clergie of our Realme had beene our Subjects, but now We have well perceived that they be but halfe Our Subjects, yea and scarce our Subjects. For all the Prelates at their Consecrations take an Oath to the Pope cleane contrary to the Oath they make unto Vs: (Dr. Barnes, ibid. with which the Pope usually dis∣pensed, but never with any Oath made to himselfe, which must be observed and stand good, what ever Oath else bee violated:) so that they seeme to be his Subjects, and not ours. And so delivering them the Coppy of both Oathes (of this to the Pope and the other to himselfe,) required them, to invent some order that he might not be thus deluded. The discovering and opening of these Oathes (which were read in Parliament) both to the King and People (as both Hall and Mr. Fox record) was the occasion that the Pope lost all hs interest and Jurisdiction here in England within short while after: This Oath to the Pope being thereupon abolished and made voyd by the Statute, and a See 25. H. 8. c. 20.28. Hen. 8. c. 10.35. Hen.. 8 c. 1. new Oath to the King pre∣scribed and ministred to the Bishops, together with an Oath of Alleagiance; wherein the Popes Authority stands abjured, and the King acknowledged Supreame head on earth under Christ of the Church of England: the forme of which Oathes are recorded in Mr. Fox, Mr. Hall, and the Statute of 28. Hen. 8. c. 10. The Prologue of which Act, with the Oath herein prescribed, being pertinent to our purpose, I shall here recite.
AN ACT EXTINGVISHING the Authority of the Bishop of Rome. 28. H. 8. c. 10. See 35. H. 8. c. 1. to the like cluse and Oath.FOrasmuch as notwithstanding the good and wholsome Lawes, Ordinances and Statutes heretofore made, en∣acted and established by the Kings Highnesse, our most gra∣cious Soveraigne Lord, and by the whole consent of his High Court of Parliament, for the extirpation abolition and extinguishment out of this Realme, and other his graces Do∣minions, Seigniories, and Countries, of the pretended power and usurped authority of the Bishop of Rome, by some cal∣led the Pope, used within the same, or elsewhere concerning the same Realme, Dominions, Seigniories or Countries, which did obsuscate, and wrest Gods holy Word and Testament, a long season, from the spirituall and true meaning thereof, to his worldly and carnall affections, as Pompe, Glory, Avarice, Ambition, and Tyranny; covering and shadowing the same with his humane and politicke Devises, Traditions and inven∣tions, set forth to promote and stablish his onely Dominion both upon the soules and also the bodies and goods of all Christian people, excluding Christ out of his Kingdome and rule of mans soule, as much as he may, and all other tempo∣rall Kings and Princes out of their Dominions, which they ought to have by Gods Law upon the bodies and goods o their Subjects, whereby he did not onely rob the Kings Majestie (being onely the supreame head of this his Realme of England, immediately under God,) of his honour, right, and preheminence due unto him by the Law of God, but spoyled this his Realme yearely of innumerable treasure, and with the losse o the same, deceived the Kings loving and obedient Subjects, perswading to them by his Lawes, Bulls, and other his deceivable meanes, such dreames, vanities and fantasies, as by the same many of them were seduced and con∣veyed
unto superstitious and erronious opinions, so that the Kings Majestie, the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, and the Commons of this Realme being over-wearied and fatigated with the Experience of the infinite abominations and mis∣chiees proceeding of his impostures and craftily colouring of his deceits, to the great damages of soules, bodies and goods, were forced of necessity for the publicke weale of this Realme, to exclude that forraine pretended power, juris∣diction and authority, used and usurped within this Realme, and to devise such remedies for their reliefe in the same, as doth not onely redound to the honour of God, the high praise and advancement of the Kings Majestie and o his Realme, but also to the great and inestimable utility of the same. And notwithstanding the sayd wholsome Lawes so made, and heretoore established, yet it is commen to the knowledge of the Kings Highnesse, and also to divers and many his loving, faithfull and obedient Subjects, how that divers seditious and contentious persons, being The Bishops naturall Pede∣gree. Impes of the sayd Bishop of Rome and his See, and in heart members of his pretended Monarchy, doe in corners and else-where as they dare whisper, inculke, preach, and perswade, and from time to time instill into the eares and heads of the poore simple and unlettered people, the advancement and continu∣ance of the sayd Bishops fained and pretended authority, pretending the same to have his As our Bishops in imitation of him pretend their Episcopacy to have. ground and originall of Gods Law, whereby the opinions of many be suspended their judgements corrupted and deceived, and diversitie in opinions augmented and increased, to the great displeasure of Almighty God, the high discontentation of our sayd most Dread Soveraigne Lord, and the interruption of the unity love, Charity, concord, and agreement that ought to be in a Christian Region and Congregation. For avoyding whereof nd repression of the follies of such seditious persons  are the meanes and Authors of such inconveniences; Be it enacted, ordained and established by the King our Soveraigne Lord and the Lords spirituall and temporall, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same; That if any person or persons, dwelling, demurring, inhabiting or resiant within this Realme, or within any other the Kings Dominions, Signiories, or Countries, or the Marches
of the same, or elsewhere within or under his obeysance and power, of what Estate, Dignity, Preheminence, Order, Degree or Condition soever he or they be, after the last day of July, which shall be in the yeare of our Lord God, 1530 shall by Writing, Cyphering, Printing, Preaching, or Teaching Deed or Act, obstinately or maliciosly hold, or stand with, to ex∣toll, set forth, maintaine or defend, the Authority, Jurisdicti∣on, or Power of the Bishop of Rome, or of his See heretoore claimed, used, or usurped within this Realme, or in any Do∣minion or Countie, being of, within, or under the Kings power or obeysance; or by any pretence obstinately or ma∣liciously invent any thing for the extolling, advancing, set∣ting forth maintenance or defence of the same, or any part thereof or by any pretence obstinately or maliciously attri∣bute any manner of Jurisdiction, Authority, or Pehemi∣nence to the sayd See of Rome, or to any Bishop of the same See for the time being within this Realme or in any of the Kings Dominions or Counties: That then every such person or persons so doing or offending, their ayders, assistants, com∣forters, abettors, procurers, maintainers, factors, Counsellours concealors, and every of them, being thereof lawfully convicted according to the Lawes of this Realme, for every such default and offence, shall incurre and run into the dangers, penalties, paines, and forfeiures ordained and provided by the Satute of Provision and Praenire, made in the 6. yeare of the Raigne of the Noble and Valiant Prince King Richard the second, a∣gainst such as attempt, procure, or make provision to the See of Rome, or elsewhere, for any thing or things, to the dero∣gation or contrary to the Prerogative Royall, or Jurisdiction of the Crowne and Dignitie of this Realme. And for stronger defence and maintenance of this Act, It is or∣dained and enacted by authority aforesayd, that all & every Ec∣clesiastical Judge, ordinary, chancellour, commissary, official, vi∣car-generall, and other Ecclesiastical officer or minister, of what dignity, preheminence, or Degree soever they shall be; and all and every Temporall judge, justicia, Major, bayliffe, sheriffe, under-sheriffe, Escheater, Alderman, Iurat, Constable, Head-borough, third-borough, borsholder, & every other said officer & Minister to be made, created, elected, or admitted within this Realme, or any other the Kings Dominions, of what state, order,
degree or condition soever he shall be, from and after the sayd last day of July, shall before he take upon him the Execution of such Office, make, take and receive, a Corporall oath upon the Evangelists, before such person or persons as have or shall have Authority to admit him: That he from henceforth shall utterly renounce, refuse, relinquish, or forsake the Bishop of Rome and his authority, power, and jurisdiction; and that he shall never consent nor agree, that the Bishop of Rome shall practise, exercise, or have any manner of authority, jurisdiction or power within this Realme or any other the Kings Dominions, but that he shall reist the same at all times to the uttermost of his power; and that from heneforth he shall accept, repute and take the Kings Majestie to be the onely su∣preame head in earth of the Church of England, and that to his cun∣ning, wit, and uttermost of his power, without guile, fraud, or other undue meanes, he shall observe, keepe, maintaine and defend the whole effects and contents of all and singular Acts and Statutes, made, and to be made, within this Realme, in derogation, extirpation, and extinguishment, of the Bishop of Rome and his authority: and all o∣ther Acts and Statutes made and to be made, in reformation and cor∣roboration of the Kings power of supreame head in earth of the Church of England, and this he shall doe against all manner of per∣sons of what estate, dignity, degree, or condition they be; and in no wise doe nor attempt, nor to his power suffer to be done, or attempted, directly or indirectly, any thing or things, privily or apertly, to the let, hinderance, dammage, or derogation thereof, or of any part thereof, by any manner of meanes, or for any manner of pretence: and in case any oth be made, or hath beene made by him to any person or persons in maintenance, defence, or favour of the Bishop of Rome, or his authority, jurisdiction, or power, he repute the same as vaine and adnihilate; So helpe him God, &c. I could wih this ob∣solete Oath were now againe revived, to hinder the further growth of Popery. This forementioned Oath to the Pope, usually taken by all our Prelates, being one maine Pillar to support the Popes usur∣ped Monarchy both at home and abroade; and a chiefe engine to undermine the royall Prerogatives of Christian Princes; and perchance the groundworke of many of our owne and forraine Prelates Treasons, Treacheries, Rebellions, Conspiracies, and contempts against their Soveraignes; It will not be amisse, no impertinent here to inser that excellent discourse, which our
famous Martyr, In his workes p. 195. to 205. Doctor Barnes hath long since made upon it, in his Supplication to King Henry the 8. where he thus writes. I dare boldly say that if we poore men, which be now con∣demned for Hereticks, and also for Traytors against our King, had not beene, the Realme of England had not stood in o good a condition as it is, for men had beene bound still in their Conscience, to obey this wretched Idoll: who durst have kept this innumerable summe of money, within the Realme, that yearely was sucked out, by this Adder, if our godly learning had not instructed their Conscience? Let all the Li∣braries be sought in England, and there shall not be one Book written in 4. C. yeares, (and admitted by the Church of Rome, and by our spiritualty) found, that doth teach this o∣bedience, and fidelity toward Princes, and delivereth our Realme from the bondage of this wicked Sathan the Pope, or else that is able to satisfie, and to quie any mans Conscience within this Realme: and yet I dare say he is no in England, that can reprove our learning by the doctrine of our Master Christ, or else of his holy Apostles. Yea, men have studyed and devised how they might bring our mighty Prince, and his Noble Realme, under the feete of this Devill. There could be nothing handled so secretly within this Realme, but if it were either pleasant or profitable to the Pope to know, then were all the Bishops in England sworne, to reveale tha matter to him. This may well be proved by their shamefull and trayterous oath, that they contrary to Gods Law, mans Law, and order of nature, have made to this false man the Pope. The words of their oath, written in their In vi. lib. 2. Tit de jurej∣and c. Ego Epi∣scpus. owne Law, be these Then he recites the forementioned oath, which he descants on in this manner There hath been wondrous packing used, and hath cost many a thousand mens lives, ere that the spiritualty brought it to passe, that all they should be sworne to the Pope, and owe none obedience to any man, but to him onely. This matter hath beene wondrous craftily con∣veyed, for at the beginning the Bishops were not sworne so straitely unto the Pope as now. For I doe reade in the ime of Gregory the third, which ws in the yeare of our Lord 759. how their oath was no more, but to sweare for to keepe the faith of our Holy Church, and to abide in the unity of the same, and not to consent for any man pleasure to the con∣trary,
to promise also to seeke the profits of the Church of Rome. And if any Bishops did live against the old Sta∣tutes of Holy Fathers, with him they should have no conver∣sation, but rather forbid it, if they could, or else truely to shew the Pope of it. This Oath continued a great many of yeares, till that a mortall hatred sprang betweene the Empe∣rour, and the Pope, for confirming of Bishops; then as many Bishops as were confirmed by the Pope did sweare the Oath that I have first written. For this Oath that Gregory maketh mention of, was not sufficient because that by it the Bishops were not bound to betray their Princes, not to revelae their Counsailes to the Pope. The which thing the Pope must needes know, or else he could not bring to passe his purpose, that is to say, he could not be Lord over the world, and cause Emperours and Kings, to fetch their confirmations of him, and to kneele downe, and kisse his feete. The which when he had brought to passe, he proceeded further, adding more things to the Bishops Oath to the maintaining of his worldly honour and dignity, as it shall afterward appeare. But first we will examine this Oath, how it standeth with Gods Word; and with the true obedience to our Prince: I pray you tell me out of what Scripture, or else out of what example of our Master Christ and his Holy Apostles you have taken this do∣ctrine, to learne to sweare to S. Peter? or else to the Church of Rome? or else to the The same may be sayd of the Oath of Ca∣nonicall obedi∣ence to Bishops. Pope? What neede you to sweare to S. Peter? ye can neither doe him good by your fidelity, no yet hurt by your falshood. Oathes be taken, that he that the Oath is made unto, might be sure of the true helpe and sucour of him that sweareth, against all men that could hurt him. Now S. Peter hath none enemies, and though he had, yet is not he afraid of them, neither can you helpe him, nor deliver him if he had neede. But the verity is, that good S. Peter must here stand in the fore-front to make men afrayd with, and to make men beleeve that you are his friends, but God knoweth that you neither favour his person, learning nor living. For if S. Peters person were here with his net on his necke, I thinke you would bid him walke begger, if you called him not Hereticke. Why doe you not swere to follow his living? and to preach and teach his Doctrine? but that maketh no∣thing for your purpose. Therefore you sweare all onely o
Saint Peters name. But wherein will you be faithfull to Saint Peter? to maintaine his worldly honours, dignities, or riches? you know well he saith, that he hath forsaken all these things for Christs sake, and for these things, I thinke he will require none Oath of you. Wherefore if you will needes be faithfull, and sworne unto S. Peter, it must be in maintaining, and in de∣fending spirituall things, as preaching of Christs Gospell pure∣ly and sincerely, ministring truely after the institution of our Master Christ, the blessed Sacraments of holy Church, and in vertuous living, giving example to the Holy Church of Christ. But now if this be your Oath, truely you are perjured, and worthy to weare Papers, for you doe reckon your selves too high and too honourable, to goe about such simple things as these be. And therefore you have applyed your selves to other greater matters, as to Christening of Bells, to hallowing of Churches,The holy workes of Bishops. to blessing of Candles, to consecrating of Holy Oyle, to hallowing of Chalices, vestments, and Atars, and to giving 40. dayes of pardon to them that receive your bles∣sings in the streete, and to some that visite Holy Saints, and such like great matters, which pertaine nothing to your Oath. Wherefore I doe reckon that after the true forme of your Oath, we have but few Bishops, but that be perjured or abjured (call it what you will) both against God, against S. Peter, and against their Prince. It followeth. And to the Holy Church of Rome. What needeth this? what good can you doe to the Church of Rome, or what profit is it to her that you sweare? thinke you that he will compell you by your Oath to be true to her? then must she needes sue you of perjury if you breake your Oath. But marke how the Church of Rome is set in your Oath, as the better person before the Pope: wherefore it must needes follow, that the Pope is un∣der the Church, and lesse than the Church, and no head of the Church, except you will make him a third person: ye neither pertaineth to S. Peter nor yet to holy Church: but is a thing of himselfe, and as your In Pr. 6. . Quoniam in rbo Papa. Law saith; neither God nor man, but middle betweene them both, that is as much to say, after my learning, as the Devill himselfe. But what meaneth it, that you sweare onely to the Holy Church of Rome? will you be traytors to the Holy Church of Constantinople? or else to the Holy Church of England? Or doe you thinke other
Churches not holy? tell us what you meane; for it seemeth a marveilous thing, and also a speciall thing, that you make such an Oath all onely to the Holy Church of Rome, naming none other Church. Why are you not rather sworne to keep? and to feede? to nourish? and to be true to your owne Church of the which you have taken cure and charge? As 1 Pet. 5.2.3. S. Peter commandeth you. See that you feede Christs flocke which is among you. For of these you have taken your name, living and dignity, you are called Bishop of Winchester, of London, and of Lincolne; and of these you are Fed, but these be forgotten in your Oath, and these you little regard, but to maintaine the Holy Church of Rome, that giveth you never a penny, but robbeth all other Churches, you must be raite∣ly sworne. And why? Antichrist must have a cloake for his Treason. For now if he be a Traytor, he is to be excused: Why? for he is sworne to it.Bishop Fisher answered, that he was sworne to the Pope, and and therefore would not sweare to the Kings supremacy. But shall I tell you what I doe take out of it? The truth is, that you sweare to betray, to kill, and slay all members of all other Churches, saving those that live after the whoredome, and mischief that is used in Rome. For if you should be bound to seeke out in Rome Christened men, and those that doe live after the living of the holy Church, I thinke you should finde but few, yea and unto those, you would thinke scorne to be sworne. Ergo, it must follow that you are sworne to the worst sort of Rome, and that your holy Church of Rome is taken for such a sort, as liveth against his blessed Word, against the living of holy Apostles, against the conditions of our holy Mother the Church. I would say in all oppression, in all Sodomitry, in all murther, in all pompe and pride, summa summarum in all manner of mischiefe, what tongue can tell, or heart can thinke. But I will not say so: for men would reckon me uncharitable and too vehement. Ne∣verthelesse all the world knoweth, that you doe reckon your selfe, by the vertue of your Oath, bound to no men, but unto such, as in very deede, liveth after this ungracious manner; and yet will you be faithfull, and true unto them against all men? yea I dare say: if that their concience had not condemned them of such mischiefe, they would never have desired this assistance of you. But the verity is, they are naught, and have neede of maintainers in their mischiefe. And also suspect you not to be te, except you made an Oath to them, yea and
scarsely then, unlesse that you in very deede, at time and place convenient, doe betray your Princes, for that is the cause of your Oath, and other profit hath not the King by it, I will be reported by all practise that ever came out of your Oath. It followeth, And to my Lord the Pope. I would gladly learne where the Pope hath got the dignity of a Lord. This thing is little regarded of my Lords the Bishops, to bring in such a worldly dignity, yea they will say, it is but a trifle, and mocke men for speaking against it; but he truth is, i they durst as much now, as in times past, they would burne for this little trifle, the best Lord in England. For I dare say, it hath cost many a mans life, or ever they brought the Pope to Lord∣ship. Blessed S. Peter (whose successor the Pope boasteth himself to be) knew nothing of this Lordship, for he saith unto his fellowes, They 1 Pet. 5. shall not exercise any lordship over the Con∣gregation. And likewise 2 Cor. 8. S. Paul durst not take upon him to command as a Lord, collections to be made for poore men, but meekely desires them without any Lordship. Also in ano∣the place: 1 Cor. 4. Let no man judge us, but as the Ministers of Christ; blessed S. Paul reckoneth himselfe but a Minister and a Servant: and yet the day hath beene, that he was so good, as my Lord the Pope. Our Master Christ, that came to teach both Peter and Paul, learned his Disciples not to use them∣selves Mat. 20. as Lords but as Servants. And marke the occasion of that he had sayd, there be two new disciples brought unto him, and the old (being not yet perfect) thought scorne that these two should sit above all other, the one of the right hand, and the other of the lft hand: but our Master Christ reproveh this proud stomacke of theirs, very straightly, saying, How the Princes and Rulers of the infidels hath power over their Subjects; but so shall not yee: for he that will be greatest among you, shall be least. Here our Master Christ learneth none Hypocrisie, that they should be called least in name, and be greatest in very deede: but he will that this Doctrine shall be expressed in their deedes. My Lord the Pope calleth himselfe in words, the Servant of all servants, but in very deed h will be Lord over all Lords. Yea nd my Lords Bishops will be sworne to him, as unto a Lord, and they will reckon themselves perjured if they burne not all them that will take the Pope but for a ser∣vant. Is not this a marvellous Hypocrisie, to be called servant
of all servants; and yet desire to be taken as Lord and King over all Kings? Yea, and unto this be our Bishops sworne, cause they will be obedient to their Princes. But and their Note this. consciences were ripped, you should finde no man sit there as a King, but my Losell the Pope, and we poore men must be condemned for reproving of this. And why? verily be∣cause my Lords have sworne to him, against their Prince, and all his true subjects. But how standeth it with your Oath to∣ward your Prince, for to be sworne to the Pope? which is not all onely another Lord, but also contrary, yea and as the world now is, the greatest mortall enemie, that our Prince hath. For I dare say, that if this wreched Clement could drowne our Noble Prince with one word, it would not be long (By Cardinall Poles practise and Instigations) undone sine clementia. The Common saying went in Hamburgh, that this caitise hath not all onely excommunicated our Noble Prince, but also given away the Kingdome to another. And this fact must you defend, for you are sworne to he Pope: Yea I dare say, if you had convenient occasion, you would de∣clare your fidelity. I doe Judge after your acts, that you have done to Kings in times past, whensoever that you had power and might to bring to passe that which you have conceived a∣gainst your Prince. If you thinke I judge amisse, or else doe you wrong, let me be put to my proose, and you shall see, what an heape of holy facts that I will bring you out of your owne Chronicles and Bookes, for the which you will be lau∣ded, and praised Highly, that you have so faithfully stucke un∣to this damnable Idoll of Rome: yea I dare say it had beene Heresie within this two yeares, to have written, or sayd thus much against the lmme of the Devill on our Princes side. This all the world can testifie, whereore I thinke yo will put me to no ryall. But to your Oath. How doth it stand with your allegiance toward you Prince, to be sworne to the Pope: your owne In 6. lib. 2. dsent. & . judi∣cata cap. pastoralis in verb Homagi. Law saith, that a leige man can make none Oath of fidelity to none other man, but to his owe King. Moreover you doe remember your Oath made unto you Prince, wherein you doe renounce all clauses, words and sentences, made unto the Pope, which may be hurfull or prejudiciall to his High∣nesse: how agreeth these two Oathes? you may set them to∣gether as well as you can; but I know no wayes to avoyd your
perjury.Excuse the Bi∣shops perjury who can. For the very truth is, that the Kings grace, and his councell, considering your Oath made to the Pope, to be pre∣judiciall to his regall power, causeth you in your Oath ater∣ward made unto him, to revoke those things that thou hast afore sworne to he Pope: and to declare, that his grace and his councell did reckon your Oath made to the Pope to bee against him: therefore he maketh you to revoke it by name, naming the same Oath, and also the same Pope. So that you may clearely perceive, how that our Prince doth suspect you, for your Oath making. And in very deede the Popes meaning and yours was none other, but for to betray the King, and his Realme: and therefore as soone as there was any variance be∣tweene the King and the Pope, then were you first of all as∣soyled of your allegeance due unto our King, and that absolu∣tion was blazen and blowne, preached and taught through∣out all the world, and all doores and postes must bee decked with papers and bulls for your discharge. But for to helpe your Prince, you could never be discharged of your hereticall and trayterous Oath made unto the Pope, against your Prince. Here neither Peter nor Paul can helpe, nor there is no key that can open that locke. O Lord God how have we beene blin∣ded thus trayterously to handle our naturall Prince? But how this Caterpiller is come to be Lord and hath brought Kings under his feete, I will speake (God willing) after this in a particular treatise It followeth, and to his successors, lawfully and regularly entring in. After what Law? I read in your owne Di. 23. Qui episcopus ex con∣cilio 4 Cartha. Bookes of law, after which me thinkes there be very few Bishops made, wherein I finde among all other good things, that he should be chaste of living, meeke, gentle to speake to, mercifull, well learned in the new and old Testament, and that he should not forbid marriage, nor should blame the eating of flesh, and should also beleeve, that all manner of sinnes, as well actuall as originall, be clearely forgiven in Baptisme. How many of these things the Popes Holinesse is indowed withall, and how many he alloweth, his owne bookes and deedes will testifie. Where∣fore I reckon that your oath doth not meane this Law, nor yet the Law that blessed Tim. 3. Tit. 1. Saint Paul writeth of. For then I rec∣kon, that by the vertue of your Oath, you have not beene bound to one Pope this 400. yeares, so that it must follow, that you have other Lawes, than blessed S. Paul speaketh of,
or the Councell of Carthaginence to choose your Pope by, the which as farre as men can reckon, by common experience and practise be these. Inprimis, He that shall be able to be Pope,Who is lawfull to be Pope. must be a vengeable tyrant, never keeping peace but alwayes warring for the defence (as ye call it) of S. Peters patrimony. To suffer no Prince to dwell in rest by him, but to snatch his possessiones to the unholy Church of Rome. To set Princes together by the eares, till they be both weary, and then to take the matter in his hand, and never to make an end, till both parties hath given some possessions to his Holy Father-head: to assoyle the soules, that hath been slaine through his pac∣king:The Popes wic∣kednesse descri∣bed at large. and he that dare most boldly, and with least shame, de∣pose Princes without a cause, he is best able to be Pope. He that can by any traine, craft, or subtilty, bring under him any Bishop or any spirituall person, or invent any new clause in their Oath, he is to be allowed afore other. Moreover, he that keepeth fewest women, and hath most of them, that you wo of, he is holiest, and apt to be head of your Church. And he that can most tyrannously burne men for preaching of the Go∣spell, and he himselfe to take no labours therein. Item, to burne Priests that marry wives and he himself to live in all mis∣chiefe, and whoredome, yea in such abominablenesse, as no man may with honesty speake (you know what I meane,) this man I say hath a testimony, afore his spiritualy, that he is a lawfull man to that Office. Furthermore, he that is a whores sonne, as our Holy Father is now, and can finde the meanes that 12. men will forswear themselves, that he is lawfully born as this holy Clement did. This is a fit Fat, for such children. Finally, he that can give most money, and buy the greatest part or Cardinals of his side, he is best worthy to be called Pope, and to set on Peters stoole. For it cannot be unknowne to you how that Thomas VVoulcy, an holy pillar of your Church, would have been Pope, when this Clement was chosen, and did offer for it a reasonable penny; but Clement dashed him out of conceite, with 2000 pound more than he offered, and so he was judged best worthy, and entred in lawfully and regularly, and unto him our Bishops be sworne, and obedient. And why? because they will have such a head, as they be mem∣bers: for how could else their Kingdome stand? For if one should be chosen after the rule of blessed S. Paul, or else after
the living of these new Heretickes, which be simple and poor, and care not for no dignities, nor will never sweare nor fight, and would rather marry a wife of their owne, then take other mens, and are alwayes studying and preaching Gods Word, seeking onely the honour of God, and the profit of his neigh∣bour, and will be subject and obedient in all things (desiring none exception) to his Prince. This man, I say, should be un∣lawfull, and not elegible, for he were able to destroy the whole Kingdome of the Papists, and not worthy to receive an Oath of my Lords the Bishops, which will not gladly be prejured for such a mans sake. For he were able to destroy the whole Church of Rome, unto the which our Bishops have beene before sworne. It followeth in your Oath, I shall no consent in Counsell or in deede, that they should lose either life or member, or that they should be taken or trapped by any evill meanes. What neede you to sweare thus unto the Pope? doth not the order of Charity binde you thus to use your selfe toward all men, that is to say, neither to hurt them, nor to harme them, neither to intrappe them, nor betray them. But all men must be betray'd, and with craft and subtletie undone, for the maintenance of this one person. The truth is, that ne∣ver man spake against this Popet, but you destroy him, and betray'd him: but this Popet hath blasphemed, and betrayed all Protestants, and yet you were never against him. And why, because you be sworne to him. And you will keepe your Oath be it right or wrong. But in your last Oath, which hath beene newly made, is added this clause, that no man should lay vio∣lent hands upon them in any wise, or any wrong should be done unto them by any manner of Colour. This part is newly brought in, sie the flesh of the Pope hath beene so holy, that no man might touch it but Harlots. Christian men must patiently suffer injuries and wrongs, but your head will for∣sweare that point, and maintaine himselfe through your power against all men. How neere that this is the Apostles living, all Christian men can well judge. It followeth in your Oath: Their Councell that shall be shewed unto me; either by their letters, or by their messengers, I shall open to no man to their hurt or damage. Let Princes beware when the Pope sendeth counslls unto you, for their meaning is to betray them. For all the world knoweth that the Pope and you doe little regard,
what the beggars of the world doth handle: But what Empe∣rours, Kings, and Dukes doth handle, hat must you let and destroy. For that is the Counsell, and you may shew it to no man, No not to your King, and why? because you are sworne to the Pope. But what say you to your Oath made unto your Prince? wherein you sweare, that you shall be faith∣full and true, and beare unto him above all creatures, love and favour, to live and to dye with him, and to open him all manner of Counsells, that may be hurtfull unto his grace. Now it is well knowne, that the Pope hath done and dayly doth handle such Counsells as be against our Princes honour,The Pope dot practise Coun∣sels against th honorable state of Princes. and conversation. And yet you may neither tell it to your Prince, nor let it, and why, because you be sworne to the Pope, and forsworne to your Prince. Tell me when any thing was opened unto our Prince, by you, that the Pope had handled in coun∣sell against our Prince: Of this thing I will take record of his Noble grace, whether I say true or false and yet must I be accu∣sed of Treason. And why, because you are sworne to the Pope, and I am true to the King: It followeth: I will helpe to de∣fend and maintaine the Papistry of Rome, against all men, sa∣ving mine order. And in your, new Oath, now in our days made is added, The regalls of Saint Peter. What and in all men be contained your Prince? you must needes defend him. And why, because ye be sworne to the Pope, and forsworne to your Prince;Quest. 6. c Aliu. For your Oath to your Prince is to defend him with all your wit and reason against all men, now must you forsake one of them; and your practise hath beene alwayes to forsake your Prince, and sticke to the Pope:Hre is specially to be noted the practise of P∣lates. For  are the doing of the Holy ∣ther of Rome, that for Rebelli∣on against Prin∣ces he would give absolution, but for matter against his Pope∣dome there was never absolution might be obtai∣ned. for of your Oath made to your Prince, you have been oftentimes assoiled. And as your Law saith, the Church of Rome is  so to doe. But of your Oath made unto the Pope, there is no absolution, neither in heaven nor earth. Neither was it ever read, heard, nor seene, that there could be any dispensation for it. Let me be reported by all the Bookes that ever were written, and by all the Bulls that ever were granted, and by all the experience that ever was used; and if I be found false, let me be blamed; and yet I am sure many men will reckon that I speake uncha∣ritably; but I would faine learne of all Charitable men in England, with what other English words I could declare this intolerable or subtile treason, thus long and shamefully used
aginst my Prince, which is necessary to be knowne. And I am compelled by violence to declare both my conession and learning in this cause. For men hath not beene ashamed to re∣port that I would (which am but a wretch and poore simple wonne, and not able to kill a Cat, though I would doe my uttemost) to make insurrection against my Noble and mighty Prince, whom (as God knoweth) I doe honour, worhip, love and favour to the uttermost power of my heart, and am not satisfied because it is no more. This I speake afore God. Let him be mercifull unto me as it is true: and if I were not so true in my heart, it were not possible for me so earnestly to write against them, whom I doe reckon to handle unfaithfully, and untruely with their Prince, yea against both Gods law and mans law. The very truth is, I can suffer, (through Gods grace) all manner of wrongs, injuries, and slanders; but to be called an hereticke against God, or a Traytor against my Price, he liveth not, but I will say he lyeth; and will be able so to prove him, if I may be reported by my workes or deedes, by my con∣versation or living, or by any thing that ever I did; (and I dare say as much of my self, notwithstanding our Prelates slanders of me.) But unto my purpose; the Bishops doth swear one Oath to the Pope, & another contrary to their Prince. And yet they will be taken for good and faithfull children: And I poore man must be condemned,The Popes Re∣gals. and all my workes for Heresi, and no man to reade them under the paine of Treason. And why? because I write against their perjurie toward their Prince. But how commeth Saint Peter by these regales that you are sworne to defend? seeing that he was never no King, but a Fisher? All the world knoweth, that Regalia belongeth to Kings, and to like power of Kings. Why are you no rather sworne to de∣fend Peters net and his Fisherie? the which things hee both had and used, and never regalls.Peter was ac∣quainted with his nets but not with Regals. But these things will not maintaine the holy Church of Rome, and therefore yee sweare not to maintaine them. But what meane you by that sentence; Saving mine order? why say you not, saving my Kings pleasure your glosse saith, you may not defend these things with wea∣pons. But oh Lord God what unshamefulnesse is this,In verbs lus . thus to delude with words all the whole world? Men knoweth that when the Pope hath neede of your helpe, there is no men sooner in Armes than you are, if you call Armes Harneys,
Bylles, and Glaves, swords and gunnes, and such other things. Doe you not remember how soone the Bishop of Norwich, Henry Spenser, was in Armes to defend Pop Vrban, it were but folly to recite examples.These Articles be now granted and are no He∣resie. In the yeare of our Lord 1164. was there a controversie betweene the Kings Grace, and the Bishops of England, for certaice Prerogatives belonging to the King. Wherefore the King required an Oath, and a con∣firmation of the Bishops, as concerning those Articles prero∣gatives. But answere was made of the Bishops, that those pre∣rogatives, cum omnibus pravitatibus in regio scripo contentis, were of none effect, nor strength, because they did forbid to appeale to the Court of Rome, unlesse the King gave licence. And because that no Bishop might goe at the Popes calling out of the Realme, without the Kings assent. And because the Clerkes should be convented in criminall causes a fore a temporall Judge. And because the King would heare mat∣ters, as concerning tithes and other Spirituall causes.The Prelates cannot abide to use obedience to their Prince. And be∣cause that it was against the See of Rome, and the dignity of the same, that a Bishop should be convented afore the King. Briefely, they would not be under the King, but this addition should be set unto it, Salvo honore Dei, & Ecclesiiae Romanae, & ordine nostro,We have been led by blind guiders. that is, we will be under your grace, saving the honour of God, of the Church of Rome, and of our order: the cause why they did except these things, was this, as they themselves grant. For Kings received their authorities, and power of the Church,The Kings po∣wer is immedi∣ately of God. but the Church receiveth her authority of Christ onely, wherefore they conclude that the King cannot command over Bishops, nor absolve any of them, nor to judge of tithes, nor of Churches, neither ye to forbid Bishops, the handling of any spirituall cause. Is not here a marveilous blindnesse and obstinacie against their Prince? They will make it against Gods honour, to obey their King, and are not ashamed to say in the Kings face, that his power is of them. But I pray you whether was Kings before Bishops, or Bishops before Kings? you shall finde, that God had long admitted Kings, or any Bishops (as you take him) was thought of. Doth not the Holy Ghost command that we should honour King?1. Pet. 2. Also in another place. Let all men b under the higher powers, for the power is of God, and he that ressteth, resisteth the power of Gods Ordinance,Rom. 13. Here Paul saith that Kings power is of God, &
of Bishops. Furthermore, what reason is it to defend the Popes Prerogative against your Princes?He that defen∣deth the Pope against his So∣veraigne Lord or Lady is an unnaturall Sub∣ject. Is not your Prince nearer, and more naturall unto you then this wretch the Pope? But here is a thing, that maketh me to marveile. When you sweare to the Pope (saving your order) is as much to say, as you shall not use no weapons, but else you shall be ready and obedient in all things. But when you shall sweare to your King, then (saving your order) is as much to say,Saving of Order hath two signi∣fications. as you have authoritie to confirme Kings, and to be their fellowes, and neither to be obedient unto them, nor yet to answere to any Justice before them, but clearely to be exempted, and they not to meddle with you, except they will give you some worldly promotion. If I would use my selfe as uncharitably against you, as you have handled me, doubtlesse I could make something of this, that should displease you. How would you cry, and how would you handle me poore wretch, f you had halfe so much against me as this is, but I will let you passe, God hath preserved me hitherto o his infinite mercy against your insatiable malice, and no doubt but he will doe the same still. I will returne to your Oath. It followeth,The Pope will hold a Councell when and where it pleaseth him. I shall come to the Synod when I am called, unlesse I shall be lawfully let. But why doe you not sweare to compell the Pope to call a Coun∣cell? seeing that it hath beene so often, and so instantly requi∣red of him, by many & Noble Princes of Christendome, yea see∣ing that al Christendom, (such was their desire of Reformation) doth require with great sighes, an order to be taken, and set in the highest Articles of our faith: but unto this you are not sworne. And why: because it is against your holy Pope of Rome: for it there were a generall Councell, both he, and you doe know, that there must needes follow, both over him and you a streight reformation. Therefore after my Counsell say, that you cannot come, for you be lawfully let. It followeth; I shall honourably entreate the Popes Loga, both going and comming, and in his necessity I shall helpe him. I pray you see, and provide well that he goe not a begging as Peter did. And see also that he neither preach nor teach, but pill and poll, with all mischiefe and unshame fastnesse. And why because you are sworne this to maintaine. It followeth: I shall visit yearely my selfe, or by some other messenger, the Pope of Rome, unlesse I e dispenced with of them. I pray
you what pertaineth this to the Office of a Bishop, yearely to visit Rome? Christ and the most of his Apostles were never at Rome, and yet they were meetly good Christian men. But I reade in the traditions of the Turke,Iu. 6. l. 1. de Ma∣joritate & obedi∣entia: Delecti ili De Iureiu∣ando c. Ego, in verbo singulis. that certaine of them must yearely visit their Mahomet. From whom I thinke you have taken this custome. Your owne Law saith, that unto this clause must these Bishops all onely be bound, that be im∣mediately underneath the Pope. Now are not you such, for you sweare an oath to the King, that you will immediately take your Bishopricke of him, and hold it all onely of his grace. Wherefore then doe you here sweare against your owne Law? And also against your Oath made to your Prince? Moreover, you know that there was an old custome, in the dayes of King Henry the second, that no Bishop should goe out of the Realme, without the Kings Licence.The Prelates will obey the Pope but not the Prince. Are you not bound to keepe this custome: but answere, that the Pope hath dispensed with you, and that you are not bound to keepe any obedience toward the acts that your Prince ma∣keth. Moreover, I marvaile sore, that you be all so straightly sworne of so long time, and never one of you that ever went in my dayes to discharge this Oath. And why? because you are dispensed with. But were it not as good to leave it out of your Oath at first, seeing you intend not to keepe it, as after∣ward to dispence with you for it. No forsooth for then the Pope could not bind you to come to Rome at his pleasure, and betray your King, and all his Counsailes. But in your Oath that is newly made, and that you have sworne last, is ad∣ded, that if the Pope be on this side the mountaines, then you shall visite him every yeare: but if he be beyond the mountaines, then every three yeares. O that knew not your practise and the circumstances of you facts that hath beene done, would little suspect this addition: but the very truth is, there is a mischievous and abominable treason in it against Princes. For if it chanced the Emperour, or else any temporall Prince neere unto Rome, to fall at variance with the Pope, then did the Pope straight runne into France, that is to say on this side the Mountaines,A devilish Pra∣ctise of Prelates where you must visite him yearely. And why? because your God is in distresse, and hath conceived a deadly hatred against a Prince, and cannot bring it to passe, without your helpe and counsell. Where∣ore
you must come yearely. And also he must know, through your betraying, how your Prince is minded, and whether he be addicted to his contrarie part or not. If he be, you must be∣tray his Counsell, and that yearely: and why? because the Pope is on this side the Mountaines. But and if he be in Rome, and hath all Princes neckes under his girdle, yet is it suffici∣ent that you come every third yeare. For you can at once com∣ming devise as much Treason, as Princes shall avoyd in five yeares. But what belongeth this unto a Bishop: that the Pope is on this side the mountaines, or beyond. If he be bound by Gods Law, yearely to visite the Pope,The Bishops sweare to visit the Pope yeare∣ly. then must you visite him wheresoever he be, though he were either with God or the Devill: and if you be not bound by Gods Law, what a presumption is it of him to bind you? yea what an over-sight is it of you, to let your selfe thus to be bound? and what a wickednesse is it of you so straightly to keepe this Oath: to the which you are not bound by Scripture, against your obe∣dience made to your Prince, which is commanded by Gods Word? But I pray you what example hath either he, or bles∣sed Saint Peter, to bind by vertue of an Oath, the other Apo∣stles yearely to visit him at Rome? All the world may perceive that this Oath is invented of insatiable covetousnesse, that the Pope and you have toward honours and dignities. And that is well declared by these words, that follow in your Oath. The possessions of my Church, I shall not sell, give, lay to morgage, or make any feoffement, or by any other meanes alienate the same without the Counsell of the Pope.The Pope ta∣keth sure Order with his Bishops But I pray you tell me one thing, why doe you not sweare that you shall neither buy, nor yet receive any possessions to your Church, nor you shall  pill nor poll, nor shave, to encrease the possessions of yr Church? But the truth is, all is fish that commeth to the net with you. And if it come once within your clouches it never commeth out againe, though the king and his Realme should stand in never so great need: but to re∣ceive all his Land, you are alwayes ready, and it is not against your Oath. I doe not say thus, because I would ye should sell or alienate the Possessions of the Church, but because I see that there is nothing maintained by them, but all onely your mischievous pompe and your pride. Your owne law comman∣deth, that the fourth part of the spirituall goods, should be
distributed among poore men. And for that cause they be cal∣led, Bona pauperum, but how little their part is, all the world can testifie. Wherefore doe you sweare,Quest. 2. . Quantu: & de Reditibus, &c. Mos est. not to alienate your goods, without the Popes licence? The Pope gave them not to you, but the King and his subjects. How commeth he now to be so neare of your Counsell in alienating them? and the King is thrust out, the which hath deserved best to be of your Counsell. But doe you not remember your owne Law? the which doth forbid, that the Pope in any wise, or for any necessity, hould alienate the goods of the Church,Quest. 2. cap. Non liceat Pap. except it be old houses, which cannot be kept without great charges. This is your owne Law, and against this will you sweare? then must you needes be perjured: for if you alienate your goods with the Popes licence, then is this decree against you and curseth you. Wherefore then put you this in your Oath, see∣ing you cannot alienate your goods with his consent nor yet without it? It followeth in your new Oath, Decrees, Ordi∣nances, Sentences, Dispositions, Reservations, Provisions and Commandments Apostolicke, with all my power, I will ob∣serve, and shall cause other men to observe them: These things were added, when this Idoll was brought so high, that no man durst winch against him,In 6. Tit. 4. c. Ad Apost. in verbo Cotintar. and when he might say & doe what he would. And as your Law Commandeth, no man so hardy to aske him why he doth so. Then began Decrees, Or∣dinances, Depositions, Dispositions, Reservations, Provisions with like shamefulnesse for to spring, and there is no remedie, but they must continue: And why? Because you are sworne to keepe them your selfe, and to compell other men also to keepe them. And out of the keeping of this part of your Oath, springeth forth another sentence th loweth,This is the clause that mintaineth the Popes Pompe and glory, and this is that that giveth him li∣berty to say and doe what he will. which is this: All Heretickes, Schismatickes, and  towards our sayd Lord the Pope, to my power I shall prosecute and with∣stand. This is the cause that made us poore men so great Heretickes. For it can never be proved, that ever wee spake against God, or our King, and yet we be Heretickes. And why, forsooth because the Bishops are sworne to the Popes Decrees, the which condemneth all them for. Heretickes, that speaketh against his holinesse, though he be as holy as my horse; for he saith himselfe in his law,Dist. 40. c. Non nos. that he needeth not to be holy himselfe, but it is sufficient, that he sitteth in an
holy seate, thee be his words: who doubteth but he is holy, the which is exalted to so great a dignity?Glos in verbo quis. In whom though good workes of his owne merits be wanting, yet are those good workes sufficient, the which were done by his prede∣cessours: upon the which text their glosse saith, that if it bee openly knowne, that the Pope be an Adulterer, or a Murde∣rer, yet ought he not to be accused, &c. Now we poore men cannot suffer such mischievous voyces, wherefore we must be Heretickes.The Preachers of the Doctrine of Christ must needs be Here∣tickes, for the sayd Doctrine is against the Pope 2 Joh. 7. they preach against the Pope & there∣fore are Here∣tickes. But why? because my Lords the Bishops are sworne to persecute us: but neverthelesse, I trust to Gods grace, and the Kings, that my Lords the Bishops will not be so hard in this point of their Oath, as they have beene. And why? because men may now come to their answere; Surely, there be many clauses in his last Oath added, that be cleare injurie unto Pinces, and against Gods Law, and mans Law, and yet our Bishops will sweare them, yea and that which is worst of all, they will accuse other men of Treason and Re∣bellion and there is no man sworne to treason nor Rebel∣lion but they onely. Wherefore most gracious Prince with all meekenesse and lowlinesse that is due to so noble a Prince, and also that doth become a true subject to doe, I low∣ly and meekely require and desire your grace, to judge be∣tweene the Bishops and me, which of us is truest and faithful∣lest to God and to your Grace:The writers Pe∣tition to the Kings Grace. I speake all onely of those that hath, and also would now (if they durst) defend the Pope, and his Lawes. Against them I make this supplication, and against them have I declared the learning and Doctrine, that I have both taught and written. And as for my facts and deeds, what I have done against God and your grace, I require them to say  uttermost that they can prove, or else by your graciou vour, I am here present and offer my selfe to prove them lyars; and that under any manner of paine, that your grace shall assigne: and against them I have declared the learning and Doctrine of their Church, and also brought ex∣amples of their facts and deedes, with the which they have put their Doctrine in exercise. Now if they be grieved or thinke themselves wrongfully handled of me, then I require no more of your grace but indifferently and graciously to heare both them and me, the which thing no doubt as your grace doth know our heavenly Father doth require of you: who pre∣serve your highnesse in all honour and dignity, Amen. Thus far Dr Barnes.
But to returne againe from these Trayterly disloyall Oathes to our Arch-Bishops: Antiquit Ec∣cles. Brit. f. 346. to 380.436. God∣win p. 166. to 170. Holinshed. p. 878.910. to 923. William Warham,WILLIAM WARHAM. the next Arch-Bishop, as he received his confirmation, consecration, Pall, to∣gether with a power Legatine from Pope Iulius, by sundry Bulls, against the Lawes and Statutes of the Realme, and tooke the forenamed Oath to the Pope, which made him no good Sub∣ject to his Prince; so the Royall Pompe at his instalment and in∣thronization was meerely Anti-Christian. The day before his comming to Canterbury, went thither the Duke of Buckingham who was his For which Of∣fice of Execution he had an annu∣all Fee from the Arch-bishop worthy so great an Arch-bishop, and so great a man. Antiqu. Eccl. Bri. p. 436. Steward [a goodly Office or the greaest Peere of the Realme] attended with 140. horse, to see all things in a readinesse. This Duke had also the Office of Chiefe Butler; and being unable to execute both duties, he deputed Sir George Bourchier unto the Butlership. The Duke himselfe tooke great paines to see that nothing requisite, for the performance of this Solemnity in the most magnificent manner, might be wanting. The next day [being Sunday] he me the Arch-bishop over against S. Andrewes Church, and doing low obeysance unto him went before him bareheaded to Christ Church: from which Church he was attended by the Duke in like ort as he was thi∣ther ward. The Cheere at dinner was as great as for money it might be made, with severall Verses, Pageants, Theaters, Sceans, and Player-like representations, in natue o a Puppet-play, (made in puffe-past or March-pane) before every Course, de∣cribed more largely by Antiquit. Eccles. Brit. p. 350.351.352.436. Matthew Parker, fitter for a Maske than a Bishops Consecration; and savoring of more than Asian Luxurie, as this his Sucessor confesseth. Beore the first Messe, the Duke himselfe came riding into the Hall upon a great Horse, bare headed, with his white staffe in his han and when the first dish was set on the Table, made obey any bowing his body to the Arch-bishop.Holinshed, p. 812. Such Vassals did hoe proud Popes of Canterbury make the very greatest Nobles, as thus to become their Servants, and waite upon their Roches. In this Arch-Bishops time, there fell out great contestations and sites at Rome betweene him, and the Bishops of Winchester, London, Lin∣colne, Exeter, and other his Suffragans, touching the Iurisdicti∣ons of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury; which cost much mo∣ney. After this he, and Cardinall Wolsi, who by his power Le∣gatine invaded and swallowed up all the Jurisdiction & Rightes of the other Praes and of the See of Canterbury) had divers
contests, and bickerings. Anno 1512. This Arch-Prelate by an Oration in Parliament against the French King, raised up a bloody warre betweene England and France, towards which two fifteenes were granted by the temporalty and two tenths by the Clergie: after which, Anno. 152. Holinshed. p. 911.912. Hall. 22. H. 8. fol. 188.189. whose words are here but transcribed. When the Commons were assembled in the nether house, they began to Commune of their griees, wherewith the Spiritualty had be∣fore time grievously oppressed them, both contrary to the Law of the Realme, and contrary to all right, and in speciall they were sore moved with sixe great causes. The first, for the excessive fines, which the Ordinaries tooke for Probate of Testaments, insomuch that Sir Henry Guildford Knight of the Garter, and Controller of the Kings house, de∣clared in the open Parliament on his fidelity, that he and others being Executors to sir William Crompton Knight, payed for the Probate of his Will to the Cardinall and the Bishop of Canterbu∣ry a thousand Markes sterling. After this Declaration where shew∣ed so many extortions done by Ordinaries for Probates of Wills, that it were too much to rehearse. The second was, the great polling and extreame exaction, which the Spirituall men used in taking of Corps, Presents, or Mortuaries. For the Children of the desunct should all dye for hunger, and goe a begging, rather than they would of Charity give to them the seely Cow which the dead man ought, if hee had but onely one, such was the Charity then. The third cause was, that Priests being Surveiors, Stewards, and Officers to Bishops, Abbots, and other Spirituall heads had and occupied Farmes, Granges, and Grasing in every Country, so that the poore Husband men could have nothing but of them; and yet for that they should pay deerely. The fourth cause was, that Abbats, Priors and Spirituall men kept Tan-houses, and bought and fold Wooll, Cloath, and all manner of Merchandize, as other Temporall Merchants did. The fifth cause was, because that Spirituall Persons promo∣ted to great benefices, and having their Livings of their Flocke, were lying in the Court in Lords houses, and tooke all of the parishioners, and nothing spent on them at all, so that for lacke of Residence, both the poore of the Parish lacked refreshing, and universally all the Parishioners lacked Preaching and true
Instruction of Gods Word, to the great perrill of their Soules. The sixth cause was, to see one Priest little learned to have  ten or twelve Benefices, and to be resident upon none, and to know many well learned Scholars in the Universities, which were able to preach and teach, to have neither Benefice nor exhibition. These things before this time might in no wise be touched, nor yet talked off by any man, except hee would be made an Hereticke, or lose all that he had. For the Note the mis∣chiefe of Pre∣lates being great temporall Of∣ficers. Bishops were Chancellors, and had all the rule about the King, so that no man durst once presume to attempt any thing contrary to their profit or commodity. But now, when God had illuminated the eyes of the King, and that their subtile doings were once espied; then men began charitably to desire a Reformation; and so at this Parliament men began to shew their grudges. Where∣upon the Burgesses of the Parliament, appointed uch as were learned in the Law, being of the Commons house, to draw one Bill of the Probates of Testaments, another for Mortuaries, and the third for Non-residence, Pluralities, and taking of farme by spi∣rituall men. The learned men tooke much paines, and first set forth the Bill of Mortuaries, which passed the Commons house, and was sent up to the Lords. To this Bill the Spirituall Lords made a faire face, saying, that surely Priests and Curats tooke more than they should, and therefore it were well done to take some reaso∣nable order: thus they spake, because it touched them little. But within two dayes after was sent up the Bill concerning Probate of Testaments; at the which the Arch-bishop of Canterbury in e∣speciall, and all other Bishops in generall both frowned and granted, for that touched their profit. Insomuch as D. Iohn Fisher Bishop of Rochester said openly in the Parliament Cham∣ber these words: My Lords, you see dayly what Bills come hither from the Commons house, and all is to the What ever makes against the Bishops gaines, be they never so unjust, must be said to tend to the Churches de∣struction. destruction of the Church. For Gods sake see what a Realme the Kingdome of Bohemia was, and when the Church went downe, then fell the glory of the King∣dome: now with the Commons is nothing but downe with the Church, and all this me seemeth is for lacke of faith onely. When these words were reported to the Commons of the nether House, that the Bishop should say, that all their doings were for lacke of faith, they tooke the matter grievously, for they imagined, that the Bishop esteemed them as Heretickes, and so by his slanderous words would have perswaded the Temporall Lords, to have
restrained their consent from the sayd two Bills, which they before had passed. Wherefore the Commons after long debate, determined to send the Speaker of the Parliament to the Kings highnesse, with a grievous complaint against the Bishop of Rochester; and so on a day, when the King was at leasure, Tho∣mas Audley speaker for the Commons, and thirty of the chiefe of the Commons House, came to the Kings presence in his Pa∣lace at Westminster, which before was called Yorke-place, and there very eloquently declared, What a dishonour to the King, and the Realme it was, to say, that they which were ele∣cted for the wisest men of all the Shires, Cities, and Boroughs, within the Realme of England, should be declared in so Noble and open a presence, to lack faith; which was equivalent to say, that they were infidels, and no Christians, as ill as Turkes or Sarazens, so that what paine or study soever they tooke for the Common wealth, or what Acts or Lawes soever they made or stablished, should be taken as Lawes made by Painims and Heahen People, and not worthy to be kept by Christian men. Wherefore he most humbly besoght the Kings Highnesse, to call the sayd Bishop before him, and to cause him to speake more discreetly of such a number as was in the Commons-house. The King was not well contented with the saying of the Bi∣shop, yet he gently answered the Speaker, that he would send for the Bishop, and send them word what answere he made; and so they departed againe. After this the King sent for the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury and sixe other Bishops, and for the Bishop of Rochester also, and there declared to him the grudge of the Commons: to the which the Bishop answeed, A silly and false evasion of a Prelate. that he meant the doings of the Bohemians, was for lacke of Faith, and not the doings of them that were in the Commons House. Which say∣ing was confirmed by the Bishops being present, who had him in great reputation: and so by that onely saying, the King ac∣cepted his excuse, and thereof sent word to the Commons by Sir VVilliam-Fitz-VVilliams Knight, Treasurer of his House∣hold, which blind excuse pleased the Commons nothing at all. After, divers assemblies were kept betweene certaine of the Lords, and certaine of the Commons, for the Bills of Probates of Testaments, and the Mortuaries; the Temporalty layd to the Spiritualty their owne Lawes and Constitutions, and the Spiri∣tualty sore defended them by prescription and usage; to whom
this answer was made by a Gentleman of Grayes-Inne, The usage hath ever beene of theeves to Rob on Shooters-hill, Ergo, is it Lawfull With this answere the Spiritual men were sore offended, because their doings were called robberies. But the Temporall men stood still by their sayings, insomuch that the said Gentleman said to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, that both the exaction of Probates of Testaments, and the taking of Mortuaries as they were used, were open Robbery and theft. After long disputa∣tion, the Temporall Lords began to leane to the Commons, but for all that the Bills remained unconcluded for a while. The King like a good and discreete Prince, not long after ayded them for the redresse of their griefes against the Spiritualty, and caused two new Bills to be made indifferently, both for the See these 2 Acts yet in force, viz. 21. H. 8. c. 4.5. Probates of Testaments and Mortuaries; which Bills were so reasonable, that the Spirituall Lords assented to them all; though they were sore against their minds, and in especiall the Probates of Testaments sore displeased the Bishops, and the Mortuaries sore displased the Parsons and Vicars. After these acts thus agreed, the Commons made another 21. H. 8. c. 13. Act for Plura∣lities of benefices, Non-Residence, buying, selling, and taking of Farmes by Spirituall Persons; which Act so displeased the Spi∣ritually, that the It is no new thing for Priests to rayle against Parliaments for making good Lawes to order them. Priests railed on the Commons of the Com∣mon house, and called them Heretickes and Schismatickes; or the which divers Priests were punished. This Act was sore de∣baed above in the Parliament Chamber, and the Lords Spiritu∣all would in no wise consent. Wherefore the King perceiving the grudge of his Commons, cused iht Lords and eight of his Commons to meee in the Saher a an after-noone; and there was sore debating of the cause, insomuch that the Temporall Lords of the Upper house which were there, ooke part with the Commons against the Spirituall Lords, and by force of reason caused them to assent to the ill with a little qualifying. Which Bill the next day was wholly agreed to in the Lords house, to the great rejoycing of the Lay people, and to the great displeasure of the Spirituall persons Immedi∣ately after this, not onely Cardinall VVole himselfe, but the Arch-bishop and whole Clegi of gland were brought in∣to a Pr by this Parliamen the Cardinall for accepting of a power Legatie from th Pope, contrary to the Lawes of the Realme, and the  of the Cli for consenting and sub∣mitted
thereunto, and holding a Synode by vertue of i: to avoid this danger, and purchase a pardon, the Clergie of the Province of Canterbury profered to give the King one hn∣dred thousand pounds, and the Clergie of the Province of Yorke 18000 ounds more; but the King would not accept of this summe, unlesse they would declare him in the Act by which they granted him this subsidie, to be supreame head of the Church of England here on earth, next under Christ: but procee∣ded to take the forfeiture of the Premunire against them. This put the Prelates, the Popes sworne vassals, to a great Dilemma; for either they must plainly renounce the Popes usurped supre∣macie, or the Kings mercy, and fall under the lash of a Premu∣nire, whereby all their Bishoprickes, goods, livings were for∣eited to his Majestie; and their lives and liberties at his devo∣tion. Loath were the Bishops to forsake their old Lord the Pope, whose servants they had beene so long, and therefore they used all delayes and adjournments to spin out the time, and delude the King, but hee would not be mocked by them. At last therefore they agreed upon this recognition. Wee ac∣knowledge the Kings Majestie to be the singular Protector, the supreame Lord, and likewise supreame head of the Church and Clergie of England so farre forth as it is lawfull for him to be by the Lawes of Christ. But the King much offended with this ambiguous dubious, and equivocating acknowledgement (which in truth was no concession of what he demanded) required them to make a full and plaine acknowledgement of his supremacie in direct and positive termes, without ambi∣guity or shifts, or else to denie and conclude against it, and in∣cure the penalty of the Premunire. Being thus put to it the Archbishop and Bishops hereupon made many ad∣journments of the Convocation, and at last put it over from Aprill, to the fifth of October, to hunne the rocke on which they were like to split themselves, or their holy Father the Pope, in which space the Archbishop died: At last they agre∣ed to give the King the Title he desired, and inserted it into a publike instrument: Whereupon the King at last granted them a generall pardon, in Parliament, which begins thus: 22. H. . c. 15. The King our Soveraigne Lord, calling to his blessed and most gra∣cious remembrance, that his good and loving subects, the most Reverend Father in God the Archbishop of Canerbury, and
other Bishops, Suffragans, Prelates, and other spirituall per∣sons of the Province of the Archbishopricke of Canterbury, of this his Realme of England, and the Ministers under-written, which have exercised, practised, or executed in spirituall Courts, and other jurisdictions within the said Province, have fallen, and incurred into divers dangers of his Lawes by things done, perpetrated, and committed contrary to the order of his Lawes, and spially, contrary to the forme of the Sta∣tutes of Provisours, Provisions, and Premunire: and his High∣nesse having alway a tender eye, with mercy, pitty, and compas∣sion owards his spirituall subjects, minding of his high good∣nesse and great benignity, so alwayes to impart the same unto them, as justice being duly administred, all rigour being ex∣cluded, and the great and benevolent minds of his said sub∣jects, largely, and many times approved towards his highnesse, and specially in their Convocation, and Synode now presently being in the Chapiter house of the Monastery of Westminster, by correspondence of gratitude to them to be requied: of his meere motion, benignity, and liberality, by authority of this his Parliament, hath given and granted his liberall and free par∣don to his said good and loving spirituall subjects, and the said Ministers, and to every of them to be had, taken and enjoyed to and by them and every of them by vertue of this present Act, in manner and forme ensuing: that is, to wit; The Kings High∣nesse of his said benignity, and high liberality, in consideration that the sad Archbishop, Bishops, and Clergie of the said Pro∣vince of Canterbury in their said Convocation, now being, have given and granted to him a subsidie of one hundred thousand pounds of lawfulmony currant in this Realme, to be levied and collected by the said Clergy at their proper costs and charges, and to be paid in certaine forme specified in their said graunt thereof, is fully and resolutely contended and pleased, that it be ordained, established, and enacted by authority of this his said Parliament, that the most Reverend Father in God William Archbishop of Canterbury, Metropolitan and Primate of all England, and all other Bishops, and Suffragans, Prelates, &c, shall be by authority of this present pardon, acquired, par∣doned, released, and discharged against his Highnesse, his heires, successours, and executors, and every of them, of all and all manner offences, contempts, and trespasses committed or
done, against all and singular Statute and Statutes of Provisours, Provisions, and Premunire, and every of them, and of all for∣feitures, and titles, that may grow to the Kings Highnesse by reason of any of the same Statutes, and of all and singular tres∣passes, wrongs, deceits, misdemeanours, foreitures, penalties and profits, summes of mony, paines of death, paines coporall and pecuniar, as generally of all other things, causes, quarrels, suits, judgements and exactions in this present Act hereafter no excepted, nor soreprised, which may be or can be by his High∣nesse in any wise, or by any meanes pardoned, before and to the tenh day of the moneth of March, in the 22. yeare of his most Noble Raigne to every of his said loving subjects. Pro∣vided alway that this Act of free pardon shall not in any wise extend or be beneficiall to the Reverend Father in God Iohn Archbishop of Dublin, now being in the Kings Dominions of Ireland, nor shall in any wise extend to pardon, discharge, or acquit the Bishop Hereford, Peter Ligham, Iohn Baker, Adam Travers, Robert Cliffe; Rouland Philips, and Thomas Pelles Clerkes: who it seemes were guilty of some notorious crimes against the King, and therefore excepted out of this generall pardon: But to returne againe to Warham. This See Fox Acts and Monuments: p. 952. and in the pages before. Arch∣bishop persecuted, and shed the blood of some of our Martyrs, and caused the corpes of VVilliam Tracy Esq. for some ortho∣doxe passages in his Will, to be taken out of the grave, and burn for an Hereticke by an Order made in Convocation: sending a Commission to Doctor Parker Chancellour of Wor∣cester to execute this wicked sentence, who accomplished the same. King Henry the eighth hearing his Subject to be taken ou of the ground, and burnt without his knowledge or due order of Law, sent for the Chancellour, laid this to his charge as an high offence, who excused himselfe by this Archbishops command then newly dead, but in conclusion it cost the Chancellour 300 to puchase his pardon, and would have cost the Archbishop more, had not his death prevented this danger: In fine, this Hlinsed, p. 936, 937. Hall An. 25. H. 8. f. 218. b. Speed, p. 1029. Archbishop VVarham, and Fisher B. of Rochester, gave credit and countenance to the forged visions & revelations of Elizabeth Barton, afterwards condemned of high Treason for the same, as nding to the reproach, perill, and destruction of the Kings persn, honou, fame, and dignity; and Thomas Laurence Register to the Archbishop (it is likely by his Masters privity) proceeded so
farre, as to write a booke of her counterfeit miracles, revelations and holinesse: for which she and her complyces were afterwards execued as Tiburne as they had justly deserved, being attainted of treason by Parliament: among which cursed cue, Richard Maister Priest, Edward Bocking Doctor of Divinity, and Henry Deering Munkes of Canterbury, Henry Gold Bachelor of Di∣vinity, Thomas Laurence Register to the Archbishop o Canter∣bury Warham, and Hugh Ric. a Frier observant (who seduced this silly girle to effect their owne, and the Prelates designes the better thereby) suffered death as Traytors, by hanging, drawing, and quartering at Tiburne: The act of their attainder, treasons and execution is at large related by M. Hall in his Chronicle, 25. H. 8. f. 218, 221, 222, 223, 224. to which I shall referre the Reader. Thomas Cranmer next to him in succession, was made Arch∣bishop by King Henry the 8. much against his will:THOMAS CRANMER. for in his Discourse with Fox Acts and Monuments pag. 1703. D. Martyn, a little before his Martyrdome, being charged by him, that he had aspired to the Archbishopricke of Canterbury; he replyed, I protest before you all, there was ne∣ver man came more unwillingly to a Bishopricke than I did to that, insomuch that when King Henry did send for mee in Post that I should come over, I prolonged my journey by seven weekes at the least, hinking that ee would be forgetfull of mee in the meane time. Hee comming to the Antiq. Eccls. Brit. p. 381. to 405. Fox Act and Monuments. p. 1690. to 17. See, tooke the like Oath to the Pope as his prede∣cssrs had done, and therefore was deeply charged of perjuy by Martyn, for renouncing and swearing against the Popes Supremacie afterward, though he answered, that the first oath was against the Lawes of God, of the Realme, the Kings Prerogative, and made void by Parliament, and so not binding. After the nullifying of which oath, partly by his meanes, but principally by the Lord Crowels (whom the King made his 31. H. 8. c. 10.37. H. 8. c. 17  Acts & mo∣numents, p. 1074. to 1089, 99.1000, 1001. Vicegerent Generall in all Ecclesiasticall affaires and causes, and superiour to the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury in place and Ecclesiasticall power) the Popes Supremacy, and usurped jurisdiction was by severall Acts of Par∣liament quite abolished out of England, as prejudiciall, and di∣rectly opposite to the Kings Prerogative Royall: King Henry dying, the Archbishop swore to his will, by which Queene Mary was to succeed to the Crowne as next heire, in case King Edward died without issue. King Edward seeing the obstinacie of Qen Mary in matters of Religion, what a pillar she was like to prove to the
Church of Rome, and persecutor of the true Professors of the Go∣spell Fox Acts and Monuments, pag. 1698. Antiquit. Eccles. Brit. pag. 401. ordaines by his last VVill, that Queene Mary should be put by the Crowne, and the Lady Jane succeed him as next Heire; to which Testament all the Councell swore, and the Archbishop too at last, after much adoe: Whereupon King Edward, and Queene Mary getting the Crowne, and putting by the Lady ane; Cran∣mer Holinshed, p. 1090.1093. who also aided the Duke of Northumberland with horse and men against the Queene, was thereupon committed prisoner to the Tower, and soone after condemned of high treason, and that by an Crmptons Ju∣risdic. of Courts. f. 12. b. ordinary Iury, for seeking thus to disinherit the Queen: who par∣doning all the rest that were guilty of this crime, released likewise the Treason against him, Holinshed. p. 1091. (though shee excepted him out of her ge∣nerall pardon, and some other Bishops,) and accused him onely of heresie as those times deemed it, for which hee was deprived, de∣graded, and burnt at last for a Martyr, repenting of that Re∣cantation, which he had over-cowardly made before, out of feare, and humane frailty. And here, not to detract any thing from the due praise of this our glorious Martyr, give mee leave onely to observe. First that hee had a hand in the condemnation, and execution of See Fox Acts and Monuments in their histories Lambert, Frith, and some other of our godly Marryrs, before hee was thoroughly instructed in the points of our Religion. Secondly, that hee was the chiefe man in accomplishing the divorce betweene Henry the 8, and Queene Katharine, which occasioned much trouble, dissention, warre; and a furtherer of this Kings subsequent lustfull, if lawfull marriages. Thirdly, that the Lincolne-shire rebels in the sixt Article of their grievances presented to King Henry the 8. complaine thus against this Archbishop, and other Prelates. Speed history, p. 1033. That wee your true Subjects find them grieved, that there be divers Bishops of England of your Graces late promotion, that have subverted the faith of Christ, as wee thinke, which is the Thomas Cran∣mer.Archbishop of Canterbury, the Iohn Fisher. Bishop of Rochester, the Bishop of Sa∣lisbury, the Bishop of S. Daveyes, and the Bishop of Develin, And in speciall, as we thinke, the beginning of all the trouble of this Realme, and the great exactions that hath beene taken of your poore Communalty, have risen by the occasion of the Iohn Long∣and. Bishop of Lincolne, by whose Officers, and by other of the Lord Cromwells servants, a great rumor and noyse is risen, and the common voyce is, that such jewels, plate, and other
ornaments of our Parish Churches, which wee occupy in the service and honour of God, should be taken from us, and spoy∣led in like manner and fashion, as the houses of Religion have beene. Adde to this. Fourthly, that though the Popes Supremacy were abolished  in his time, by sundry Acts of Parliament, yet the Bishops of that age laboured underhand to support it, what they might, and were both willing to continue & set it up againe, as is cleare by 1 H 8. c. 14. the two notable Statutes of 37. H. 8. c. 17. and 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. worthy consideration. And likewise by M. Tin∣dall, in his obedience of a Christian man, and practise of Popish Prelates, by Rodoricke Mors his complaint to the Par∣liament, c. 19, 20, 21. by VVilliam VVraghtons hunting and finding ou of the Romish Fox among the English Bishops, and his rescuing of the Fox, by Henry Stalbridge his exhortato∣ry Epistle, D. Barnes his supplication to King Henry the 8. Acts and mo∣numents, p. 1472 old edition.M. Fox, and other Treatises written in those dayes even by Protestants, which prove the Bishops of those times to be Tray∣tors to the King; close enemies to the Kings Prerogative, and fast friends to the Popes unjust usrpation, as Bonner, Stephen Gardener, with other of them shewed themselves in Queene Maries daies. By which it appeares, that the Bishops in those times were ge∣nerally disliked and complained against on all hands. Fifthly, that the bloody Statute of 31. H. 8. c. 14. called by Halls Chro∣nicle. 31. H. 8. f. 234. Holinshed. p. 946. Speed. p. 1044, 1045. some the sixe Articles, by others the whip with sixe strings, and by the most part the bloody statute, was made and devised in this Archbishops time, by the cruelty and policy of the Bishops, especially of Stephen Gardener Bishop of VVinchester: which Statute for the miserable and pernicious tyranny & rigid execution, of the same is worthy of no memory among Christian men, but rather to be bu∣ried in perpetuall silence of oblivion, as Acts & Mo∣numents, p. 586, 587.589.1289.1472. old editi∣on.M. Fox determines. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 389, 390.396. Mathew Parker indeed records that Cranmer opposed this Act at first, then caused it to be 32. H. 8. c. 10.35. H. 8. c. 5.6. moderated, and at last to be repealed in King Edwards dayes, but others seeme to imply that he gave consent thereto at first. Sixtly, that he is the onely Martyr of all the Archbishops of  Canterbury, none ever dying in defence of the Gospell of Christ but he alone; the others making many Martyrs in all ages by their persecutions, but never being any themselves. Hence Matthew Parker his Successour, writes thus; Antiq: Ec∣cles. Brit. p. 403 404. Cranmerus fide
integra, non Pontificia censura in libro vitae scriptus coelestem hre∣ditatatem cum Christo consecutus est, ut si in hominibus gloriari fas esset, non ab Augustino, Dunstano, Elphego, Anselmo, Thoma Becket, Edmundo, & reliqua pontificia urba, sed ab hoc uno, qui solus in Christi causa contra Antichristum Flammarum incredibili dolore ad coelos sublaus est, Cantuariensis sedes nobilitata esse videatur. Seventhly, that as this Prelate at first, was unwilling to be made a Bishop, so he suffered Martyrdome onely after his de∣privation and degradation from his Bishopricke, not whilst hee was a Bishop. Eightly, that hee failed more in his Martydome by reason of his cowardly recantation, than any of his fellow Martyrs, and that Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 3. p. 666, 667. in the last edition. Antiq. Eccles: Brit. p. 403. through promises and hopes of life and restitution to his former dignity and Archbishopricke, the chiefe motives inducing him to this shamefull recantation. Ninthly, that though he suffered Martyrdome for Religion only as a private Christian, after he was put from his Bishoprick,  not whiles he continued Archbishop, yet he was condemned as a Traytor for-high treason, and that justly, as he confessed, whiles hee was an Archbishop, for an Act done by him as an Arch∣bishop, and Counsellour of State, for which he professed both his sorrow, and repentance; And this Archprelate, and Holinshed, p. 1089. Bi∣shop Ridley (committed likewise for Treason) were very importu∣nate suitors to King Edward the 6. to tolerate the use of Masse in his Sister Maries familie;Fox Acts and monuments, old Edition. p. 881.884, 885. Speed. p. 1223. pressing him with divers politicke reasons to condescend to this their importunate suite, which the infant King, not onely rejected with strong pious reasons, but teares, to these Bi∣shops great reproach: who thereupon said to M. Cheeke the Kings Tutor: Ah M. Cheeke, you may be glad all the dayes of your life, that you may have such a Scholler, for he hath more Diviny in his little finger, than all we have in all our bodies. CARDINAL POOLE.But to passe from this Martyr to Cardinall Poole, his imme∣diate successor. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 405. to 424. Godwin. p. 171, 172. Speed, p. 1143, 1144. This Archprelate though almost, if not quite a Protestant in the point of justification, was yet a notori-Traytor, and so procliamed by King Henry the 8. who there∣upon gave his Danery of Exeter to another, and that no without just cause: for he refused to come out of Italy to the King his Soveraigne when he sent for him: hee was sent twice by the Pope as his Legate, both to the French King, and the
Germans, to stirre them up to make warre against King Henry the 8. and to invade England, though with ill successe; The King thereupon requested thm to send him over into England, that he might proceed against him as a Traytor. He was intimate with the Pope, studied to advance his power, and suppresse his Soveraignes, stirred up his friends in England against the King by his letters, whereupon the King banished both him and his mother the Countesse of Salisbury by Act of Parliament, proclay∣med him a Traytor (whence Father Latimer in his 5. Sermon before King Edward calls him Cardinall Poole the Kings Tray∣tor, &c.) and after that be headed his mother and elder brother Vicount Mountacute for high treason. What manner of person,fol. 60, 61. and Traytor this Cardinall was to his Soveraigne, will appeare by a Recorded in M. Fox Acts and monumens, pag. 972. and Thomas Bacons reports of certaine men, vol f. 266.267. The manifold ingratitude of Ple. Letter written to him being at Rome by Cutbert Tonsiall Bishop of Duresme, and Iohn Stokerley, Bishop of London, which begins thus: For the good will that we have borne unto you in times past, as long as you continued the Kings true subject, wee cannot a little lament and mourne that you neither regarding the inestimable kindnesse of the Kings highnesse, heretofore shewed unto you, in your bringing up, nor the honour of the house that you be come of, nor the wealth of the Country that you are borne in, should so decline from your duty to your Prince, that you should be seduced by faire words, and vaine promises of the Bishop of Rome, to wind with him, going about by all meanes possible to pull downe, and put under foot your naturall Prince and Master, to the destruction of the Coun∣try that hath brought you up; and for the vain-glory of a Red Ha, to make your selfe an instrument to set forth his malice, who hath stirred up by all meanes that he could, all such Chri∣stian princes as would give eares unto him, to depose the Kings highnesse from his Kingdome and to offer it as a prey to them that should execute his malice, and to stirre if he could his sub∣jects against him in stirring, and nourishing rebellions in his Realme: where the office and duty of all good Christians, and namely of us that be Priests, should be to bring all commotion to tranquillity, and trouble to quietnesse, all discord to con∣cord, and in doing the contrary, wee shew our selves to be but the Ministers of Sathan, and no of Christ, who ordai∣ned all us that be Priests to use in all places the legation of peace, and not of discord. But since that cannot be undone,
that is done, the second is, to make amends, and to ollow the doing of the Prodigall Sonne spoken of in the Gospell, who re∣turned home to his father, and was well accepted, as no doub you might be, if you will say as he said, in acknowledging your folly, and do as hee did, in returning home againe from your wandring abroad in service of them who little care what come of you, so that their purpose by you be served. This Cardinals Treason, ingratitude, and perfidiousnesse, is yet further exemplified by the same Cutbert Tonstall, in his Sermon which he preached before King Henry the 8. upon Palme Sunday, in the yeare of of our Lord, 1538. Printed anciently by i selfe, in part recited by Holinshed p. 1164, 1165. and more largely by In his reports of certaine men: vol. 3. f. 279, 280. Thomas Becon, where he thus blazons both the Pope and him in their native colours. The Bishop of Rome, because he can not longer in this Realm wrongfully use his usurped power in all things as hee was wont to doe, and sucke out of this Realme by avarice insatiable, in∣numerable summes of money yearly to the great exhausting of the same; hee therefore moved and repleat with furious ire, and pestilent malice, goeth about to stirre all Christian Nati∣ons that will give eare to his Devillish enchantments, to move warre against this Realme of England,The madnesse of the Pope a∣gainst England. giving it in prey to all those that by his instigation will invade it. And the Bishop of Rome now of late to set forth his pestilent malice the more, hath allured to his purpose a subject of this Realme Reginald Pole, comming of a noble blood, and thereby the more arrant Tray∣tor, to goe about from Prince to Prince, and from Country to Country, to stirre them to warre against this Realme, and to destroy the same being his native country;Reginald Pole, & his unnatural∣nesse to the Realme of Eng∣land. whose pestilent purpose, the Princes that hee breaketh it unto, have in much abomination, both for that the Bishop of Rome (who being a Bishop should procure peace) is a stirrer of warre, and because this most arrant and unkind Traytor is his minister to so devil∣lish a purpose, to destroy the Country that he was borne in, which any heathen man would abhorre to doe. But for all that without shame hee still goeth on, exhorting thereunto all Princes that will heare him, who do abhorre to see such unna∣uralnesse in any man as he shamelesse doth set forwards; whose pernitious treasons late secretly wrought against this Realme, have been by the worke of Almighty God, so marvellously
detected, and by his owne brother without looking herefore so diclosed, and condigne punisment ensued, that hereafter (God willing) they shall not take any more such roote to he noysance of this Realme. And where all Nations of Gentiles, by reasons and by law of nature, do preferre their Coun∣try before their Parents, so that for their Country they will dye against their Parents being traytors; this pestilent man, worse than a Pagan, is not ashamed to destroy (if he could) his native Country. And whereas Curtius an Heathen man was content for saving of the City of Rome where he was borne, to leape into a gaping of the earth, which by the illusions of the devill was answered should not be shut, but that it must first have one: this pernicious man is contented to rune headlong into hell, so that he may destroy thereby his native country of England, being in that behalfe incomparably worse than any Pagan. And besides his pestilent treason, his unkindnesse against the Kings Majestie, who brought him up of a very child, and promoted both him, and likewise restored his blood being tainted, to be of the Peeres of this Realme, and gave him money yearly out of his coffers to maintaine him honou∣rably at study, makes his Treason much more detestable to all the world, and him to be repured more wild and cruell than Tyger. But for all this thou English man take courage unto thee, and be nothing afraid, thou hast God on thy side, who hath gi∣ven this Realme to the generation of Englishmen, to every man in his degree after the lawes of the same: thou hast a Noble, Victorious and Vertuous King, hardy as a Lyon, who will not suffer thee to be so devoured by such wild beasts. Onely take an English heart unto thee, and mistrust not God, but trust firm∣ly in him, and surely the ruine intended against thee shall fall on their owne neckes that intend it, and eare not though the devill and his disciples be against thee, for God thy protector is stronger than hee, or any other, and shall by his grace give him and them a fall; and so shew unto thee, that God is on thy side. Consider, that it is written in Prov. 6. that amongst many crimes there rehearsed, that God hateth chiefly, hee doth detest those persons that sow discord among their brethren (as all we Chri∣stians are brethren under our heavenly Father) Also it is writ∣ten in Iohn 8. that those that do stirre men to murther are chil∣dren of the Devill, which was from the beginning a murtherer,
and brought Adam to sinne, and thereby to death; as the Jewes (his children) stirred the peope to put Christ to death. Saint Paul also in Rom. 16. warneth them to beware of those that make dissention and debate among them, against the Doctrine that he had taught them, and biddeth them eschew their com∣pany; wherein the Holy Ghost wrought in Paul, for these ma∣ny yeares past little warre hath beene in these parts of Chri∣stendome,The Pope mover of wares. but the Bishop of Rome either hath beene a stirrer of it, or a nourisher of it, and seldome any compounder of it, un∣lesse it was for his ambition and profit. Whereore since as S. Paul saith in 1 Cor. 14. that God is not the God of dissenti∣on, but of peace, who commandeth by his Word peace alway to be kept; we are sure that all those that goe about to breake peace betweene Realmes, and to bring them to warre, are the children of the devill,Breakers of peace, and sow∣ers of discord, are the children of the devill. what holy names soever they pretend to cloake their pestilent malice withall, which cloaking under hy∣pocrisie is double devillishnesse, and of Christ most deested; because under his blessed name they do play the Devills part. And therefore seeing Christ is on ourside against them, let us not feare them at all, but putting our confidence in Almighty God, & cleaving fast to the Kings Majesty, our supreme head on earth next under Christ of this Church of England, as aithfull subjects by Godslaw ought to do; though they goe about to stirre Gog & Magog, and all the ravenners of the world against us, we trust in God verily, and doubt not but they shall have such a ruine as is prophesied by Ezekiel in C. 39. against Gog and Magog going about to destroy the people of God, whom the people of God shall so vanquish and overthrow on the mountaines of Israel, that none of them shall escape, but their carkasses there to lye to be devoured by kies, and crowes, and birds of the aire; and if they shall persist in their pestilent malice, to make invasion into this Realme: then let us wish that their great Captaine Gog, (I meane the Bishop of Rome) may come to them to drinke with them of the same cup that hee maliciously goeth about to prepare for us, that the people of God might surely live in peace. Thus Tonstall, concerning the Pope and the Car∣dinall, though a Papist. It is an Italian proverbe of our English men Antq. Eccles. Brit. p. 408. That an Italianated English man, is a devill incarnate: such a one was this Cardinall; qui Italis pontificiisque adulationi∣bus, coniliis, atque technis in Regis atque Patriae discrimine sic se
passus st,  non modo  PRODITOR, writes his immediae successor of him  In the 31. yeare of King Henry the 8 he put the King & Kingdome to extraordina∣ry trouble and expence or the King being then enformed by his rusty and faithfull friends, that the cankered and cruell Serpent the Bishop of Rome, by that Arch-trytor Reginald Poole, enemy to Gods Words, and his naturall country, had moved and stir∣red divers great Princes and Potentates of Christendome to in∣vade the Realme of England, and utterly to destroy the whole Nation of the same; Wherefore his Majesty in his owne person, without any delay, tooke very laborious and painull journeys owards the Sea coasts; also hee sent divers of his Nobles and Counsellours to view and search all the Ports and dangers of the Coasts where any meee and convenient landing place might be supposed, as well on the borders of England, as also of VVales, and in all such doubtfull places his highnesse caused divers and many Bulwarkes and ortifications to be made: And further, his Highnesse caused the Lord Admirall, Earle of Southhampton, to prepare in readinesse ships for the Sea, to his great cost and charges: And beside this, to have all people in a readinesse, hee directed his commissions throughout the Realme to have his people mustered, and the harnesse and weapons seene and view∣ed, to the intent that all things should be in readinesse if his enemies should make any attempt into this Realme, and like∣wise caused a generall muster to be made of all the Citizens of London betweene the age of 60. and 16. This Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. qua supr Arch-traytor after the Pope had imployed him to move the Emperour and King of Spaine to breake their league with King Henry, and to proclaime warre against him, kept a continuall guard about him, lest the King should send some to murther him. And re∣tiring to Viterbium, where he lived some space neere a Nunnery, he bega two bastards (a sonne and a daughter) on the Abbese, who oft repaired to his lodging; which was afterwards obje∣cted to him, when he was God, pag. 124. to 129. See Speed, p. 1143, 1144. Martin Hist: p. 397, to 401. elected Pope by the major part of Cardinals, and yet lost that Antichristian See by his owne negli∣gence and delayes King Edward the 6. deceasing and Queene Mary comming to the Crowne, she presently sent for this Tray∣tor home; the Pope upon this occasion makes him his Legate, to reduce England under his vassallage, and tyranny. The Car∣dinall hereupon sore longed homeward, not doubting but if
things stood, as hee thought, to get a dispensation to lay off the Hat, and put on a Crowne. But the Emperour mistrusting what the Prelate intended, found devises to hold him beyond the seas, untill the match was concluded betweene Queene May and his sonne. Anno 1554. he arrived in England, and the same day he landed, an Act passed in the Parliament house (through the Queenes, and VVinchesiers meanes) for his restitution in blood, and the utter repealing of the Act of atainder against him in King Henry the 8. his raigne. The Cardinall soone after caused Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury to be deprived and degra∣ded, seating himselfe in his See; and making a long Oration in Parliament, declaring the offence and schisme of the Kingdome in casting off the Pope, and his willingnesse to receive them into the bosome of the Church againe upon their submission; he caused the Parliament to make an Act, repealing all Statutes, Articles, and Provisions made against the See of Rome since the 20. yeare of Henry the 8. reviving the Popes supremacie, and denying the Queens, wherein the whole Realm submitted it selfe to the Pope: some parts of which Act, pertinent to my purpose, I shall crave leave to recite, 1. & 2. Phil. & Mary, ch. 8. See Holinshed, p. 12, 1123. Whereas since the 20. yeare of K. Henry the 8. of fa∣mous memory, Father unto your Majesty, our most naturall So∣veraigne, and gracious Lady and Queene, much false and erro∣neous Doctrine hath beene taught, preached, and written, part∣ly by divers naturall borne subjects of this Realme, and partly being brought in hither from sundry other forraine Countries, hath beene sowne and spread a broad within the same, by reason wherof, as well the spiritualiy as the temporality of your High∣nesse Realmes and Dominions have swerved from the obedience of the See Apostolicke, and declined from the unity of Christs Church, and so have continued, untill such time as your Majesty being first raised up by God, and set in the seat royall over us, & then by his divine & gracious providence knit in marriage with the most Noble and Vertuous Prince the King our Soveraigne Lord your husband, the Popes holinesse, and the See Apostolike sent hither unto your Majesties, as unto persons undefiled, and by Gods goodnesse preserved from the common infection aforesaid, & to the whole Realm the most reverend father in God the Lord Cardinall Poole, Legate de Latere, to call us home againe into the right way, from whence we have all this long while wandred, and
strayed abroad; and we aer sundry long and grievous plagues, and calamities, seeing by the goodnesse of God our owne er∣rours, have acknowledged the same unto the said most reverend Father, and by him have beene and are the rather at the contemplation of your Majesties, received and embraced in∣to the unity and bosome of Christs Church, and upon our humble submission, and promise made for a declaration of our repentance, to repeale and abrogate such Acts and Statures as had beene made in Parliament since the said 20. yeare of the said King Henry the 8. against the supremacie of the See Apostolike, as in our submission exhibited to the said most reverend Father in God by your Majesties appeareth. The tenor where∣of ensueth. Wee the Lords spirituall and temporall, and the Commons assembled in this present Parliament, representing the whole body of the Realme of England,The submission of the whole Realme to the Pope. and the Dominions of the same, in the name of our selves particularly, and also of the said body universally, in this our supplication directed to your Majesties, with most humble suit, that it may by your gra∣ces intercession and meanes be exhibited, to the most reverend Father in God, the Lord Cardinall Poole Legate, sent specially hither from our most holy Father Pope Iulius the third, and the See Apostolike of Rome, do declare our selves very sory and repentant of the Schisme and disobedience committed in this Realme and dominions aforesaid, against the said See Aposto∣like,Schisme and dis∣obedience a∣gainst the Se Apostolike. either by making agreeing, or executing any Lawes or∣dinances, or Commandements against the supremacy of the said See, or otherwise doing or speaking that might impugne the same, offering our selves, and promising by this our suppli∣cation, that for a token and knowledge of our said repentance, we are and shall be alwayes ready under, and with the Autho∣rities of your Majesties, to the uttermost of our powers to doe what shall lye in us for the abrogation and repealing of the said Lawes and Ordinances in this present Parliament, as well for our selves as for the whole body whom wee represent: where∣upon wee most humbly desire your Majesties, as personages undefiled, in the offence of this body towards the said See, which neverthelesse God by his providence hath made subject to you, so to set forth this our most humble suit, that wee may obtaine from the See Apostolike, by the said most reverend Father, as well particularly as generally, absolution, release, and dis∣charge
from all danger of such censures and senens, as by the Lawes of the Church wee are fallen into; and that wee may a children repentant be received into the bosome, and unity of Christs Church, so as this noble Realme, with all the members thereof may in this unity and perfect obedience to the See A∣postolike, and Popes for the time being, serve God and your Majesties to the furtherance and advancement of his honou and glory: wee are at the intercession of your Majesties, by the authority of our holy Father Pope Iulius the third, and of the See Apostolicke, assoyled, discharged and delivered from ex∣communication, interdictions, and other censures Ecclesiasticall, which have hanged over our heads for our said defaults since the time of the said schisme mentioned in our said supplicati∣on. The which time the said Lord Legate, and wee do all de∣clare, recognise, and meane by this Act to be onely since the 20. yeare o the raigne of your most Noble Father King Henry the 8. It may now like your Majesties, that for the accomplish∣ment of our promise, made in th said supplication, that is, to repeale all Lawes and Statutes made contrary to the said supre∣macie and See Apostolike, during the said schisme, which is to be understood, since the 20. yeare of the raigne of the said late King Henry the 8. and so the Lord Legate doth accept, and recognise the same. After which they repeale in this Act also, the Statutes against the Popes supremacie, and profit: And declare, that the title or stile of supemacie, or supreme head of the Church of England, and of Ireland, or either of them, ne∣ver was, nor could be justly or lawfully attributed, or acknow∣ledged to any King or Soveraigne Governour of this Realme, nor in any wise could or might rightfully, justly, or lawfully by any King or Soveraigne Governour of this Realme, be clay∣med, challenged, or used. And withall they commend Queene Mary for omitting this stile, though sled by 25. H. 8. c. 19.21.26. H. 8. c. 1.3.27. H. 8. c. 15.28. H. 8. c. 7.10.31. H. 8. c. 10.14.32. H. 8. c. 22, 24, 26.33. H. 8. c. 29.34. & 35.H. 8. c. 17.19.35. H. 8. c. 1.3.37. H. 8. . 17. Act of Parlia∣ment. And to colour this disloyalty and prejudice to the Crown, they adde this srivolous clause to the end of this Act, And foras∣much as we your Majesties humble & obedient subjects the Lords spirituall and temporall, and Commons in this present Parlia∣ment assembled, neither by the making or delivering of either the supplications aforsaid, nor by any clause, Articles or Sentence thereof, or of any other Clause, Aticle, or Sentence of this or any other Statue, or the preambles of the same, made or
agreed upon in this Session of this prsnt Parliament, by any manner of interpretation, construction, implication, or other∣wise intend to derogate, impaire, or diminish any of the prero∣gatives, liberies, franchesies, preheminences, or jurisdictions of your Crowne imperiall of this Realme, and other the Domi∣nions to the same belonging; Wee do most humbly beseech your Majesties that it may be declared and ordained, and be it naced and declared by authority of this present Parliament, that neither the making exhibiting or inferring in this present Statute, or in the preambles of the same, of the supplicaions or promise aforesaid, or either of them, nor any other things, words, sentences, clauses, Articles in the preambles, or body of the Acts aforesaid, shall be construed, understood, or expoun∣ded to derogate, diminish or take away any the liberties, privi∣ledges, prerogatives, preheminences, authorities, or juris∣dictions, or any part or parcell thereof, which were in your Im∣periall Crowne of this Realme, or did belong to your said Imperiall Crowne, the 20. yeare of the raigne of your the Queens Majesties, most noble Father, (Henry the 8.) or any o∣ther your most noble Progenitors before the said 20: yeare. And the More care is here taken for the Popes, than Queenes supre∣macy. Popes holinesse, and See Apostolicke to be restored, & have and enjoy such authority, preheminence and jurisdiction, as his Holinesse used and exercised, or might lawfully have used and exercised by authority of his supremacie, the said 20. yeare of the raigne of the King your Father within this your Realme of England, and other your Dominions without diminution or enlargement of the same, and none other, and the Ecclesiasti∣call jurisdiction of the Restored here to their jurisdi∣ction, together with the Pope, as members of his body. Archbishops, Bishops, and Ordina∣naries to be in the same Stae for processe of suis, punishment of crimes, and execution of censures of the Church, with knowledge of causes belonging to the same, and as large in these points as the said jurisdiction was the said 20. yeare. Where observe, that the Prelates usurped Jurisdiction over the Kings prerogative was much eclipsed, if not quite abo∣lished by severall statutes made in King Henry the 8. and Ed∣ward the 6. his raigne, and expired together with the Popes, as appeares by these words of the Clergies supplication reci∣ted in the body of this Act. Nos Episcopi & Clerus, &c. cum omni debita humilitate & reverentia, exponimus Majestatibus ve∣stris, quod licet Ecclesiarum, quibus in Episcopos, Decanos, Archi∣diaconos
&c. constituti sumus bona, Iurisdictiones & jura in pernicioso hujus Regni praeterito schismate DEPERDITA ET AMISSA, omni studio & totis nostris vribus, recuperare, & ad pristinum ecclesiarum jus revocare, juris remediis niti deberemus, &c. Insu∣per Majestatibus vestris supplicamus, ut pro sua pietate effi∣cere dignentur, ut ea quae ad jurisdictionem nostram & libertatem Ecclesiasticam pertinent, sine quibus debitum nostri pastoralis of∣ficii & curae animarum nobis commissae exercere non possumus, nobis superiorum temporum injuria ablata, restituantur, & ea nobis & ec∣clesiis perpetuo illaesa & salva permaneant; & ut omnes leges, quae hanc nostram jurisdictionem & libertatem Ecclesiasticam tollunt, seu quovis modo impediunt, abrogentur, ad honorem dei, & majestatum vestrarum, &c. As therefore the Bishops & Popes Jurisdiction were suppres∣sed together before, so it is worth the observation, that they are both revived together by this Act, upon the restauration of Popery; And good reason, for Nicholas le Maistre in his In∣stauration of the Ancient Principality of Bishops, Dedicated to the great French Cardinall Richeleiu, Printed at Paris 1633. in his Dedicatory Epistle to this Cardinall informes us; That verily the Majestie of the Pontificall and Episcopall jurisdiction is so conjoyned and confederated together, that the enemies cannot so guide their hands, but with the same audacity where∣with they assaulted the Popes Crowne, they likewise shaked the Bishops Miters, and as it were with one bloody wound pierced both their sides. Whence it came to passe, that the atrocity of the Bishops sorrowes increased so farre, that their patience suffi∣cient to digest their owne domesticke injuries, was let loose to the dangers of the chiefe Pontise, the Pope, and brake forth into the most sharpe indignation and hatred that thence it might appeare, that the glory of their owne name could never be more secure, than when and where the Popes greatnesse shall be a∣dorned with greatest honours: which being violated, all the splendor of the Episcopall Order must necessarily dye and grow contemptible. Hence we see it comes to passe by a certaine Divine assent and Counsell, that the Authority of Bishops should be expelled out of the same Provinces, out of which un∣happy lust had thrust out the Papall Majestie. So this Author of late, by which we may discerne what a neare and indissoluble connexion there is betweene the Papacy and the Prelacie, and
how the Pope and Prelates ever mutually strive to support and advance one anothers authority. Cardinall Poole thus reviving the Popes and Prelates Jurisdiction, and suppressing and eclip∣sing the Royall Prerogative, as you have heard, hereupon the Queenes name and Title See the Br∣viate of the Pre∣lates Encroach∣ments, &c. p. 106.107 114.115.125.16.127.91. to 100 formerly used in all Ecclesiasticall Processe, with this clause, Suprema Autoritate Regia legitime ful∣citus & the like, was wholly omitted out of them; and whereas all such processes were sealed with her seale, and all Probates of Wills and Letters of Administration granted in her name, and under her seale onely, not the Bishops, like Writs at the Com∣mon Law, according to the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. the Bishops thenceforth used onely their owne seales and names, excluding hers, and so set themselves in her Royall Throne. To effect this, the Fox Acts and monuments, in the old Edition. p. 684.689.924690. In that of 1610. p. 1294.1495. Cardinall and Prelates caused Queene Mary to send Articles to the Ordinaries to be put in Execution, whereof this was one; Fox Acts and Monuments old Edition. p. p. 94 that no Bishop or his Oficer, or any other Person hereafter in any of their Ecclesiastical writings, in proces or other extrajudiciall Acts, doe use to put in this clause or sentence, Regia autoritate fulcitus, or doe demand any Oath touching the Primacy: to which Master Fox annexeth this Marginall anno∣tation, The Kings Authority giveth place to the Popes Autho∣rity, the supremacy of the King repealed; and hereupon in the Fox Acts and Monuments p. 927. Queenes writ to Bonner, or the sommoning of a Convocation, her stile of Supremum caput was taken away; where note (good Reader, writes Master Fox) concerning the altering and chan∣ging of the Queenes stile, the later part hereof to be let out of her Title which is, Ecclesiae Anglicanae & Hibernae supremum ca∣put, because in the Parliament last past, the supremacy being gi∣ven away from the Crowne of England to the Pope, thereupon this parcell of the Title was also taken away: likewise the sayd Bonner giving his Certificate upon the same, left out, Autori∣tate illustrissimae, &c. legitime fulcitus; wch parcell also in the said Parliament was reprived and taken away the same time.See the Hio∣ry the Councill, of Trent. p 339. to 35. Sir Iohn Davis Irish Re∣ports. f. 97.98. See the Brvia p. 91. to 100. & Cooke Ca∣dries Case f. . Which notable usurpation upon the Crowne, though abolished by 1. El. c. 1.8. El. c. 1.1. ac. c. 25. and other Acts which revive the statute 1. El. 6. c. 2. being nothing but the Common Law, our Prelates (in imitation of these and other their undutifull Popish Predecessors) have not onely continued, but likewise upon the now Arch-Bishop of Canterburies motion in Star-Chamber, pro∣cured a Resolution and Certificate of all the Judges of England
against the Laws & Kings prerogative royall, to justifie this their usurpation, of issuing out processe under their owne names and seales, and keeping Visitations and Courts in their owne names, without any Patent or Commission from his Majestie, to be le∣gall; as appeares by See I new dis∣covery of the Prelates tyran∣ny. p. 34. &c. two Orders of Starre-Chamber, 12. Maii, and 4. Iunii. 13. Caroli. This Arch-prelate Cardinall, having thus re-established the Popes and Prelates jurisdiction here by Act of Parliament, Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 422. Fox Acts and Monu∣ments p. 1537. in the old Edi∣tion. caused divers of our Martyrs to be burnt, of which his Predecessor Cranmer was one; and in his Visitation at Oxford and Cambridge, caused the dead rotten Corps of learned Martin Bucer, Paulus Fagius, Peter Martyrs wise to be digged out of their graves, and burnt to ashes for Heretiques: yea Antiq. Ecclesiae Brit. p. 420.421. the common talke was, that he purposed to have taken up King Henry the 8. his body at Windsor, and to have burnt it, yea and King Edward the 6. his Corps too, as many thought. I cannot here omit what his immediate sucessor Holinsed p. 1134. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 422. Matthew Parker, re∣cords of him, that this Cardinall being out of hope to get the Crowne of England to himselfe, to which he aspired, endeavou∣red to transferre all his right therein to King Philip, let Queene Mary dying without issue, Queene Elizabeth (who differed from him and the Papists in matters of Religion, whose life he and they had layd in waite for, keeping her in long and strict impri∣sonment) should of right injoy it: to which purpose they very secretly entred into most wicked consultations concerning this matter, to this effect; that Mary not onely by the Common Law should be proclaimed Queene, but likewise a conquerour of the Kingdome by right of warre; so as by this pretext shee might change all publike and private rights and interests, and give the Kingdome to whom soever she pleased. But this coun∣ell, though liked of at first, yet because it was doubtfull and dangerous, was not long approved of. Wherefore rejecting it they thought it best and most expedient for the establishment of the Popes affaires, that the Lady Elizabeth should be either dispatched out of the way, or married to some Noble Spaniard. But God providing for her and our safety, dissipated all these wicked consultations, and brought them to nothing. And Car∣dinall Poole perswading Queene Mary to joyne with King Phi∣lip her husband in a warre against the French King, with whom Pope Paul the fourth had confederated against the Emperour seeking to betray the Kingdome o Naples to him; the Pope
was arre exasperated hereby against the Cardinall, See Martins Chronicle p. 415.416. Gdwin p. 125.126.12 that he re∣voked his power Legatine, imprisoned Cardinall Moron Prote∣ctor of the English at Rome, and Pooles speciall friend, cited Poole to appeare at Rome as suspected of Heresie, and created William Peter a Franciscan to be his Legate in his place. The Queene hereupon intercedes for the Cardinall, who having intelli∣gence of this matter refused to have his silver Crosse (the badge of his authority) carried beore him, till by the intercession o Ormanet the Popes Dtary here in England, and the Queenes mediation, he was at last restored to his Office. In , Speedes History p. 1145. the flames of persecution consumed 5. Bishops, 2. Divines, 8. Gentlemen, 84. Artificers, 100. Husbandmen, Servants, and Labourers, 26. Wives, 20. Widowes, 9. Virgins, a Boyes, and 2. Infants. To close up all concerning him in Holmsheds words, Hollinshed p. 1165. A Trayter he lived, and a Traytor he dyed: Speed p. 1153. Godwin, p. 128. the same day on which Queene Mary expired, the Tydings of whose deparure strucke him quite dead, being sicke before of a quartane Fea∣ver Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 423. Illud autem (saith his Successour) ad aternam mmanitatis Pontificiae memoriam, infamiamque contra Polum valebit, quod eo Legato ac accelerante, integerrimus, Doctissimusque Archiepiscopus Cranerus igne crematus est, quod Archiepiscopo praeterea (quod legimus) accidit nemini (sew or none of them having zeale enough to make them Martyrs) pluresque in ill sue legationis triennio ferro, stamaque crudeliter macta sun, qum in uius∣quam regis eorum, qui post Lucium huic insulae imperabant, longis∣simo regno. Ita Cranmerum Martyren, Polum tyramum antua∣ria celebrat: hic plumbo depressus, ille cineribus atque flamma ad coelos elatus est. Matthew Parker his immediate successor,MATTHEW PARKER. though a man of better temper, a learned Antiquary,Antiq Eccles. Brit. p. 427. &c. 436.437. Mar∣tin History. p. 508.. a frequent Preacher of Gods Word, not onely in his Cathedrall at Canterbury, but in sundry Parish Churches; was yet over-Pontificall and Princely in his buildings, feasts, houshold-stuffe, and apparell, if not an overstiffe maintainer of his Jurisdiction and Ecclesiasticall Courts, which grew so odious among the people, that they offered vio∣lence to the Ministers and Promoters of those Courts (Anno. 1566.) eating and vexing them with clamors and out-cryes, as they went along the streetes; which insolency the Queene by her opportun severity repressed: Two yeares afer (Anno 1568.) Clemn, Burton, Hallingham, Benson, and others, making profession of
the purer Religion more zealously than was knowne before, would allow of nothing but what was taken out of the Scrip∣tnres, and out of a desire of reformation, not onely openly que∣stioned but condemned the received Discipline of the Church of England, with the Church Liturgie, and the very calling o Bi∣shop, as favouring too much of the Popish Religion; protesting in the Pulpits, that it was an impious thing to hold any thing Common with the Church of Rome, using all diligence to have the Church of England reformed in every point, according to the Rule of the Church of Geneva. These the Queene (by this Arch-Bishops instigation) commanded to be layd by the heeles: yet it is almost incredible how upon a sudden their followers in∣creased every where (knowne by the envious name of Puri∣tanes) through a kinde of obstinate perversenesse of their owne, stopping their eares against all advise; (so Martyn, though I think rather out of solide judgement and the inconveniences they saw and found in the Lordly Prelacie in thos best times) which saith hee) might seeme to be helped forward also by the sloathfull connivency of the Bishops (some of whom then mis∣liked their owne calling and government, and could have beene content with its dissolution and change to a better) and the se∣cret favour of some Noble men at Court; whom Martyn slaun∣ders, to have gaped after the goods of the Church; when as they rather did it out of the mischiefes and dislike of the Prela∣ticall government. In his time the Martis Hi∣story, p. 548.549.550.552. Earles of Northumberland, and Westmerland, the Lord Dacres and others Anno 1569. be∣ing pressed forward by one Nicholas Martin a Romish Priest, sen from the Bishop of Rome to pronounce Queene Elizabeth an Hereticke, and therefore to have lost all Dominion and Sove∣raignty, raised a Rebellion in the North to set up Popery and restore the Romish Religion, the 5. wounds of Christ being painted in their Banners: Murrey, then Regent of Scotland, in∣formed the Queene, that the Bishop of Rosse, then in England, was the Author of that Rebellion whereupon he was commit∣ted to the Bishop of London and remained his prisoner. And the same yeare Spd. p. 1170. to 1176. Mar∣tins Chron. p. 557. to 560. Pope Pius the fifth by his Bull excommunicated and deprived Queene Elizabeth from her Crowne, and absol∣ved all her Nobles, Subjects, and people of the Realme from their Oath of allegiance or any other duty to her, which Bull Iohn Felton setting up at the Bishop of Londons Palace gate, was
executed for his paines: yet I read of no reutation of it made by this Archprelate. Edmund Grindall next enjoying this See,EDMVND GRINDALL. a grave and pious man, and a fugitive in Queene Maries raigne, stood highly in Queene Elizabeths avour for a long time: till by the cunning devises of some, who accused him as a favourer of the Puritans,Martyns Histo∣ry. p. 662.654, 655. Continua∣tion of Holinshd. pag. 1322. to 1329. Conventicles, and prophecying (which he justified in a particular treatise which I have seene, dedicated to the Queene, and sub∣scribed by all his suffragans) hee utterly lost the same; being thereupon suspended from his Bishopricke and so dyed su∣spended. Martin records, that the true cause of his suspension was, for disallowing the matrimony of Julio, an Italian Physitian, with another mans wife, therein thwarting the Earle of Leicesters plea∣sure. In his dayes M. Iohn (or rather Philip) Stubs of Lincolnes Inne, lost his hand, for writing a booke against the Queenes in∣tended match with the Duke of Anjou, with this Title, The gulfe wherein England will be swallowed up by the French marri∣age, with which the Queene was sorely vexed and displeased. Sentence was pronounced against him by vertue of a Law made in the raigne of Philip and Mary, then expired, and personall to them; whereupon the Iudges and chiefe Lawyers were at va∣riance concerning the force of that Statute:IOHN WHITEGIFT. but might prevailed therein against right. And about the same time Edward Cam∣pian, Ralph Sherwin, Luke Kerby, Alexander Briant Priests, were indited, condemned, and executed for high Treason, for plotting the ruine of the Queene and Kingdome, as adhering to the Pope, the Queenes enemie, and comming into England to raise forces against her. Iohn VVhitegift, next to him in succession, a stately Pontifi∣call Bishop, See Sr Gorge Paul in the life of Whitegift. Martyns Hist. p. 663.676.761, 762.780, 781, 782, 783. Iohn Penry his suppli∣cation to the Parliament: the Petition to Qu. Elizabeth. The Register. The Abstract of cer∣taine Acts of Parliamen. The Demonstration of Discipline. M. Cartrights reply, Marin Marprlat, and others. contested much for the authority and Lordly jurisdiction of Prelates, in defence whereof hee then writ, though hee durst not averre our Archbishops to be of divine institution. Hee had some contestations with the Judges, whom he much troubled about Prohibitions, ex officio oathes, and proceedings, the power of the high Commission and other Exclesiasticall Courts,  he endeavoured to enlarge to the prejudice of the Queenes prerogative, and the Subjects liber∣ties; whereupon, in the Parliament Anno 1585. divers Bils and complaints were exhibited against the oath ex officio, the granting of faculties by Bishops, Non-residencie, and other abuses,
which this Prelate by his power, to prevent a reformation crossed and frustrated, to the great disturbance of the Church and State, and the increase o schismes and divisions in both. After this Anno 1588. hee procured these reverend Ministers and Gentlemen, M. Vdall, M. Penry,, M. Cartwright, King, Prudlar, Paine, M. Knightly, M. Wigstone, and others, to be questioned, and fined in Starchamber, for writing against the English Hie∣rarchy, and caused M. Penry, Vdall, and others against all Law, and Justice to be condemned, and executed for this cause, whereupon the Judge, before whom they were ar∣raigned, much troubled in conscience, fell into desperation, and died miserably. These his violent proceedings stirred up VVigginton, Coppinger, and franticke Hacket (whom the Prelates oppression made starke mad) to accuse the, Archbishops of Canterbury and Yorke of high Treason, and to runne into extra∣vagant actions and opinions, which they afterward recanted. And not these alone, but others likewise, opposing the go∣vernment of the Church of England, disallowed the calling of Bishops, and got some eminent Lawyers (as M. Maurice At∣turney of the Court of Wards, and others) to write against the government of Bishops, and the Oath ex oficio, which troubled much the whole Church, State, Judges, Parliament and King∣dome, and fired them almost into an uproare; this Archprelate straining his Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction beyond its bounds, farre higher than any of his predecessors since the reformation. Whereupon multitudes of bookes were written against the cal∣ling, Lordlinesse, and extravagances of the Prelates, and their Courts, some in serious, others in more light and jesting man∣ner, wherewith the Prelates were much nettled, and their go∣vernment rendred very odious among the people, which cer∣tainly had then beene subverted, had not the power of this Archprelate made a privy Counsellor, and of Chancellour Hat∣on (a man popishly affected, as was generally then reported) kept it from ruine. This Archprelates traine of servants was extraordinary great, to the number of above 60 menservants) who were all trained up to martia ires, and mustred almost every weeke, his stable being stil well furnished with good store of great horses; a commendable thing in a warlike Pre∣late, though scarce allowable in a pious Apostolicall Bishop, who should rather traine up schollers for the pulpit, than soul∣diers for the field.
Richard Bancroft his great creature,RICHARD BANCROFT. and immediate successor, had many conflicts with the Judges, concerning prohibitions, ex officio, Oathes, and the power of the High Commissioners, before the King and Councell, to the great disquiet of the Realme, and oppression of the people: hee In his Sermon at Pauls Crosse, by D. Reynolds in his letter to Sr. Francis Knoles. defended the Bi∣shops Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction to be jure Divino, and not de∣rived immediately by Letters Patents from the King, like an ungratefull wretch; contrary to the expresse Acts of 26. H. 8. c. 1.31. H. 8 c. 9, 10.37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. Edw. 6. c.. 1. Eliz. c. 1.1. & 2. Phil. & Mar. c. 8. 8. Eliz. c. 1. and the whole streame of the Fathers, forraine Protestants, and our English writers, to the great affront of the Kings prerogative royall: And if some men yet alive may be credited (who accused him to the Councell of these crimes, and offered to prove them) hee had a hand in the compiling of Dolmans the Jesuites Booke concer∣ning the succession of the Crowne of England; the maine scope of which booke (written, as Martyns Chron. p. 793. some say, by Cardinall Allen, and Fr. Ingelfield, Dolmans enemies) was to exclude all persons, how neere soever allyed to the Crown, unlesse they were Roman Catholikes, contending further for the right of Isabel Infanta of Spaine, and seeking to disprove King Iames his most rightfull title there∣unto; which Dolman with other old Priests and Jesuites hee harboured in his house; where they affirme this booke was Printed: and some thought hee was privie to that devillish plot of the Gunpowder-treason, most of the traytors lying at Lambeth whiles they were about that hellish worke. This Re∣lation I had from others, who averred it for truth, and offered to prove it in his lifetime, could they have beene heard. And it seemes for the point of Dolmans booke, and conniving at such other seditious, traiterly, popish pamphlets of that nature, this Prelate was not altogether cleare: for in the p. 48, 49. Conference at Hampton Court before King Iames, when D. Reynolds mo∣ved the King, that such unlawfull and seditious bookes might be suppressed, at least restrained, which unsetled and corrup∣ted the minds of many young Schollers in both Universities, instancing in Ficlerus a Papist, De jure Magistratus in subditos, for one: Bancroft (then Bishop of London) supposing him∣selfe principally aimed (and why should hee have such a sus∣pition, unlesse conscious of some guilt, upon such a generall motion and information?) answered, first in the Generall: that
there was no such licentious divulging of those Bookes as hee imagined, or complained off. And secondly, to the particular instance of Ficlerus, that he detested both the Author and ap∣plyer alike. But for the first my Lord Cecill justified the com∣plaint true; taxing also the unlimited liberty of dispersing and divulging these Popish and seditious Pamplets both in Pauls Church-yard, and the Universities; instancing in one then late∣ly set forth, and published, namely, Speculum Tragicum; which both his Majesty, and the Lord Henry Howard Earle of North-Hampton, termed a dangerous booke both for matter and in∣tention. Yea Lewis Hughes, an ancient Minister In his certaine grievances well worthy the con∣sideration of the right honourable Court of Parlia∣ment. p. 14, 15. writes thus of this Arch-Prelate; In the later end of Queene Elizabeths raigne, when shee began to be sickly, and not like to live long; D. Bancroft (then Bishop of London) knowing that King Iames was to succeed her, and fearing that his Majestie would reforme things amisse in the worship and service of God, and in the government of the Church, did license a booke written by a Jesuite that hee kept in his house, wherein was written, That it was in the Popes power as a gift appropriate to Saint Peters Chaire, to depose the Kings of England, and to give authority to the people to elect and set up another. Fifteene hundred of those bookes were printed, and dispersed, and being questioned for it, his answer was, that hee did set the Jesuites to write one against another, that hee might out of their writings picke matter against them. It was thought by many, hee had no good meaning in licensing, and suffering so many dangerous Bookes to be dispersed. So hee. Which sufficiently discovers this Arch-Prelates traiterly heart to his Soveraigne, his affection to the Popes supremacy, and disaffection to our Religion; he being a great Persecutor and Silencer of hundreds of our most conscio∣nable preaching Ministers; and, if I may credit other mens re∣ports, his life was ill, and his death fearfull. GEORGE ABBOT.George Abbot, his successor in this See, though a man of a better temper, and worthy praise for his frequent preaching; was yet taxed by some, for being over-stately to his fellow bre∣thren, and for his overmuch delight in shooting at deere, which he exercised so long, till at last by the unhappy glance of his arrow, hee kild his keeper instead of the Bucke hee let loose at. He incurred his Majesties displeasure so farre (by whose means I know nor, unlesse by his successors,) that hee was debarred
accsse to the Kings Court, yea & suspended from his ofice of Arch-Bishop for a season, which was executed in the interim by Commissioners. He was a means of some good mens troubles in the High Commission,AVGV∣STINE. where he caused M. Huntly a Kentish Minister to be most unjustly fined,See Antiq. Ec∣cles, Brit. p. 15. to 45. & 1. to 7. Fox Acts & mo∣numents, p. 149. to 156. Malmes∣de gestis Pontif. l. 1. William Har∣risons Descripti∣on of England. l. 2. c. 1.2. and imprisoned, for denying to preach a Visitation Sermon, when hee was sicke and unable to doe it, and therefore sent the Arch-deacon 20s to procure another, which was refused; and which is arre more injui∣ous, when this poore Minister after many motions was released by the Judges of the Kings Bench by an Habeas Corpus, rom his unjust imprisonment, hee, and the other Prelates caused him for this very Act of seeking his just relief in a legall way, to be apprehended by their pursevant immediately after the Judges had bayled him,See Greg. Epist. l. 11. epist. 36.44. and Morney his mystery of ini∣quity Sect. 22. p. 116, 117. even in the face of the Court, and for this very cause deprived and degraded him in the High Commission, and committed him a fresh, and gave his living to his Chaplaine, to the great affron of justice; for which act he might have smar∣ed in a high degree, had hee beene but questioned. I should now descend to the present Archbishop,Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 4, 5, 6, 7. Matth. Westm. An. 603. p. 204, 205, 206. Beda Eccles. hist. l. 2. c. 21, 22. Fox Ac and Monuments, p. 153, 154. Po∣lichron. l. 5. c. 19. f. 194, 195. Fabi∣an, part. 5. c. 109, 110. Malmesb. l. 5. de Regibus Hric Spelman∣ concilia tom. 1. p. 104. to 112. Godwin cata∣logue of Bihops, p. 5, 6. Iacob. Vsse∣rius de Britanni∣carum Ecclesiar∣primrdiis, pag. 133.92.1157. Malmes. de ge∣stis, regum A∣gli. l. 1. c. 3. William Laud, the last of this See, but that I must first ascend to Autin the first Archbishop of Canterbury, whom I have purposely re∣served to this place the better to parallell them together. The Archbishopricke of Canterbury, had its originall creati∣on from Pope Gregory the first, (a very traytor to his Soveraigne Mauritius, and flatterer of the usurper Phocas) about the yeare of our Lord. 600. This its unhappy derivation from uch a trecherous, and rebellious parentage, hath tainted the whole line of our Canterburian Arch-Prelates, and infused such an oc∣cult pernicious quality into this See, as hath made it a very chaire of Pestilence, which hath infected all, or most of those, who have sate therein, and made them as great Traytors, and rebels to their Soveraignes of England, as their Holy Fathers of Rome have proved to their liege Lord, the Roman Emperours, and to plague our and with civill dissentions, warres, and blood∣shed, almost as much as the Popes have molested Italy and Ger∣many in this kind. Augustine the first Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, sent from Rome by Gregory the first, rather to pervert, that convert our Nation to the Christian faith, about 600. yeares after Christ, was consecrated Bishop of the English Nation (for no lesse Diocesse
or title would content him) by Etherius Archbishop of Arelat, electing Canterbury for his Archiepiscopall See. After which by the assistance of King Ethelbert in the yeare 602. hee caused the Brittish Bishops, and learned men to meete together in a Synode at a place called Augustines Ok, to dispute with them, concer∣ning the observation of Easter day, and the Ceremonies of Baptisme; wherein they differed from the Church of Rome, to whom hee would have them conforme, not onely in doctrine, but even in rites and cere∣monies, using both perswasions, prayers, and threatnings to bring them under his yoke and discipline. But the Britains refusing to con∣form to his demands at this Synode: Augustine, not long after caused another Synode to be sommoned: Whereunto 7. British Bishops, and a great number of Monkes, especially of the fa∣mous Monastery of Bangor, repaired; who inquired of an holy Anchorite living among them, whether they should submit to Austins preaching, and ceremonies, or no? who answered, If hee be a man of God, then obey him: They replying, How shall wee know him to be such a one? hee subjoyned, If hee be meeke and humble, it is credible that he beares the yoke of Christ, and will of∣fer it to you to beare; but if he bee haughty and proud, hee is not of God, and therefore not to be lisned to by you. But how, said hey, shall wee know this? Observe, quoth hee, how he carrieth himselfe when hee first enters into the Synode, and if hee shall rise up to yu, know that hee is Christs servant, and obey him in all things: bnt if hee shall do contrary, and whereas you are many, shall proudly despise you, do ye neglect and contemne him againe. Augustine en∣ers first into the Synode with pride and pompe, with the ban∣ner of his Apostleship, a silver Crosse, a Letany, Procession, Pageants, painted Images, Reliques, Anthems, and such like rituall trifles: The British Bishops approaching neare him, sitting ambitiously in his chaire, he did not onely not rise up to salute them, but also no so much as daigne to shew them any signe of love, or benevolence with his countenance or gesture. The Britons observing this arrogancy of the man, contradicted what ever he propounded to them: and whereas hee comman∣ded them to observe the manners and customes of the Church of Rome in all things: they not onely stoutly repugned them, but likewise affirmed their owne rites and ceremenies to be farre ancienter and better than those hee prescribed them, which having received from their ancesters who were followers of the Apostles,
and having so long observed, they ought not to change propter no vos dogmatistas, for new dogmatists pleasures. They further added, that they would not account him for their Archbishop; seing they had an Archbishop of their owne already resident at Leicester, to whom tey ought to and would obey, and that they would not subject themselves to a forraine Bishop. With which answer Augustine eing enraged, fiercely threatned future warres, and revenge of death unto them, which followed soone after. For Augustine requesting the Britons in this Synode, that they would receive him for their Archbishop, and joyne in common labour with him to preach the Gospell to the English Saxons; The Britons who were driven out of their owne country by them refused to doe it, adding, that they had worthily hated the English and their religion, which were esteemed by them but as dogs, and therefore un∣worthily contemned. This answer of the Britons Augustine gladly aid hold on, imagining that he had gained an occasion from them, whence hee might revenge their neglect and contempt of him. Therefore hee greedily carries the newes of this contu∣mely to King Ethelbert, which this King not unwillingly laid hold on, and thereupon instigated Edelfred King of the Nor∣thumbrians, his kinsman, although a Pagan, against the Britons: who thereupon, Anno Dom. 613. comes with a numerous, and almost tupendious army to Leicester, called by the Britons Calegan (now Chester) where Brochinal the Captaine of the Britans expected his comming, and whether Abbot Dinoth-with a great number of Priests, Hermites, and Monkes, specially such as were of Bangor monastery, had fled. These keeping a fast for three dayes space, prayed to God to protect his people from the swords of the Barbarians. The King commanded them to turne their armies first of all upon those who fought against him, though not with armes, yet with their prayers which was more, whom Brochinal their Generall also, (terrified with the first comming of the enemies, flying most shamefully) exposed weaponlesse and naked to the swords of the enemies; 50. men onely of them escaped by flight, the re∣sidue to the number of 1200 were slaine with the sword of del∣fred. Beda relates, that Augustine taught by divine Oracle, fore∣told this warre to the British Bishops, and Clerkes in the Au∣gustinian Councell; when as it is more likely, that hee having communicated counsell with King Ethelbert, was not onely
consious to the inferring of that warre, but also the cause there∣of. For he was familiar with the King, by whose perswasion and instigation Edelfred inflicted this calamity on the Britons. And verily it is Epitom. Chron. reported, that Augustine in his first con∣ference concerning these Rites, when hee could not per∣swade them by entreaties, threatned them. Moreover, Amandus Xi∣ixiensis. Aman∣dus Xierixiensis, a man of the order of the Friers Mino∣rites, seemes to suffragate to this conjecture, whose very words I will subjoyne. VVhereas the ritains, saith he, were Catholikes, the Saxons were Gentiles, to convert whom S. Gregory sent Augustine and Mellitus, who converted the Saxons. But when as Augustine with his Apostolicall authority would perswade the Brittish Bishops and Abbots to receive him for their Legate, and to preach with him to the English, discord was moved for their dis∣obedience to Saint Augustine, so a warre was raised betweene the King of the Britons, and the King of the Saons, who now be∣ing converted would make the Britons subject to Augustine: by whom (writes Matthew Parker) we are able to prove out of hi∣storians, that Religion was overturned and rooted out, or at least depraved and corrupted. And this they say was predicted by Merlin in these words Religion shall be blotted out againe, and there shall be a transmutation of the chiefe Sees: The dignity of London shall adorne Canterbury; which was fulfilled by Augu∣stine, who caused 1200. of the Monkes of Bangor in Wales to be slaine, because they obeyed him not in the councell, as Alexan∣der Essebiensis plainly teacheth. It is marvellous that Merlin in one prophecie and in coherent words should thus foretell the deletion of religion, the transmutation of the Principall Sees and the transferring of the dignity of London to Canterbury. This slaughter of these Monkes of Bangor by Edelfred, the a∣venger of Augustines wrath, was avenged soone after by God, who hated his cruelty: for whiles the King hastned to oote out the remainder of them, and burne their famous Monastery; three Dukes of the Britaines met him, slew ten thousand and sixty of his souldiers, routed his whole army, wounded the King himselfe, and put him to a shamefull flight. This was the fruit of this first Archbishop of Canterbury, to raise up such a bloody warre within the bowels of our Kingdomes, to the ruine of both parties, and all to advance his owne jurisdiction, and intro∣duce his Roman ceremonies. And verily (writes Antiq. Eccles. rit. p. 4, 5. where hee no∣tably inveighs against ceremo∣monies, and the igorous pres∣ng of them. Matthew
Parker his successour) that first contention raysed by Augustine about the introducing of Roman Rites, which could not be appeased but with the overthrow and blood of the innocent Britaines, ad no∣sra recentiora tempora, cum simili pernicie, coedeque Christia∣norum pervenit, is desceuded to our latter times, with the like de∣struction of Christians. And had he lived to have seen and heard the violent actions & practises of his present successor William Laud;WILIAM LAUD. whose minon Sunday no Sab∣bath, p. 2.43, 44. Altare Christia∣num. D. Iohn Pocklinton, in two severall pernitious Pamphlets (adjudged solemnely to be burnt in both Universities by the Lords House of Parliament, though licensed for the Presse by D. Bray this Canterburies owne domesticke Chaplain, who by like order fron the Lords House hath publikely recanted his licensing of these Pamphlets in a Sermon at Saint Margarets in VVestminster, before sundry of the Commons House) hath pro∣claimed to the World, that this present Prelate of Canterbury de∣rived his lineall succession from this Augustine; first Prelate of this See, and so through his loynes from Pope Gregory the first founder of it, and through his predecessours, from S. Peters Chaire at Rome; though I doubt See D. Rnald conference with Ha. c. 6. Divil. 3. p. 210. to 218. Christopher Crlil, his St Pe∣ters life and pe∣regrination, pro∣ving that Peter was never at Rome M. Br∣nard his fabulous foundation of the Popedome. Peter never sate Bishop, nor ever had any chaire there: I say, had he but survived to have seene Bishop Lauds strange violent acts, and tyrannos proceedings to advance his Archiepiscopall authority, and erect Romes superstitions, rites, and ceremonies in the Churches of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and that even by warre, by blood shed rather than saile in his designes; by cutting of Ministers, Lawyers, Physiti∣ans and Mechanicks eares, searing their chekes, slitting their noses, whipping them openly through the streetes at carts tailes; banishing them their Country, shutting them up close Prisoners in remote Ilands, where neither their kindred, friends, wives, nor children must have any accesse to them, no nor yet once set footing in those Ilands to enqire how their husbands did, under paine of like imprisonment, no they have pen, inke, or paper once allowed them to write to their friends for neces∣saries; and by a bloody cruell warre betweene England and Scotland, which Bishop Peirce truly termed Bellum Episcopale, the Bishops warre:See M. Rus his speech to the Lords at the Transmission of M. Smarts cause. he would have thought himselfe a Prophet, & this saying of his more experimentally verefied by this Arch-prelate, than by any of his Predecessors; all whose tyranny, malice, fury, violence, injustice, lawlesnesse, oppression, inhu∣manity,
trechery, pride, ambition, extravagances, treasons, and prelaticall vices seeme to meere and lodge together in him, as in their propr center, as I could largely manifest by particu∣lars, did not his unjust and rigorous proceedings against my selfe, and all who had relation to mee, without any just cause or provocation on my part or theirs, command mee silence, lest I might seeme malicious or revengefull. Since therefore these his practises are so notorious unto all, I shall forbeare to rip up particulars, and close up all concerning him, with the whole house of Commons, Articles, and Charges of high Trea∣son against him, as they were transmitted to the Lords by that worthy Gentleman (my much honoured friend) M. Iohn Pymme, which being a publike charge of all the Commons by way of justice, in the supremest Court of Judicature, published alrea∣dy to the world in Print: I hope it will neither be reputed a scandalum magnatum, nor matter of revenge in mee, if I here in∣sert them, since most pertinent to the Subject matter of this Treatise, which I had in part digested many yeares by-past, be∣fore his last information in Starchamber exhibited against mee. A true Copy of the Articles of the Commons assembled in Parlia∣ment, against WILLIAM LAUD Archbishop of Canter∣bury, in maintenance of their accusation, whereby hee stands charged with high Treason: and of the Speech or Declaration of JOHN PYMME, Esquire, upon the same: upon their transmission to the Lord. My Lords, Mr. Pimmes Speech.I Am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses now assembled for the Commons in Parliament; to de∣liver to your Lordships these Articles, in maintenance of their Charge against the Archbishop of Canterbury. Their desire is, that first your Lordships would be pleased to heare the Arti∣cles read, and then I shall endeavour to present to you the sense of the Commons, concerning the nature of the Charge, and the order of their proceedings.
Articles of the Commons assembled in Parliament, in maintenance of their accusation against WILLIAM LAUD, Arch∣bishop of Canterbury: whereby hee stands charged with high Treason. 1. That hee hath traiterously endeavoured to subvert the fundamentall Lawes, and Government of this Kingdome of England, and instead thereof to introduce an Arbitary, and tyrannicall Government against Law; and to that end, hath wickedly and traiterously advised his Majesty, that hee might at his owne will and pleasure, leavie, and take money of his Sub∣jects, without their consent in Parliament; and this hee affir∣med was warrantable by the Law of God. 2. He hath for the better accomplishment of that his traite∣rous designe, advised, and procured Sermons, and other dis∣courses to be Preached, Printed, and published, in which the Authority of Parliaments, and the force of the Lawes of this Kingdome, have bin denyed; and absolute and unlimited power over the persons and estates of his Majesties subjects maintained and defended, not onely in the King, but in him∣selfe, and other Bishops, against the Law: And he hath beene a great protector, favourer, and promoter of the publishers of such false and pernicious opinions. 3. Hee hath by Letters, Messages, Threas, and Promises, and by divers other wayes to Judges, and other Ministers of Justice, interrupted and perverted, and at other times by meanes aforesaid, hath endeavoured to interrupt, and pervert the course of Justice in his Majesties Courts at Westminster, and other Courts, to the subversion of the Lawes of this Kingdome, whereby sundry of his Majesties Subjects have beene stopt in their just suits, deprived of their lawfull rights, and subjected to his tyrannicall will, to their ruine, and destruction. 4. That the said Archbishop, hath trayterously, and corruptly sold Justice to those, who have had causes depending before him, by colour of his Ecclesiasticall Jurisdiction, as Archbi∣shop, High Commissioner, Referree, or otherwise, and hath taken unlawfull gifts, and bribes of his Majesties Su (and hath as much as in him lies) endeavoured to corrupt the other Courts of Justice, by advising, and procuring his Majesty
to ell places of Judicature, and other Offices contrary to the Lawes and Statutes in that behalfe. 5. He hath trayterously caused a booke of Canons to be com∣posed, and published without any lawfull warrant, and autho∣rity in that behalfe; in which pretended Canons, many matters are contained contrary to the Kings Prerogative, to the funda∣mentall Lawes, and Statutes of this Realme, to the right of Parliament, to the propriety, and liberty of the subject, and matters tending to sedition, and of dangerous consequence, and to the establishment of a vast, unlawfull, and presumptuous power in himselfe, and his successors: many of which Canons, by the practise of the said Archbishop, were surreptiiously pas∣sed in the late Convoction, without due consideration and debate: others by feare and compulsion, were subscribed by the Prelates, and Clarkes there assembled, which hd never beene voted, and passed in the Convocation, as they ought to have beene. And the said Archbishop hath contrive, and endea∣voured to assure, and confirme the unlawfull and exorbitant power, which hee hath usurped and exercised over his Maje∣sties Subjects, by a wicked and ungodly oath in one of the said pretended Canons, injoyned to be taken by all the Clear∣gie, and many of the Laity of this Kingdome. 6. He hath trayterously assumed to himselfe a Papall and ty∣rannicall power, both in Ecclesiasticall, and Temporall mat∣ters, over his Majesties Subjects in this Realme of England, and in other places, to the disherison of the Crowne, dishonour of his Majestie, and derogation of his supreme authority in Eccle∣siasticall matters; And the said Archbishop claimes the Kings Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, as incident to his Episcopall, and Archiepiscopall office, in this Kingdome, and doth deny the ame to be derived from the Crowne of England, which he hath accordingly exercised, to the hig contempt of his royall Ma∣jesty, and to the destruction of divers of the Kings liege people, in their persons, and estates. 7. That he hath trayterously indeavoured to alter and sub∣vert Gods true Religion, by Law established in this Realm, and in stead thereof to set up Popish superstition, and Idolatry. And to that end, hath declared and maintained in Speeches, and Printed Booke, divers popish doctrines, and opinions con∣trary to the Articles of Religion established by Law. Hee
hath urged and injoyned divers Popish, and superstitious Ce∣remonies without any warrant of Law, and hath cruelly persecuted those who have opposed the same, by corporall punishments, and Imprisonments; and most unjustly vexed o∣thers, who refused to conforme thereunto, by Ecclesiasticall censures of Excommunication, Suspension, Deprivation, and Degradation, contrary to the Lawes of this Kingdome. 8. That for the better advancing of his trayterous purpose and deigne, he did abuse the great power, and trust his Maje∣sty reposed in him, and did intrude upon the place of divers great officers, and upon the rigt of other his Majesties Sub∣jects, whereby hee did procure to himselfe the nomination of sundry persons to Ecclesiasticall Dignities, Promotions, and Be∣nefices, belonging to his Majesty, and divers of the Nobility, Clergy, and others; and hath taken upon him the commenda∣dation of Chaplaines to the King; by which meanes hee hath preferred to his Majesties service, and to other great promotions in the Church suh as have beene Popishly affected, or other∣wise unound, and corrupt both in doctrine and manner. 9. Hee hath for the same trayterous, and wicked intent, chosen and imployed, such men to be his owne Domesticall Chaplaines, whom hee knew to be notoriously disaffected to the reformed religion, grosly addicted to popish superstition, and erroneous, and unsound both in Judgement and practise, and to them or some of them hath hee committed the Licensing of Bookes to be Printed, by which meane divers false and su∣perstitious bookes have beene published, to the great scan∣dall of Religion, and to the seducing of many his Majesties Subjects. 10. He hath trayterously & wickedly endeavoured to reconcile the Church of England with the Church Rome; and for the effe∣cting thereof, hath consorted, & confederated with divers popish Priests, and Jesuites; and hath kept secret intelligence with the Pope of Rome, & by himselfe, his Agents & Instruments, treated with such as have from thence received Authority, and instructi∣on; he hath permitted, and countenanced a popish Hierarchie, or Ecclesiasticall government to be established in this King∣dome: by all which trayterous and malicious practises this Church and Kingdome hath beene exceedingly indangered, and like to fall under the Tyranny of the Roman See.
11. Hee in his owne person, and his suffragans, Visitors, Sut∣rogates, Chancellors, and other Officers, by his command, have caused divers learned, pious, and Orthodox Ministers of Gods word to be silenced, suspended, deprived, degraded, ex∣communicated, & otherwise grieved, without any just and law∣full cause: and by divers other meanes hee hath hindred the preaching of Gods word, caused divers of his Majesties loyall Subjects to forsake the Kingdome, and increased, and cherished Ignorance, and profanenesse amongst the people, that so hee might th better facilitate the way to the effecting of his owne wicked and trayterous designe, of altering, and corrupting the true religion here established. 12. Hee hath traiterously endeavoured to cause division, and discord betwixt the Church of England, and other Reormed Churches, and to that end hath supprest, and abrogated the Priviledges, and Immunities, which have beene by his Maje∣sty, and his royall Ancestors graunted to the Dutch, and French Churches in this Kingdome: and divers other wayes hath ex∣pressed his malice, and disaffection to these Churches, that so by such disunion, the Papists might have more advantage or the overthrow, and extirpation of both. See th Charge of the Scttish Commissioners against Canter∣bury.13. Hee hath maliciously and traiterously plotted, and en∣deavoured to stirre up warre and enmity betwixt his Majesties two Kingdomes of England, and Scotland, and to that pur∣pose hath laboured to introduce into the Kingdome of Scot∣land, divers Innovations both in Religion, and Government, all or the most part of them tending to popery, & superstition, to the great grievance, and discontent of his Majesties Subjects of that Nation: ad for their refusing to submit to such In∣novations, hee did trayterously advise his Majesty to sub∣due them by force of Armes, and by his owne Authority and Power contrary o Law, did procure sundry of his Majesties subjects, and inforced the Clergie of this Kingdome to contri∣bute towards the maintenance of Which Doctor Pierce Bishop of Bath and Wel in his speech to hi Clergy to set on this contributi∣on, stiled Bellum Episcopale, ad∣ding, that whatver his Majesty had expressed in his Declaration t be the cause of this warr, yet in truth this warre is FOR VS, Bishops that warre, and when his Majesty with much wisedome and Justice had made a Pacifica∣tion betwixt the two Kingdomes, the said Achbishop did pre∣sumptuously censure that pacification, as dishonourable to his Majestie, and by his counsels and endeavours, so incensed his Majestie against his said subjects of Scotland, that hee did thereupon (by advice of the said Archbishop) nter into an
offensive warre against them, to the grea hazzard of his Maje∣sties person, and his subjects of both Kingdomes. 14. That to preserve himselfe from being questioned for these, and other his trayterous courses, hee laboured to sub∣vers the rights of Parliament, and the ancient course of Parlia∣mentary proceeding, and by false and malitious slanders to incense his Majesty against Parliaments. By which words, counsel, and actions, he hath traiterously, and contrary to his allegiance laboured to alienate the hearts of the Kings liege people from his Majesty, and to set a division betweene them, and to ruine and destroy his Majesties King∣domes; for which they do impeach him of High Treason, agaist our Soveraigne Lord the King, his Crowne and Dig∣nity. The said Commons do further averre, that the said VVilliam Archbishop of Caterbury, during the times that the crimes afore∣mentioned were done, and committed, hath beene a Bishop, or Archbishop of this Realm of England, one of the Kings Com∣missioners for Ecclesiasticall matters and one of his Majesties most honourable Privie Councell, and hath taken an Oath for his faithfull discharge of the said Office of Councellor, and hath likewise taken an oath of supremacy and Allegeane. And the said Commons by protestation saving to themselves the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other accusa∣tion or impeachment against the said Archbishop, and also of replying to the Answers, tat the said Archbishop shall make unto the said Articles, or to any of them, and of offering fur∣ther proofe also of the Premises, or any of them, or of any other impeachment, or accusation that shall be exhibited by them, as the cause shall according to the cours of Parliament require, do pray that the said Archbishop may be put to an∣swer to all and every the Premises, and that such proceedings, examination, tryall, and Judgement may be upon every of them had and used, as is agreeable to Law and Justice. The Articles being read, M. PYMME proceeded in his Speech as followeth. My Lords, There is an expression in the Scripture, which I will not pre∣sume either to understand, or to interpret; yet to a vulgar eye
it seemes to have an aspect something surable to the Person and Cause before you: It is a description of the evill Spirits, wherein they are said to be spirituall wickednesse in high places. Crimes acted by the spirituall faculties of the Soule, the Will and the Understanding, exercised about spirituall matters, concerning Gods Wordship, and the Salvation of Man; seconded with power, authority, learning, and many other advantages, do make the party who commits them, very sutable to that description, Spirituall wickednesses in high places. These crimes (My Lords) are various in their Nature, hay∣nous in their quality, and universall in their extent. If you examine them Theologically, as they stand in opposition to the truth of God, they will be found to be against the rule of Faith, against the power of godlinesse, against the meanes of Salva∣tion. If you examine them Morally, as they stand in opposition to the light of Nature, to right reason, and the principles of humane society, you will then perceive pride without any moderation such a Pride as that is which exalts it selfe above all that is called God. Malice without any provocation; Malice against vertue, against innocencie, against piety, injustice with∣out any meanes of restitution, even such injustice as doth robbe the present times of their possessions; the future, of their pos∣sibilities. I they be examined (My Lords) by Legall Rules in a Civill way, as they stand in opposition to the Publiqu Good, and to the Lawes of the Land. Hee will be found to be a Traytor against his Majesties Crowne, an incendiary against the Peace of the State; hee will be found to be the highest, the bol∣dest, the mot ipudent oppressour, that ever was an oppressor both of King and People This Charge (my Lords) is distributed and conveyed into oteene severall Articles, as you have heard; and those ar∣ticles are onely generall: I being the intention of the House of Commons (which they have commanded mee to declare) to make them more certaine and particular by preparatory Exa∣minations to be taken with the helpe of your Lordships house, as in the Case of my Lord of Strafford. I shall now runne thorough them with a light touch, onely marking in every of them some speciall point of venome, viru∣lency, and malignity.
1 The first Article (my Lords) doth containe his ndeavour to introduce into this Kingdome an Arbitrary power of Go∣vernment, without any limitations or Rules of Law. This (my Lords) is against the safety of the Kings Person, the honour of his Crowne, and most destructive to his people. Those Causss which are most perfect have not onely a power to produce effects, but to conserve and cherih them. The Se∣minary vertue, and the nutritive vertue in vegetables, do pro∣duce from the same principles. It was the defect of justice, the restraining of oppression and violence that first brought go∣vernment into the World, and set up Kings, the most ex∣cellent way of Government. And by the maintnance of Justice all kinds of government receive a sure foundation and esta∣blishment. It is this that hath in it an ability to preserve, and secure the royall power of Kings, yea, to adorne and encrease it. 2 In the second Article, yor Lordships may observe, abso∣lute and unlimited power, defended by Preaching, by Sermons, and other discourses, printed and published upon that subject. And truely (my Lords) it seemes to be a prodigious crime, that the truth of God, and his holy Law should be perverted to defend the lawlesnesse of men. That the holy and sacred fun∣ction of the Ministry, which was ordained for instruction of mens soules in the wayes of God, should be so abused, that the Ministers are become the trumpets of sedition, the promoters and defenders of violence and oppression. 3 In the third Article (my Lords) you have the Judges, who under his Majesty are the dispersers and distributers of Ju∣stice, frequently corrupted by feare, & solicitation; you have the course of Justice in the execution of it shamefully obstructed. And if a wilfull Act of injustice in a Judge be so high a crime in the estimate of the Law, as to deserve death, under what bur∣then of guilt doth this man lye, who hath beene the cause of great numbers of such voluntary and wilfull acts of injustice? 4 In the fourth Article, hee will be found in his owne person to have sold justice in Causes depending beore him. And by his wicked counsll endeavouring to make his Majesty a Merchant of the same commodity, onely with this difference, that the King by taking money for places of judicature, should sell it in grosse; whereas the Archbishop sold it by retaile. 5 In the fit Article, there appeares a power usurped of
making Canons; of laying obligations on the Subjects in the nature of Lawes: and this power abused to the making of such Canons as are in the matter of them very pernicious, be∣ing directly contrary to the prerogative of the King, and the li∣berty of the people. In the manner of pressing of them, may be found fraud and shufling: in the conclusion, violence and constaint; men being forced by terrour and threatning to sub∣scribe to all: which power thus wickedly gotten, they labou∣red to establish by perjury, injoyning such an Oath for the maintenance of it, as can neither be taken nor kept with a good conscience. 6. In the sixth Article, you have the King robbed of his Supremacy: you have a Papall power exercised over his Ma∣jesties Subjects in their consciences, and in their persons: You have Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction claimed by an Incident right, which the Law declares to proceede from the Crowne. And herein your Lordships may observe that those who la∣bour in civill matters to set up he King above the Lawes of the Kingdome, doe yet in Ecclesiasticall matters endevour to set up themselves above the King. This was irst procured by the Arch-bishop to be extrajudicially declared by the Judges, and then to be published in a Proclamation. In doing whereof he hath made the Kings Throne but a footstoole for his owne and their pride. 7. You have (my Lords) in the seventh Article, Religion undermined and sbverted: you have Popery cherished and deended: you have this seconded with power and violence, by severe punishment upon those which have opposed this mischievous intention: and by the subtile and eager prosecu∣tion of these men, hath the power of Ecclesiasticall Commissio∣ners, of the Starre-Chamber and Councell Table beene often made subservient to his wicked designe. My Lords, 8. You may observe in the eighth Article, great care taken to get into his owne hand the power of nominating to Ecclesi∣asticall Livings and promotions: you have as much mischie∣vous, as much wicked care taken in the disposing of these pre∣ferments, to the hinderance and corruption of Religion. And by this meanes (my Lords) the Kings sacred Majesty, instead of Sermons, fit for spirituall instructours, hath often had inve∣ctives
against his people, incouragement to injustice, or to the overthrow of the Lawes. Such Chaplaines have beene brough into his service, as have as much as may bee, laboured to corrupt his owne Houshold, and beene eminent examples of corruption to others; which hath so farre prevailed, as that it hath exceedingly tainted the Universities, and beene generally dispert to all the chiese Cities, the greatest Townes and Audi∣tories of the Kingdome. The grievous Effects whereof is most manifest to the Commons House, there being diverse hndred complaints there depending in the House against scandalous ministers; and yet (I beleeve) the hundred part of them is not yet brought in. 9. The ninth Article sets out the like care to have Chap∣laines of his owne, that might be promoters of this wicked and trayterous designe: Men of corrupt judgements, of corrupt practice, extreamely addicted to superstition: and to such mens cares hath beene committed the Licensing of Bookes to the Presse; by meanes whereof many have beene published that are full of falshood, of scandals; such as have beene more wor∣thy to be burnt by the hand of the Hangman in Smitfield (as I thinke one of them was) than to be admitted to come into the hands of the Kings people. 10. In the tenth Article it will appeare, how he having made these aproaches to Popery, comes now to close and joyne more neerely with it; he confederates with Priests and Jesuites: He, by his instruments negotiates with the Pope at Rome, and hath correspondence with thm that e authorized from Rome here. He hath permitted a Romane Hierarchie to be set up in this Kindome. And though he hath beene so careull that a poore man could not goe to the neighbour Parish to heare a Sermon, when he had none at home, could not have a Sermon repeated, nor Prayer used in his owne Family, but hee was a it subject for the High Commission Court; yet the other hath beene done in all parts of the Realme and no notice taken of it, by any Ecclesiasticall Judges or Courts. My Lords, 11. You may perceive Preaching suppressed in the eleventh, divers godly and Orthodox Ministers oppressed in their per∣sons and Estates; you have the Kings loyall subjects banished out of the Kingdome, not as limeecke to seeke for bread in
forraine Countries, by reason of the great scarcity which was in Israel; but travelling abroad for the bread of life, because they could not have i at home, by reason of the spirituall a∣mine of Gods Word, caused by this man and his partakers. And by this meanes you have had the trade, the Manufactury, the industry of many thousands of his Majesties subjects carried out of the Land. It is a miserable abuse of the spirituall Keyes to shut up the doores of heaven, and to open the gates of hell, to let in pro∣phanenesse, ignorance, superstition, and errour. I shall neede say no more: These things are evident, and abundantly knowne to all. 12. In the twelfth Article (my Lords) you have a division endeavoured betweene this and the forraine reformed Chur-Churches. The Church of Christ is one body, and the Mem∣bers of Christ have a mutuall relation, as members of the same body, Unity with Gods true Church every where is not one∣ly the beauty, but the strength of Religion: of which beauty and strength he hath sought to deprive this Church by his ma∣nifold attempts to breake this union. To which purpose hee hath suppressed the priviledges granted to the Dutch and French Churches. He hath denyed them to be of the same Faith and Religion with us; and many other wayes hath he de∣clared his malice to those Churches. 13. In the thirteenth Article, as he hath sought to make an Ecclesiasticall division, or religious difference betweene us & forraine Nations, so he hath sought to make a Civill diffeence betweene us and his Majesties subjects of the Kingdome of Sotland. And this he hath promoted by many innovations, there prest by himselfe and his owne authority, when they were uncapable of such alteraions. He advised his Majesty to use violence. He hath made private and publicke Collections to∣wards the maintenance of the warre, which he might justly call his owne ware. And with an impudent boldnesse, hath struck Tallies in the Exchequer for divers summes of money, procu∣red by himselfe, Pro defensione Regni; when by his Counsels the King was drawne to undertake not a Defensive, but an Offnsive Warre. 14. He hath lastly, thought to secure himselfe and his party
by seeking to undermine Parliaments, and thereby hath la∣boured to bereave this Kingdome of the Legislaive power, which can onely be used in Parliaments: and that we should be left a Kingdome without that which indeede makes and con∣stitutes a Kingdome; and is the onely Meane to preserve and re∣store it from distempers and decayes. He hath hereby endea∣voured to bereave us of the highest Judicatory, such a Judica∣tory, as is necessary and essentiall to our government. Some Cases of Treason, and others concerning the Prerogative of the Crowne, and liberty of the People. It is the supreame Ju∣dicatory to which all difficult Cases resort from other Courts. He hath sought to deprive the Kig of the Love and Counsell of his People, of that assistance which he might have from them, and likewise to deprive the People of that reliefe of grievance which they most humbly xpect from his Majesty. My Lords, The Parliament is the Cabbinet wherein the chie∣fest Jewels both of the Crown & Kingdome are deposited. The great Prerogative of the King, and the liberty of the People are most effectually exercised and maintained by Parliaments. Here (my Lords) you cannot passe by this occasion of great thankes to God and his Majesty for passing the Bill whereby the fre∣quent course of Parliaments is established; which I assure my selfe, he will by experience finde to be a strong foundation both of his honour, and of his Crowne. This is all (my Lords) I have to say to the particulars of the Charge. The Commons desire your Lordships that they may have the same way of Examination that they had in the Case of the Earle of Strafford: That is, to examine members of all kindes, of your Lordships House and their owne, and others, as they shall see cavse. And those Examinations to be kept se∣cret and private, that they may with more advantage be made use of when the matter comes to tryall. They have declared that they reserve to themselves the po∣wer of making Additionall Articles, by which they intend to re∣duce his Charge to be mor particular and certaine, in respect of the severall times, occasion, and other circumstances of the Of∣fences therein Charged. And that your Lordships would bee pleased to put this Cause in such a quicke way of proceeding, that these great and dangerous Crimes together with the offen∣dors may be brought to a just Judgement.
To these Articles of the Commons house, I might here an∣nex those of the Scottish Commissioners against this Arch-Prelate; but I reserve them to a Chapt 7. fitter place; and shall onely for a Co∣rollary, add Mr. Grymstons Printed speech in Parliament, a∣gainst this Arch-Bishop, to Mr. Pymmes, pretermitting all o∣thers of this Nature for brevitie sake. Mr. Grymstones Speech in Parliament, upon the accusation and impeachment of VVILLIAM LAVD Archbishop of Canterbury, of High Treason. Mr Speaker, THere hath beene presented to he House, a most faithfull and exact report of the conference we had with the Lords yesterday, together with the opinion of the Committees, that were imployed in that service. That they conceived it fit, the Arch-bishop of Canterbury should be sequestred. I must second he motion, and with the favour of the House, I shall be bold to offer my reasons, why I conceive it more ne∣cessary, we should proceede a little further, than the desire of a bare sequestration onely. Mr. Speaker, long introductions are not sutabl to weighty businesse, we are fallen upon the great man, the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury: looke upon him as he is in his Highnesse, and hee is the sye of all pestient filth, that hath infected the State and government of the Church and Common-wealth: looke upon him in his dependancies, and he is the man, the onely man that hath raised and advanced all those (that together with him∣selfe) have beene the Authors and causers of all the ruines, mi∣series, and calamities, we now groane under. Who is it but he onely, that hath brought the Earle of Straf∣ford to all his great places and imployments, a fit instrument and spirit, to act and execute all his wicked and bloody designes in thes Kingdomes? Who is it, but he onely that brought in Secretary Winde∣anke into the place of Secretary and trust, the very Broker and Pnder to the Whore of Babylon? Who is it, Mr. Speaker, but he onely that hath advanced all Popish Bishops? I shall name some of them; Bishop Manwa∣ring,
the Bishop of Bathe and Wells, the Bishop of Oxford, and Bishop Wren, (the least o all, but the most uncleane one.) These are men that should have sed Christs Flocke, but they are the Wolves that devoured them; the Sheepe should have fed upon the Mountaines, but the Mountaines have eaten up the Sheepe. It was the happinesse of the Church, when the zeale of Gods house did eate up the Bishops: glorious and brave Martyrs that went to the stake, in defence of the Prote∣stants religion; but the zeale of these Bishops have beene to eate up and persecute the Church. Who is it, Mr. Speaker, but the great Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury, that hath sit at the Helme to guide and steere them to all the managing of their Projects, that have beene set on foote in this Kingdome these ten yeares last past? and rather than he would stand out, he hath most unworthily trucked and chaf∣fered in the meanest of them. As for instance, that of Tobacco, wherein thousands of poore people have beene stripped and turned out of their trade, for which they have served as Ap∣prentises; we all know he was the Compounder and Contra∣ctor with them for the Licences, putting them to pay Fines, and Fee-Farme-rents to use their Trades. Certainely, Mr. Speaker, he might have spent his time better (and more for his grace) in the Pulpit; then thus sharking and taking in the Tobacco shop. Mr. Speaker, we all know what he hath beene charged with∣all here in this House, Crims of a dangerous consequence, and of transcendent nature, no lesse than the subversion of the Go∣vernment of this Kingdome, and the alteration of the Protestant Religion, and this not upon bare information onely, but much of it comes before us already, upon cleare and manifest poofes, and there is scarce any businesse, Grievances, or Complaints, come before us in this place, wherein we doe not finde him intermingled, and as it were twisted into it, like a busie and an∣gry Waspe, his sting in the taile of everything. We have this day heard the report of the Conference yester∣day; and in it the Accusations which the Scottish Natio hath charged him withall; And we doe all know he is guilty of the same (if not more) in this Kingdome. Mr. Speaker, he hath beene, and is the common enemie to
all goodnesse and good men, and it is not safe, that such a viper should be neere to his Majesties person, to distill his poyson in∣to his Sacred eares, nor is it safe for the Common wealth that he should sit in so eminent a place of Government, being thus accused; we know what we did in the Earle of Strafords case. This man is the corrupt Fountaine that hath inected all the streames, and till the fountaine be purged, we cannot expect to have any cleare Channels. I shall be bold therefore to offer my opinion, and if I erre it is the errour of my judgement, and not my want of zeale and affection to the publicke good. I conceive it most necessary and fit, that we should now take up a Resolution to doe somewhat, to strike whilst the Iron is hot; And goe up to the Lords in the name of the Commons of this House, and in the name of the Commons of England; and to accuse him of High Treason, and to desire their Lord∣ships, his person may be sequestred, and that in convenient time they may bring up the Charge. Which soone after was accordingly executed, as you have already seene. By these speeches & Articles of High Treason against this Arch-Prelate it is apparent, that his Treasons equall, if not far exceed, the Treasons of any of his Predecessors in the darkest mists of Popery; and that he, like his Predecessor Austin hath, endeavored to rayse a bloody civill warre betweene England, Ireland, and Scotland, onely for opposing his all-subduing Archiepiscopall Jurisdiction, extended by him over all his Majesties three Kingdomes, and for refusing to receive those Superstitious Ro∣mish Ceremonies and Innovations, which he would have vio∣lently thrust upon them: yea it is evident by these Articles that he is the primum mobile, whence all our late warres, tumults, up∣roares, and divisions proceeded and the spring whence all our insupportable grievances both in our Church and State have originally flowed. And so by his owne late published maxime (The Relation of his Conf∣rence with Fisher p. 132.142.296 8.301. A schisme must needes be theirs whose the cause of it is, and he makes the separation that gives the first just cause thereof:) the blame of all these late schismes, warres, and intolerable grievances, whether Civill or Ecclesiasticall, must rest intirely on his head; who, as he is like to leave no heires of his body lawully begot∣ten to inherit his vertues, so it is pity he should leave any succes∣sour
behinde him in his See, to perpetuate his, and his Prede∣cessors Treasons, with other their Archiepiscopall vices. It is his owne late resolution: Relation of his Conferenc with Fier p. 270. The condition of the Church were most miserable, if it should be constrained to acknowledge a Wolfe manifestly raging for her shepheard: and it is likewise his observation, Ibidem p. 384.385. A man may become of a Pastor a Wolfe; and since Iudas changed from an Apostle to a Devill, Joh 6. It is no wonder to see others change from shepheards into Wolves I doubt the Church is not empty of such changlings at this day. Whether himselfe and his forementioned Predecessors have not proved such Wolves and changlings, by reason of the Venome of their Archiepisco¦all Chaire: and whether the condition of our Church were not most miserable, if she should be still constrained to acknowledge these Arch-Wolves of Canterbury, manifestly raging, to be her Shepheards, and still to maintaine an interrupted succession of them to devoure the poore sheepe of Christ both soule and bo∣dy, and to be perpetuall pests, Traytors and incendiaries to our Church and State, as their Predecessours have ever beene, I shall submit to those whom it most concernes, who have now sufficient power and opportunity in their hands to redresse all incumbent, and prevent all future mischiefes in this kinde. I could now gladly wade out of this dangerous See of Can∣terbury wherein I have so long roved, did not the Acts of some other ancient Prelates of it, next successors to Augustine, detaine me in it a little longer. Not to mention the See Antiq. Ec∣cles. Brit. p. 8. God∣win. p. 8. forwardnesse and activity of Laurentius the second Arch-Bishop of this See, to settle the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome among us, & to obtrude thē on the Britaines, who withstood them; or his contests with King Eadbaldus, from whose tyranny and displeasure he purpo∣sed to flee into forraine parts, had no S. Peter in a dreame re∣proved, and whipped him with whip-cord for this his cowardice so terribly (if it be true) that all his body was gore blood. Malmesbur. d Gestis Pontif. lib. 1. p. 196. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 14.15.17. Godwin. p. 11. Theodorus the seventh Prelate who possessed this Chaire,THEODORUS. by birth a Greeke, was so farre from doing any thing contrary to or different from the Church of Rome, that he over-conten∣tiously propugned her Authority and Ceremonies, depriving some Bishops upon his meere pleasure for this cause onely, that they were consecrated after a different manner from the Romans,
and compelling them to be canonically ordained. He exerci∣sed the right and authority o his See in such sort, that he see∣med not so much to governe by judgement and Counsell, as to be violently hurried with the impetuousnesse and perturbation of his minde: so that he did not a little obscure those other ver∣tues which were not vulgar, with this overmuch pertinacity of asserting his owne dignity. His unjust deprivation of Bishops without cause (whom he thrust in and out at his pleasure, as his late successors have deprived, silenced, and suspended our best preaching Ministers) detracted much from his glory: espe∣cially his unjust dealing with Wilfrid Arch-Bishop of Yorke, whom he most unworthily expelled from his See, though eve∣ry way equall, if not superiour to himselfe in holinesse of life, learning and industry: by persecuting whom immoderately and unjustly, mulium n uit Ecclesiae paci, & male consuluit famae suae; he much prejudiced the Churches peace and his owne reputa∣tion: he stirred up King Egfrid against Wilfrid, and by that meanes kept him off from being restored to his Bishopricke. And when as Wilfrid appearing before the Kings tribunall ex∣postulated the cause of his injuries, Theodor answered, Malmesbur. de Gestis Pontif. Angl. l. 3. p, 261.262. We lay no guilt to your charge; sed quod constituimus ratum esse volumus: but what we have decreed that we will shall be ratified. Than which speech what can be more absurd? as if he should say, So I will have it, so I command, my will shall stand for a reason. Such a wilfull and headstrong Prelate was he, to the great disturbance both of Church and state; for which some say he repented on his death-bed, though this vice dyed not with him but descended to his successors. BIRHTUAL∣DUS.Birhtubaldus an English man, his next successor, not Malmes. de Ge∣stis Pontif. l. 3. p. 263. to 266. Antiq. Eccl. Bri. p. 17.18.19. onely assisted but caused Alfricke King of Northumberland, to thrust Wilfrid out of his See at Yorke, 5. yeares after his restitution to it, and to spoyle him of all his lands and goods, and banish him the Kingdome. And then afterwards endeavoured to justifie and make good this deprivation, though unjust, in a Councell which he summoned for this purpose; which when he could not effect, he endeavoured by faire speeches to perswade Wilfrid to renounce his Bishopricke rather than violate the peace of the Church: but he refusing, appealed to Rome, whereupon his complaint to the Pope Birhtuald is sent for, Wilfrid acquitted, and this turbulent malicious Arch-Prelate overthrowne, and
forced to restore Wilfrid to Yorke againe, after a long contesta∣tion betweene them, to the great Disturbance of Church and State. Tatwin the 9. Archbishop of Canterbury,TATWIN. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 21. God∣win Pag. 13. two yeares after his consecration, ad a great controversie with the Archbishop of Yorke concerning primacy, for which cause hee posted to Rome, and tere received his pall and confirmation from the Pope; but these controversies for primacie I shall reserve for ano∣ther Treatise. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 22.24. Cutbert his successor (as Thomas Sprot describes him) was a deceitfull man full of foxlike craft,CUTBERT. a viper, eating out the bowels of his owne mother. In his dayes both Prince and people, Priests, Nunnes, and Monkes were extremely addicted to un∣cleannesse, whoredome, adultery, and costly apparell; the Bishops themselves being as bad, reproved them not for these sinnes, lived wickedly, rixas & arma inter se gerebant, brawled and warred among themselves, addicted not themselves to read the Scriptures, but to luxury, and preached not or very rare∣ly, by meanes whereof people were so ignorant that they could scarce say the Articles of the Creed, or the Lords prayer in their mother tongue. To reforme these abuses a Synode was called, but these sinnes still raigning, the Kingdome was soone over-runne and conquered by the bloody Danes. Lambert the 13. Archbishop of Canterbury,LAMBERT. about the yeare of Christ 76. so highly Matth. Westm. An. 765. p. 76. Malmesburiensi, De gestis Pontif. l. 1. p. 198, 199. Ant. Eccls. Brit. p. 26.29. God∣win p. 5. offended Offa King of Mercia, that out of his enmity against him, and the Kentish men, hee ob∣tained a Bull from Pope Adrian to erect a new Archbishopricke at Lichfield: obtaining an Archbishops Pall for Eadulphus Bi∣shop of that See, to whom the Diocesses of Worcester, Leicester. Legecester, Hereford, Helenham, and Duwich were annexed and subjected; so as Canterbury had left unto him for his Province onely the Bishoprickes of London, Winchester, Rochester, and Sherburne, which much abated his pride. Athelardus his next successor,ATHELARDUS and Eanbaldus Archbishop of Yorke, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 27, to 34. Malmes. de Ge∣stis Pontif l. 1. p. 199. Matth. West. An. 1267. p. 292. Godwin p. 16. about the yeare 79. procuring letters from Kenulph King of Mercia, written in his, and his Bishops, Dukes, and peoples names to Pope Leo, for the reuniting of the former dis∣joyned Bishoprickes to the See of Canterbury, poasted with them to Rome; where after they had solicited, and bribed the Pope, they obtained their suit without much difficulty, and so these
Bishoprickes were reannexed to Canterbury, lest the seamelesse coate of Christ should sustaine some rent or schisme betweene the two Archbishprickes; and withall, Ethelard obtained such a large grant from the Pope, that if any of his Diocesse, as well Kings and Princes, as ordinary people, should transgresse his Lordly Mandates, he should excommunicate them till they repented, and if they continued impenitent, all should esteeme them as Ethnickes and publicans. In his time the English grew such Apostates from vertue, ut gentes quascunque proditione superarent, that they exceeded all Nations in treason and trechery. No doubt they learned it from their traiterous Prelates, and Priests, whom the Danes in his dayes lew, together with Monkes, Nunnes, and Levites, without any commiseration: Et fudeunt sanguinem sanctorum etiam IN CIRCUITU ALTARIS, as Epistola ad He∣gibaldum, Episc. Ant. Eccles. Brit. p. 31. Alcuinus writes: by which it appeares, that altars in those dayes stood not close against the East wall of the Chancell, as now some place them, but in such sort, thas they might be COMPASSED ROUND; the Alter of Augustine in his collegiate Church at Canterbury, stan∣ding before those dayes, in ejus Porticus Beda Eel. Hist. l. 2. c. 3. Antiqu. Eccls. Brit. p. 7. MEDIO, in the MIDST of the Porch there; and the Altar of the old Church in Saint Edmonds Bury, built ovall, standing likewise AS IT WERE IN THE MIDST of the Church, as Camdes Bri∣tannia, p. 460. Camden out of Everden, a Monke of that house, relates: but of this in the by. ELNOTHVS. Speed Hist. l. 8. . 4. p. 484.496. Holinshed. Histo∣ry of England. l. 7. c. 13. p. 182 Elnothus Archbishop of Canterbury, about the yeare of our Lord 1036. against his Alleagiance and Oath crowned Harold (a bastard, having no right to the Crowne) King of England, Hardi-Canute the right heire being put by his right. At first this Prelate seemed unwilling to performe that service, for it is reported, that hee having the Regall Scepter, and Crowne in his custodie, with an oath refused to consecrate any other for King, so long as the Queenes Children were living, for (said he) Canutus committed them to my trust and assurance, and to them will I give my faith and allegiance. This Scepter and Crowne therefore I here lay downe upon this Altar: neither do I deny or deliver them to you, but I require by the Apostolique authority, all Bishops, that none of them presume to take the same away, neither therewith that they consecrate you for King, as for your selfe if you dare, you may usurpe that which I have committed to God on this his Table. Not∣withstanding that great thunderclap was allayd with the
showers of golden promises of his just and religious Govern∣ment intendd (though present experience manifested the con∣trarie) and hee perswaded without much intreaty to crowne this usurper King. And now having thus long sayled in this troublesome See of Canterbury, I shall onely trouble you with a passage out of William Harrison, touching the Archbishops of Canterbury in generall, and Robert the Norman in particular; and then hoise up my sailes, and steare my course into the Northern See of Yorke. William Hri∣son Description of England. . 132.133. The Archbishop of Canterbury (writes hee) is commonly called Primate of all England, and in the Coronations of the Kings of this Land, and all other times, wherein it shall please the Prince to weare and put on his Crowne, his office is to set it upon their heads. They beare also the name of their high Chaplins continually, although not a few of them have presumed (in time past) to be their equals, and void of subjection unto them. That this is true, it may easily appeare by their owne acts yet kept in record, besides their Epistles and Answers written, or in Print, wherein they have sought, not onely to match, but also to mae them with great rigour and more than open tyranny. Our adversaries will peradventure deny this absolutely, as they do many other things apparent, though not without shamelesse impudencie, or at leastwise deend it as just, and not swerving from common equity, because they imagine every Archbishop to be the Kings equall in his owne Province. But how well their doing herein a∣greeth with the saying of Peter, and examples of the Primi∣tive Church, it may easily appeare: some examples also of their demeanour I will not let to remember, lest they should say I speake of malice, and without all ground of likelihood, of their practices with meane persons: I speake nor, neither will I beginne at Duntane, the author of all their pride and presumption here in England: but for so much as the dealing of Robert the Norman, against Earle Goodwine, is a rare History, and deserveh to be remembred, I will touch it in this place, protesting to deale with all in more faithfull manner, than it hath heretofore beene delivered unto us by the Norman Writers, or French English, who (offer purpose) have so defaced Earle Goodwine, that were it no for the testimony of one or two meere English men living in those dayes, it should be impossi∣ble
for mee (or any other) at this present to declare the truh of that matter according to the circumstances: marke therefore what I say; for the truth is, that such Norman as came in with Emma, in the time of Ethelred, and Canutus, and the Confessor, did fall by sundry meanes into such favour with those Princes, that the Gentlemen did grow to beare great rule in the Court, and their Clerkes to be possessors of the best benefices in the Land. Hereupon therefore one Robert, a jolly ambitious Priest, got first to be Bishop of London, and after the death of Eadsius, to be Archbishop of Canterbury, by the gift of King Edward, leaving his former See to VVilliam his Countriman: Vlfo also a Norman was preferred to Lincolne, and other to other places, as the King did thinke convenient. These Norman Clerkes, and their friends being thus exalted, it was not long ere they began to mocke, abuse, and despise the English, and so much the more as they daily saw themselves to encrease in avour with King Edward, who also called divers of them to be of his secret Councell, which did not a little incense the hearts of the English against them. A ay also was made at Dover be∣tweene the servants of Earle Goodwine, and the French, whose Masters came over to see and salute the King: which so infla∣med the minds of the French Clergie and Courtiers against the English Nobility, that each part sought for opportunity of revenge, which ere long tooke hold betweene them: for the said Robert being called to be Arcbishop of Canterbury, was no sooner in possession of his See, than hee began to quarrell with Earle Goodwine (the Kings Father in Law by the marriage of his daughter) who also was ready to acquit his demeanour with like malice; and so the mischiefe began. Hereupon therefore the Archbishop charged the Earle with the murther of Alfred the Kings brother, whom not he, but Harald the sonne of Canutus, and the Danes, had cruelly made away; for Alfred and his brother comming into the Land with five and twenty aile, upon the death of Canutus being landed, the Normans that arrived with them, giving out how they came to recover their right, to wit, the Crowne of England, and thereunto the un∣skilfull young Gentlemen shewing themselves to like of the u∣mor that was spread in this behalfe the report of their demea∣nour was quickly brought to Harald, who caused a company orthwith of Danes privily to lay in wait for them as they rod
toward Gilford, where Alfred was slaine, and whence Edward with much difficulty escaped to his ships, and so returned into Normandy. But this affirmation of the Archbishop being greatly soothed out with his crafty utterance (for he was learned) con∣firmed by his French friends (for they had all conspired against the Earle) and thereunto the King being desirous to revenge the death of his Brother, bred such a grudge in his mind a∣gainst Goodwine, that he banished him and his Sonnes cleane out of the Land hee sent also his wife the Earles daughter prisoner to Wilton, with one onely maiden attending upon her, where shee lay almost a yeare before shee was released: in the meane season, the rest of the Peeres, as Siward Earle of Nor∣thumberland, surnamed Digara, or ortis, Leofrick Earle of Che∣ster, and other went to the King, before the departure of Good∣wine, endeavouring to perswade him unto the revocation of his sentence, and desiring that his cause might be heard and dis∣cussed by Order of Law; But the King incensed by the Arch∣bishop and his Normans, would not heare on that side, saying plainly and swearing by Saint Iohn the Evangelist, (for that was his common Oath) that Earle Goodwine should not have his Peace till hee restored his brother Alfred alive againe unto his presence; with which answer the Peeres departed in choler from Court, and Goodwine towards the Coast. Comming also unto the shore and ready to take shipping, hee kneeled downe in presence of his conduct (to wit at Bo∣senham in the moneth of September, from whence hee intended to saile into Flanders unto Baldwine the Earle) and there wished openly before them all, that if ever hee attempted any thing against the Kings person of England or his Royall estate, that he might never come safe unto his Cousin nor see his Country any more, but perish in this voyage; and herewith he went aboard the ship that was provided for him, and so from the Coast into the open Sea. But see what followed, hee was not yet gone a mile away from the Land, before he saw the shore full of armed Souldiers sent after by the Archbishop and his friends to kill him ere he should depart, and goe out of the Country, which yet more incensed the hearts of the English against them. Being come also to Flanders hee caused the Earle, the French King, and o∣thers, of his friends among whom also the Emperour was one, to write unto the King in his hehalfe, but all in vaine, for no∣thing
could be obtained from him of which the Norman had no liking; whereupon the Earle and his Sonnes changed their minds, obtained aid, and invaded the Land in sundry places. Finally joyning their powers, they came by the Thames into Southwarke neere London, where they lodged, and looked for the King to encounter with thm in the field: the King seeing what was done, commanded the Londoner not to aide nor victuall them: but the Citizens made answer, how the quarrell of Goodwine was the cause of the whoe Realme, which hee had in a manner given over unto the spoyle of the French, and there∣upon they not onely victualled them abundantly, but also recei∣ved the Earle and his chiefe friends into the City, where they lodged them at their ease, till the Kings power was ready to joyne with them in battle: great resort also was made unto them from all places of the Realme; so that the Earles Army was wonderfully increased, and the day and place chosen where∣in the Battle should be fought. But when the Armies met, the Kings side began some to flee to the Earle, other to lay downe their weapons, and not a few to unne away outright: the rest telling him plainly, that they would never fight against thei owne County men, to mainaine Frenchmens quarrel:We have seene the like of late i  like prela∣icall quarrell. the Nor∣mans also seeing the sequell, fled away so fast as they might gallop, leaving the King in the field to shift for himselfe (as h best might) whilst they did save themselves elsewhere. In the meane season the Earles Power would have set upon the King, either to his slaughter or apprehension; but hee stayed them, saying after this manner. The King is my Sonne (as you all know) and it is not for a father to deale so hardly with his child, neither a subject with his Soveraigne. It is not he tha hath hurt or done mee this injury, but the proud Normans that are about him; wherefore to gaine a Kingdome I will doe him no violence: and therewithall casting aside his battell axe, hee ran to the King that stood al∣together amazed, and falling at his feete he craved his peace, accused the Archbishop, required that his cause might be heard in open assemblie of his Peeres, and finally determined as truth and equity should deserve. The King (after hee had paused a pretty while) seeing his old Father-in-Law to lie groveling at his feete, and conceiving with himselfe that his suite was not un∣reasonable; seeing also his children, and the rest of the greatest Barons of the Land to kneele before him, and make the like re∣quest:
hee listed up the Earle by the hand, bad him be of good comfort, pardoned all that was past, and friendly having kissed hm & his sonnes upon the cheekes, he lead them to his pallace, called home the Queene, and Summonned all his Lords unto a Councell; wherein it is much to read how many ils were presented against the Bishop and his Normans, some containing matter of rapes, other of robbery, extortion, murder, manslaughter, high teason, adultery, and not a few of battery: wherewith the King (as a man now awaked out of sleepe) was so offended, that upon consultation had of these things he banished all the Nor∣mans out of the Land, onely three or foure excepted, whom he retained for sundry necessary causes, albeit they never came more so neere him afterward as to be of his Privie Councell: af∣ter this also the Earle lived almost two yeares, and then falling into an apoplexie, as he sate with the King at the table, hee was taken up and carried into the Kings bedchamber, where (after a few dayes) hee made an end of his life; and thus much of our first broyle raised by the Clergie, & practice of the Arch∣bishop. I would intreat of all the like examples of Tyranny, practised by the Prelates of this See against their Lords and Soveraignes; but then I should rather write an History, than a Description of this Iland. Wherefore I referre you to those re∣ports of Anselme and Becket, sufficiently penned by other, the which Anselme also making a shew, as if hee had beene very un∣willing to be placed in the See of Canterbury, gave this an∣swer to the Letters of such his friends, as did make request unto him to take the charge upon him: I would o secular Lordly Prelates would consider this. Secularia negotia nescio, quia scire nolo, &c. Of secular affaires I have no skill, becuase I will not know them: for I even abhorre the troubles that rise about them, as one that desireth to have his mind at Liberty: I apply my whole endeavour to the rule of the Scriptures, you lead mee to the contrary; and it is to be feared lest the plough of holy Church, which two strong men of equall force, and both like earnest to contend unto that which is good (that is the King and the Archbishop) ought to draw, should thereby now swarve from the right furrow, by mat∣ching of an old sheepe with a wild untamed Bull. I am that old sheepe, who if I might be quie, could peradventure shew my selfe not altogether ungratefull to some, by feeding them with the milke of the word of God, and covering them with wooll; but if you match mee with this Bull, yo shall see that through want of equality in draught
the plough will not goe too right, &c. as followeth in the processe of his Letters. The said Thomas Becket was so proud, that hee wrote to King Henry the second, as to his Lord, to his King, and to his Sonne, offering him his Counsell, his reverence and due correcti∣on, &c. Others in like sort have protested, that they oug't no∣thing to the Kings of this Land, but their councell onely, reserving all obedience unto the See of Rome. William Harri∣son Description of England, pag. 134, 135. Neither did this pride stay at Archbishops and Bishops, but descended lower, even to the rake-hels of the Clergie, and puddles of all ungodlinesse; for beside the injury received of their superiours, how was King Iohn dealt withall by the vile Cistertians at Lincolne in the se∣cond of his raigne? Certes when hee had (upon just occasion) conceived some grudge against them for their ambitious demea∣nour; and upon denyall to pay such summes of money as were allotted unto them, hee had caused seisure to be made of such horses, swine, neate, and other things of theirs, as were maintained in his forrests. They denounced him as fast amongst themselves, with Bell, Booke and Candle, to be accursed and excom∣communicated. Thereunto they so handled the matter with the Pope and their friends: that the King was faine to yeeld to their good graces, insomuch that a meeting for pacification was ap∣pointed betweene them at Lincolne, by meanes of the present Archbishop of Canterbury; who went oft betweene him and the Cistertian Commissioners, before the matter could be finished. In the end the King himselfe came also unto the said Commissio∣ners, as they sate in their Chapter house, and there with teares fell down at their feete, craving pardon for his trespasses against them, and heartily requiring that they would (from thenceforth) commend him and his Realme in their prayers unto the protection of the Al∣mighty, and receive him into their fraternity, promising moreover full satisfaction of their dammages sustined, and to build an house of their order in whatsoever place of England it should please them to assigne. And this he confirmed by Charter, bearing date the 27 of November, after the Scottish King was returned into Scotland, and departed from the King. Whereby (and by other the like, as betweene Iohn Strafford and Edward the third, &c.) a man may easily conceive how proud the Clergie men have beene in former times, as wholly presuming upon the primacy of the Pope More matter could I alleage of these & the like broyles, not to be found among our Common Historiographer, howbeit reser∣ving
the same unto places more convenient, I will cease to speake of them at this time. So Harrison. And thus have I now at last conclded my Canterbury voyage, and sayled through this most dangerous See; wherein so many Pontiffes have suffered shipwracke both of their loyalty, charity, faith, and honesty. And many godly Christians through their cruelty, and tyranny made shipwracke, not onely of their goods, liberties, estates, cares, and other members, but also of their lives; it being both in Augustines time, and almost ever since, a very Aeldama, and See of blood. So as I may well conclude of these Primates, and Metropolitans of all England, in Saint Sermo 1. in con∣vers. S. Pauli, & super Cant. Serm 77. Bernards words: Heu, heu Domine Deus, ipsi sunt in persecutione tua PRIMI, qui vi∣dentur in Ecclesia tua PRIMATUM DILIGERE, GE∣RERE PRINCIPATUM. Misera eorum conversatio, plebis tuae miserabilis subversio est: Atque utinam sola hac parte nocerent: But alas, Iusta omnino querimonia, nec ad ullam jusi∣us, quam ad nostram referenda aetatem; Parum est nostris vigilibus quod non servant nos, nisi & perdant. Alto quippe demersi oblivionis somno ad nullum Dominicae comminationis tonitruum expergiscuntur, ut vel suum ipsorum periculum expavescant. Inde est, ut not parcant suis, qui non parcant sibi,Hee writes it principally of the Popes of Rome, but tis as true o the Popes of Canter∣bury, PERIMENTES PARITER ET PEREUNTES. What then remaines but that King, Parliament and people (having such just cause and faire oppor∣tunity) should all joyne cordially together, utterly to subvert this chaire of pestilence, and with Rev. 18.19.21. great violence to throw downe this our English Babylon, and in one houre to make her so desolate, as shee may be found no more at all; that so the people beholding her long expected and much desired overthrow, may ry mightily with a strong and joyfull voyce, with the Angel in the Rev. 1.. Apocalypse; Babylon (Canterbury) the great is falne, is falne; which hath beene the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foule spirit, and a cage of every uncleane and hatefull bird, and in her was found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slaine upon the earth. From this overflowing boundlesse See (which hath still outswolne the bankes of divine, and hu∣mane Lawes which would confine it) have all those perilous inundations of trechery, rebellion, forraine and inestine warres, seditions, tyrannyes, oppessions, grievances, innovations, and mischiefes commonly issued which have miserably torne and perplexed our Kingdome: vexed if not almost ruined our
Kings, Church, State, People in ancient & moderne times. This great Archiepiscopal prime chaire, hath bin the Metropolitical nest wherin all the egges of all ou mischiefs, & grievances have com∣monly been laid and hatched by our Canterburian Harpies. I can therfore prescribe no better advise for our future security against those and other our mischievous Prelates and birds of prey, than that which Sylsr ral∣du. Turghesie (a prudent man) once gave to the King of Meth, when he demanded of him, how hee might destroy certaine noysome birds then lately come into Ireland, where they did much mischiefe to the Country, Nidos eorum ubique destruendos, that their nests, and Sees (like the Abbies and Priories of old,) are every where to be destroyed, and converted to better uses; then we need not feare a succession of these pernitious birds, and mischievous vermin; the very Turbans and Acans of our En∣glish Israel; which must never looke for tranquility or felicity, whiles these continue or domineer amongst us. Till these Io∣nasses be cast over-board, and quite abandoned, we can neither hope for, nor enjoy a calme.
CHAP. II. OF THE SEVERALL Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebel∣lions, Seditions, State-schismes, Contempts, and Disloyalties of the Arch-Bishops of YORKE, against their Soveraignes, and of the Warres, Tumults, and Civill Dissentions caused by them I Have thus as briefly as I could with convenience, given you an Epitome of the Arch-Bishops of Canterburtes Arch-Treasons, Re∣bellions, Trecheries, Seditions, Disloyalties, State-Schismes, Di∣sturbances and oppositions to our Lawes, more at large related in our Historians; I shall now pro∣ceed in order, to those of the Arch-Bishops of Yorke, which will almost equall them, as well in heinousnesse, as in number; both of them being Pri∣mates
and Metropolitanes in all these prodigious villanies and crimes, as well as in Episcopall Jurisdiction. WILFRID. Will: Malsb. de Gests Pontif. l. 3. p. 260. to 266. Antiqut. Eccs: Brit. p. 14. to 19. Godwin. p 560, 561, 562. Math, Westm. Anno 672. Florentius Wi∣gorniensis, An. 677.65. Ho∣linshed hist. of Brit. l. 5. c 34.35, 36. l 6 c. 2. Henrici Spelm. Concil Tom. 1. p. 146, 147, 149, 157.161, 162, 163, 178, 179, 200, to 206. VVilfrid the third Arch-Bishop of Yorke, about the yeare of our Lord 678. went about to prswade King Egfrdus Queene to forsake her husband, and betake her selfe to a Monastery, without the Kings privitie or con∣sent; the King much displeased with him for it (by the advice of Theodore Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, who ma∣ligned the greatnesse of his Diocesse) first sought to dimi∣nish his Authoritie by dividing his Diocesse into 3. Bi∣shoprickes and then exhibited divers complaints against him to the Pope to have him deprived, causing him to be condemned in two severall Councels; and thereupon thrust him from his Bishopricke, which Theodore divided into foure Diocesses. After ten yeares exile, Egfrid dying, Alfrid his Successour restored VVilfrid; but five yeares after, this King likwise fell out with him, and forced him to Rome, where though the Pope restored him, yet the King would never admit him to his See during his life: What the true cause of these displeasures was, the Histo∣rians of those times (who favoured VVilfrid) are sparing to relate: belike it was some notorious offences against these Kings, else they would not be so unjust, as without cause to keepe him from his Bishopricke, and to impri∣son him in chaines, as one of them did. Antiqu Ecces. Brit p 47. Some record, that it was because hee favoured and aided the Rebellious Danes, which is most probable. Malmesbury, and others out of him, say, it was onely the malice of Queene Ermenburga, who envied him, for that hee had many Abbots and Ab∣bies under him, was served with Gold and Silver plate, had a great traine of followers, and was very gorgeous in his Pontificall Robes, and because hee would never yeeld to have his Diocesse divided into three mote Bishopricks, though it were sufficient to maintaine foure Bishops be∣side himselfe, of which there was need. And some im∣pute it to the envie and malice of Theodore Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. The first of these could not be the sole cause for that ended upon VVilfrids exile and the Kings death.
The second is as unlikely, since VVilfid himselfe,Matth Wesm. Anno 673. Henrii Spelm. Cocil. Tom. 1. p. 153. with all the Bishops of that time, and the Councell of Hert∣ford, Can. 9. Anno 677. decreed, that the number of e∣leevers increasing, more Bishops and Bishoprickes should bee made and erected. Whereupon Acca and Bowin were made Bishops instead of Bosa, and his Bishopricke di∣vided into foure parts, to which partition VVilfid had good reason to consent, it being the Kings expresse pleasure, and the Councels decree, to which himselfe subscribed. The envie of Theodore was in likelihood a partiall, but not principall cause of his first Trou∣bles onely. Hee was therefore, in all likelihood, an aider and assister of the Rebellious Danes, and a great opposite and Rebell against these two Kings; yea, and against Edulfus their successour, who all three succes∣sively refused to restore him, notwithstanding the Popes Letters and Command; which then it seemes were of little force. Many Councels were assembled about this VVilfrid, and the whole Church and King∣dome much disquietted and vexed with the many Schismes and contentions concerning him, too tedi∣ous to relate. Anno 872. Matb. Westm. An 872. God∣win. p. 566. Vlferus,VLFERUS. Arch-Bishop of Yorke, was by his Diocesans driven out of the Countrey: for what cause is not expressed, and therefore likely for some notorious offence, because the Monkes conceale it out of favour to him. Anno 952. Malmsb. de Gestis Pontif. l. 3. p 269. Godwin, p 567. Holinhed Hist. of England. l. 6. c. 23. p. 158. Math. Wstm. Ann. 951.953. VVolstan Arch-Bishop of Yorke,WOLSTAN. was convict of an hainous crime, who forgetting that du∣tifull affection hee ought to beare unto Edred his King, if for no other cause, yet for Athelstane his Brothers sake, who preferred him; forgetting his Oath and Allegeance unto the same King being his naturall Prince, yea forgetting that hee was either an English man or a Christian, was not ashamed to revolt from King Edred, and cleave to the Danes and favour them, an Heathen people, and such as sought not onely to de∣stroy
his Countrey, but also to root out Christian Re∣ligion. For which Treason, and for setting up Eri¦cus King in Edreds stead, though hee deserved a thou∣sand deaths he was onely deprived, committed to Pri∣son and one yeare after enlarged again, because he was a Bishop; whereas for this cause as his Treason was the more hainous and execrable, so hs punishment should have beene the greater: But hee being released upon his repentance, grew so angry with himselfe that hee was thus pardoned against right and justice that vtm evetigio exuit, hee presently made away him∣selfe, being his owne executioner. Math. Westm. Hovden & Flo¦rentius Wigorni∣sis, An. 951, 952, 953. Some say, that hee was thus imprisoned, for killing divers Citizens of Thetford in revenge of the death of one Anselme an Ab∣bot, whom they had slaine without cause; belike hee was guiltie of both those crimes, and punished for both in this mild manner, after divers complaints. Anno 975. Holinshed hist. of England, l. 6. c. 25. p. 162. Oswald Arch-Bishop of Yorke assisted Dunstan of Canterbry,OSVVALD. and the other Bishops, to put E∣gelred the right Heire from the Crowne, and to set up Edward an Usurper, whom they crowned as more fit for their behoofe and ends. Elfricke Arch-Bishop of Yorke,ELFRICK. surnamed Puttoc, was reputed detestable for two barbarous Acts: He caused Hardenute the King Malmsb. de Gestis Pontif. p 270, 271. Godwin, p 570. Florentius Wi∣goniensis, An. 1040, 1041. Math Westm. An 1040 Ho∣linsheds Hist. of England. l. 7. c 15. p. 185. Speed, p. 407 to command the dead body of his Brother King Harold to be digged up out of his Grave, after that to be beheaded and cast into the Thames, as an infamous example to men. And not content with this crueltie towards the dead he perswaded the same King by way of revenge on VVorcester men (because they would not suffer him to hold that See in commendam with Yorke, as three of his predecessours had done be∣fore him) to fire that goodly Citie, and seize on all the Citizens goods, pretending that they had stubbornely resisted those who collected the Kings tributes: And as if this were not sufficient revenge to kill all the men and waste the whole Countrey, which was most
cruelly executed hee likewise caused this King to thrust the living Bishop of VVorceter out of his See and to bestow it on himselfe; and incensed this King so farre against Earle Godwin, that hee was enforced to buy his peace of the King with the gift of the rich∣est and costliest Shippe that wee reade of in that Age. Aldredus his Successour,ALDREDUS (who gat that See by Sy∣monie, and held VVorcester in commendam with it, and was one of the first who distinguished the Clergie from the Laitie in their externall habits) Will: Malmsb. de Gests Pontif. l. 3. p. 271. Godwin. p. 571. to 574. Speed, p. 419. Polichro. l. 7. c. 27, 28. l. 7. c. 1. Math. Wstm. Ann. 1071. Wigr∣niensis, An. 106. Holinshed, ist. of England, l 8. c. 8. p. 196. crowned Ha∣rold, invading the Dignitie Royall, no way due unto him. After which, though hee purposed o Crowne Edgar the right Heire King, to whom he and the No∣bilitie had first adhered, yet like a wily Bishop siding with the strongest, he altered his purpose and crown∣ed VVilliam the Conquerour King, requiring first an Oath of him to dfend the Church, to minister justice, and te vse Englishmen as favourable as Normans. This Oath it seemed to Aldred, that the King had broken by laying heavie taxes on the people, of which he admonished the King, who was very angry at it. He therefore (like a couragious Prelate but like a disloyall Subject) thundered out an Excommunication against him, saying That now worthily he had cursed, whom once un∣worthily hee had blessed. This bold pranke being repor∣ted to the King, incensed him very much at first, but thinking better of it, hee determined to give him good words a while, and so sent some to intreat for his ab∣solution. The Messengers came too late, for the Bi∣shop being troubled much in mind after the perfor∣mance of that Action, and either amazed with feare of what might happen after it, or overcome with griefe and repentance for what he had done, never could be merry after, but dyed of griefe before they came. In his time Vrsus Earle of Worceter had built a Castle at Worceter to some prejudice of the Monkes, the Ditch of
which Castle trenched somewhat upon the Church-yard, and adjoyned too neere to the Monastery. Aldred went unto the Earle, and having demanded of him whether it were done by his appointment, which he could not deny, looking stedfastly on him, used these insolent and uncharitable words, Hightest thou Vrse? Have thou Gods curse, adding, yea and mine too, and the curse of all hollowed heads, unlesse thou take away this Castle, and know thou assuredly that thy posterity shall not inherit the Lands of Saint Mary: which curse the Monkes say was shortly after accomplished, Vrsus dying soone after, and Roger his sonne flying the Realme. THURSTAN Polichron. l. 7. c. 15. Malmsb de Gestis Ponti. l. 3. p. 274, 275. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 112, 113. Eadme∣rus hist. Novo∣rum, l 5, 6. p. 117. to 138. Godwin p. 579.580.981. Walfingh. and Holtnshed, p. 41, 42, 49. Thurstan Arch-Bishop of orke, about the yeare of our Lord, 1100. contrary to the Kings expresse com∣mand, and his owne faithfull Oath and promise to Henry the first, received his Consecration from the Pope at the Councell of Rheemes; whereupon the King banished him the Realme, neither could he in five yeares space be entreated to restore him. At last the Pope, by his procurement, writ a very sharpe Letter to the King, signifying, that he would Excommuni∣cate both him, and the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury al∣so, if Thurstan were any longer kept from his See, and some say, he actually Excommunicated them both, and interdicted as well the Province of Yorke, as of Canterbury from the use of all manner of Sacraments, and from the Baptisme of Infants. Upon which the King, to be out of trouble, contrary to his solemne vow, yeelded that he should be called home, and soone after he was reconciled unto the King. This Arch-Bishop, Anno 1148. when as David, King of Scots, en∣tred our borders, and spoiled the Countrey as farre as the River of Teyse, gathered together such a power as hee was able to raise on a sudden, met them at Alver∣ton, slew 1200. of them; after which hee cast off his Rochet, and turned Monke at Pontfrast, where hee dyed,
Henry Murdac Arch-Bishop of Yorke,MURDAC: thrust into that See by the Pope, against King Stephens good liking,Nenbrignsis hist. l. 1. c. 17. Godw. p. 582. who commended his Kinsman, William thereto; re∣fused to sweare fealtie to the King; who thereupon was so displeased with him, that the Townsmen of ork, by his good liking, shut Murdac out of the Citie, and refused to receive him. Murdac suspended them for this affront, Eustace the Kings Sonne commanded Divine Service to be said notwithstanding, as at o∣ther times; hereupon divers tumults and seditions were raised in the Citie, wherein an Arch-Deacon, a great Friend of the Arch-Bishops, was slaine: two or three yeares these stirres continued, till at last the Arch-Bishop submitted and reconciled himselfe to the King. Geffrey Plantagenet,PLANTAGI∣NET Henry the second his base Sonne, after the Arch-Bishopricke of Yorke had beene tenne yeares void, and kept so long in the Kings hands, was commended to that See by Richard the first, and con∣secrated by the Arch-Bishop of Towers. Godw. p. 587, 588 Neubrig. l. 4. c. 17. Mat Paris hist Ma∣ior, p. 146.157, 134, 212, 222, Holinshed, p. 143, 147, 163 170. He tooke an oath to king Richard his Brother, then going to the Holy Land, not to set foot in England within 3. yeares space; yet presently after he hied him over into Eng∣land; but upon his arrivall, he was there arrested and imprisoned in a barbarous manner by William Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellour of England, being drawne by the heeles from the very Altar of Saint Martins Church in Dover. All the time of king Richard he had many contests with the Commons of Yorke, who oft complained of him both to the king and Pope. Richard dying, king Iohn and this Bishop had many contenti∣ons one with the other. Anno 1194. by the kings per∣mission, many grievous complaints were exhibited in Parliament against this Arch-Bishop, for extortion and unjust vexations hee had practised, but he passed so little thereof, that he made no answer to their Bills. Moreover, in the second yeare of his raigne, he com∣manded
the Sheriffe of Yorkeshire to seize upon all th Arch-Bishops goods and Lands, and to returne them into the Exchequer, for hindring the kings Officers in gathering a kinde of taxe throughout his Diocesse, and refusing to saile into Nomandy with him, to make a marriage for his Neece, and to conclude a league with the French king; which command the Sheriffe executing, the Arch-Bishop thereupon Matth. Westm. Anno 1207. excommu∣nicated, not onely the Sheriffe that had done him this violence, but all those in generall, who were the Au∣thors of the same, and that had beene any meanes to stirre up the kings indignation against him. The King hereupon suspends him from his Bishoprick, to whom at last he was glad to pay 1000. pound for his restitu∣tion. Holinshed, p 147. Holinsh writes that whereas this Arch-Bi∣shop of Yorke had offended king Richard, he pardoned and received him againe into favour: Whereupon the Arch-Bishop waxed so proud, that using the king reproachfully, hee lost his Arch-Bishopricke, the rule of Yorkeshire, which he had in government as Sheriffe, the favour of his Soveraigne, and which was the grea∣test losse of all, the love of God. Anno 1207. this fire of contention raked up in ashes, brake out againe. King Iohn being at Winchester required such of the No∣bilitie and Clergie as were there present, that payment should be made unto him of the third part of all the moveable goods in England; this motion no man gaine-sad but Geffrey the Arch-Bishop, who openly contradicted it. After this, whether it were, he were guiltie of some greater attempt, or that hee understood his Brother was grievously offended with him, secret∣ly hee avoided the Realme excommunicating be∣fore his departure, such of his Jurisdiction, as ei∣ther had already paid, or should hereafter presume to pay the said taxe; whereupon hee was banished the Realme, and lived five yeares in exile till his death.
Godfrey de Kinton his Successour,GODFREY DE KINTON. though he had no bickerings with the king, that I read of, yet he fell out with the whole Citie of Yorke,Godwin p. 594. interdicting it in the beginning of Lent, and not restoring it till the third of May following. Godw p. 596. See 21. Ed. 1. n the Fleas of the Parliament, plac. 17. & Dorsclauso, p. 21. E. 1. m. 3. Iohn Roman Arch-Bishop of Yorke,IOHN ROMAN. Anno 1294. excommunicated Anthony Beake Bishop of Durham (or rather two of the Bishops servants) being one of the kings Councell, and at that time beyond the Seas in the kings Service. Whereat the king being highly displeased, the Arch-Bishop thought it best to put himselfe to his Mercie, hee did so, and was fain to re∣deeme the kings favour with 4000. Markes (being fined so much by the whole Parliament for this his offence;) the griefe whereof strucke him into an incu∣rable disease, whereof he dyed. Godw. p. 597.598. Thomas de Corbridge,THOMAS DE COR∣BRIDGE. his Successour, Anno 1299. upon the Popes Commendatory Letters, bestowed his Canons place of Yorke and Custoseship of the Parish of Saint Sepulcher on one Gilbert Segrave, notwithstan∣ding the King had formerly written earnestly to him in the behalfe of one Iohn Bush his Secretary; which affront in preferring the Popes Clerke before him and his Secretary, the King tooke so hainously, that hee seized on three Mannors or Barronies belonging to his See, and retained them during the Arch-Bishops life, which was not long, hee either out of griefe, or Gods just Jdgement, being soone taken away. It falling out for the most part (as Bishop Godwin ob∣serves in his life) that those Bishops which have pre∣sumed most in opposing themselves against their Prin∣ces, have least time endured, and ever quickly beene taken away. Anno Dom. 1329. Walsing hist. Angliae p 110, 111. Holinsh. 348. William de MeltonWILLIAM DE MELTON Arch-Bishop of Yorke (successively Treasurer and Chancellour of England) upon the Examination of Edmund, Earle of Ken, (whom this Prelate and the Bishop of London
had drawne into a conspiracie and rebellion against King Edward the third) was accused of High Treason, for reporting that King Edward the second was still a∣live after his death, (and that upon the credit of a prea∣ching Fryer of London, who had raised up a Devill, which certainly informed him thereof as a truth:) For writing a Letter of Fidelitie to this Earle which hee sent by his owne Chaplaine Acyn, for sending him 500. men in Armes, and ptomising to send him as many more as hee could possibly raise; and sending Richard de Pomfret to him both to Reusington and Arun∣dle, to further the said Rebellion. The Poore Earle was found guiltie of high Treason, and beheaded: The Bi∣shop of London, and Arch-Bishop, the chiefe plotters of this Treason and Conspirace, were suffered to goe at libertie under fureties, taken of them for their good demeanour and forth-comming; and the Fryer who had raised the Spirit, to know whether the Kings Fa∣ther were living or not, was onely committed to pri∣son, where he dyed. An. 1319. Holinshd hist. of Scot. p. 222. this William Melton Arch-Bishop of Yorke and the Bishop of Ely, with the Citizens of Yorke, not making them of the Countrey once privie to their designes, having in their compa∣nie a great company of Priests and men of Religion, gave battell unto the Scots neere Melton upon Swale. But for as much as most of the English were unex∣pert in the feates of Warre (the Bishops being their Captaines) and came not in any orderly way of Battell, they were easily put to flight by the Scots, who slew about 4000. of them, sparing neither Religious person nor other. So ill is it for Prelates to turne Warriers, and that rashly without taking good ad∣vice. ALEXAN∣DER NEVEL. Godwin. p. 601, 602, Graf∣ton, p. 375. Holished, p. 458, 460, 463, 464. Walsingh. hist Ang p 354, 368. Speeds p. 748, 749. Alexander Nevell Arch-Bishop of Yorke, in great favour with King Richard the second, was amongst o∣thers conuicted by Parliament, for abusing the Kings youth by flattery and exciting and stirring him against
the Nobilitie and Lords, whom hee falsely accused of Treason to the King (to the great prejudice of the King and Realme) by whispering tales day and night against them, and for anulling Acts of Parliament: for which causes hee was condemned in Parliament of high Treason, and then adjudged to perpetuall im∣prisonment in the Castle of Rocheser. Hee foreseeing the Tempst that grew toward him, fled out of the Realme. Vrbane the Fifth for his securitie translated him (being both a Alexan. Nevel roditor & usurone tran∣slato ad Epis∣copatum S. An∣drae in Scotia, Hist. Ang. p. 368. Traytor and whisperer, writes Walsingham) from Yorke to Saint Andrewes in Scotland, which Kingdome at that time refused to acknowledge Vrbane for Pope, yeelding obedience to the Antipope, by means whereof, Vrbanes gift was insufficient to in∣vest him in Saint Andrewes; yet good to void him quite from Yorke; whereby hee being stript of both Arch-Bishoprickes, and enjoying the benefit of nei∣ther, for very want was forced to become a Parish Priest at Lovaine, and so lived three yeares till his death. Thomas Arundel his Successour,THOMAS ARUNDEL. to prejudice the Lon∣doners and benefit those of Yorke, Godwin, p. 603 Graton, p. 382. Wal∣sgh. hist. Ang. p 386, 392, 393. Ydig. Nast. p. 151. removed all the Kings Courts from Westminster to Yorke, to the great prejudice and grievance of the Londners and Subjects in the West and South parts of England, and the no lit∣tle disturbance of the Realme. His pretence was, that hee did it onely to punish the pride and pre∣sumption of the Londoners, who were then in great disgrace with the King by reason of a fray made up∣on the Bishop of Salisburyes Man who abused a Ba∣ker, and brake his head with a Dagger, without a∣ny just cause; for which the Citizens assaul∣ted the Bishops House to have Justice done upon his Man, who had done the wrong; but the Bishops bolstering him out no Justice could be had, and instead thereof, their Liberties were seized on, and the
Terme removed to Yorke, to vex them the more: The Arch-Bishop not long after, was attainted of Treason in Parliament immediately upon his Translatin from Yorke to Canterbury. And good reason: for he conspired Holinshed, p 488. with the Duke of Gloucester, the Abbot of Saint Al∣banes, and the Prior of Westminster (both which Reli∣gious persons declared to the Duke, that they had seve∣rall Visions, That the Kingdome should bee destroyed through the misgovernment of Richard the second; by which they animated the Duke to conspire with them and others, against their Soveraigne; who meeting together at drundel Castle, about the 20. yeare of King Richards Raigne, they sware each to other to bee assi∣stant one to another in all such matters as they should determine, and therewith received the Sacrament from this Arch-Bishop, who celebrated Masse before them the morrow after; which done, they withdrew themselves into a chamber, and concluded, to take King Richard, the Dukes of Lancaster and Yorke, and to commit them to Prison; and to hang and draw all the other Lords of the Kings Councell; all which they intended to ac∣complish in August following, had not their plot been dis∣covered and prevented by Earle Marshall. This Prelate after his attainder for this Treason, was the chiefe Holinshed, p. 503. Actor in effecting King Richards involuntary Resigna∣tion, in the instrument whereof he is first named. I shall say no more of this Arundel, but what William Harrison hath recorded of him in his Description of Eng∣land, l. 2.  c. 1. p. 134. And even no lesse unquietnesse had another of our Princes with Thomas Arundel (than King Stephen had with his Predecessours, and Robert de Sgillo Bishop of London) who fled to Rome for feare of his head, and caused the Pope to write an ambitious and contumelious Letter unto his Soveraigne about his restitution. But when by the Kings Letters yet extant and beginning thus, Thomas PRODITIONIS
non expers, nostrae Regiae Majestati insidias fabricavit; the Pope understood the bottome of the matter, hee was contented that Thomas should be deprived, and ano∣ther Arch-Bishop chosen in his stead. But of this and him you may reade more before, pag. 75, 76, &c. Godwin, p. 604, 605, 606. Polychron, lib 8. c. 10. f 326. Walsingh. Ypodigm, Nust. A. 1405 f. 168.170. Caxton, pars 7. Hn 4. p. 430. Stow, Martin, Fabian An. 6. Hen. 4. Speeds Hist. l 9. c. 14. p. 775. sect. 43. Halls Chron. par. 1. An. 6. H. 4. f. 25. Walsingh. hist. Angliae, p. 416, 417. Ho∣linshed, p. 522.529, 530. Richard Scroope Arch-Bishop of orke,RICHARD SCROOPE. Brother to William Scroope Earle of Wilshire, Ann. 1403. and 1405. joyned with the Earle of Northumberland, the Earle Marshall, the Lord Bardolp and others, in a Con∣spiracie and Rebellion against King Henry the fourth, gathering what forces hee could against him. The Percies to make their part seeme good, devised certaine Articles by the devise of this Arch-Bishop, which they shewed to divers Noble-men and other States of the Realme, and moved them so farre to promote their purpose by this meanes, that they did not onely pro∣mise them ayde and succour by words, but also by their writings and seales confirmed the same. After this, Anno 1405. This Arch-Bishop conspiring with the Earle of Northumberland and others aforesaid, devi∣sed like Articles as before, of such matters as was sup∣posed not onely the Commonaltie of the Realme, but the Nobilitie found themselves grieved with; which Articles he and his Confederates first shewed to such of their adherents as were neere about them, and after sent them abroad to their friends further off; assuring them, that for redresse of such oppressions they would shed the last drop of bloud in their bodies, if need were: Whereupon great multitudes flocking to the Arch-Bishop to Yorke, to take his part in this quarrell, hee not meaning to stay, after hee saw himselfe so well accompanied with so great number of men, forthwith discovered his enterprise, causing the Articles aforsaid to be set up in the publicke streets of the Citie of Yorke, and upon the gates of the Monasteries, that each man might understand the causes that moved him to rise in
Armes against the King, the reforcing whereof did not yet appertaine unto him. Hereupon the Knights, Esquies, Gentlemen, Yeomen, and others of the the Commons as well of the Citie, as of the Townes and Countries about, being allured for desire to see a Reformation of the things mentioned in the Arti∣cles, assembled in great number, and the Arch-Bishop comming forth amongst them clad in armour, encou∣raged exhorted, and (by all meanes he could) pricked them forth to take the enterprise in hand, and man∣fully to continue in their begun purpose; promising forgivenesse of sinnes to all them whose hap it was to dye in the quarrell. And indeed the respect men had of the Arch-Bishop caused them to like better of the cause, since the gravitie of his age, integritie of his life incomperable learning and reverent aspect of his per∣sonage, moved all men to have him in no small esti∣mation. The Earle of Westmerland and Duke of Lan∣aster, the Kings sonne, being in those parts with the Kings Forces, inquired of them in a peaceable man∣ner, What their intent should be in taking Armes? The Arch-Bishop answered, That hee meant nothing but the good of the Realme, as hee would gladly certifie them if hee might have secure and safe conduct to them, and thereupon shewed a writing containing certaine Articles which hee had devised; wherein he charged King Henry with treason against his Soveraigne King Richard; op∣pression of the Church and Common-weale, whose Liberties hee had sworne to defend, Tyrannie and cruelty, in putting to death th said King, many of the Nobilitie, and great numbers of the Commons: with impietie and sacriledge, in defrauding the Church of Rome of her Rights; and lastly, with vill government, perfidiousnesse, perjury, and di∣vers other like hainous crimes, for which hee pro∣nounced the King excommunicate, requiring all men to joyne with that company, whose endeavour
should bee, but to reforme what was amisse, to seate and settle in the kingdome the right Heire, to establish peace in Wales and Ireland, and to free the whole Realme from the great and intollerable burthen of exactions, no longer to be endured. The Earle of Westmerland having read this writing (contai∣ning sundry treasons and conlumelies with a witnesse, and fit for an Arch-Bishop to publish) professed to al∣low of the Enterprise, and praised it for honest and reasonable; insomuch as meeting with the trayte∣rous Arch-Bishop at a parley, after a very few spee∣ches they seemed to become friends, shaking hands together, and drinking to each other in the sight of both their Armies. The Arch-Bishop now doubting of nothing, suffered his men to disperse them for a time: But the Earle contrary-wise waxing stronger and stronger, and seeing him selfe able to deale with the Bishop, came upon him suddenly and arrested him, little thinking of any such matter. The King by this time was come North, and as farre as Pomfret: Thither the Arch-Bishop with other priso∣ners, arrested with him, were brought, and carryed with the King to Yorke; or as some say, to Thorpe; where Sir William Fulford, a Knight learned in the Law, and another Justice called Gascoine sitting on an high Stage in the Hall, condemned the Arch-Bishop to be beheaded, without being judged by his Peeres; Bishops being (as Stamford Plecs of the Crowne, l. 3. c. 1. f. 153. a Cromptons I∣risdiction of Courts f. 12. b. some say) properly no Peeres of the Realme, and so not to be judged by their Peeres; who cer∣tainely would have acquitted, or saved his life had they beene Bishops, they ever using to boulster out their fellow Bishops, in their treasons, and to save them from the Gibbet. Presently after this judgement given, the Arch-Bishop was set upon an ill favoured Jade, his face toward the Horse taile, and carri∣ed with great scorne and shame to a Field hard
by, where his head at last was chopped off by a fellow that did his office very ill, not being able to dispatch him with lesse then five strokes. Pag. 430. Grafton writes, that Thomas Arundel Arch-Bishop of Canterbury (as great a Traytor as hee) came to the King and said, Sir if the Bishop of Yorke have offended you so greatly as it is said, yet I pray you consider, that I am your Ghostly Father, and the se∣cond Peere in your Realme, and that you ought not to hearken to any mans voyce before me, wherefore I counsell to reserve the paine and punishment of the said Bishop to the Popes judgement, and hee will take such order as yee shall be pleased. And if ye will not so doe, yet let him be refrred to the Par∣liament, and keep your hands defiled from his bloud; (a sweet Counsellour.) Then the King answered, I may not stay him, for the rumour of the people; whereupon the Arch-Bishop called for a Notary, to make an instrument of the Kings answer, that if need were it might be shew∣ed to the Pope but the King would not stay, but cau∣sed execution to be done. Though many of our Arch-Bishops and Bishops before him, had beene desperate Traytors, yet he is the first Bishop (the more the pittie, for that made them so presumptuous in their Treasons) that was put to death by order of Law. This just exe∣cution on such a Traytorly Rebell, so unwontedly and extraordinarily performed on an Arch-Prelate, in this contumelious (though deserved) manner, without any preceding degradation, was so distastefull to his fellow Prelates (none of the best Subjects,) and so dangerous a president for the future, that they accoun∣ted this Arch-Traytor, no lesse then a Martyr, ascribing many miracles to have beene done by vertu of his holinesse both at his Tombe, and at the place where he was beheaded: (pittie that more of them had not been so served, that wee might have had more such Holy Saints and won∣derous Miracles of this kind.) They reported abroad, That the Bishop at the time of his Execution, desired the Ex∣ecutioner to have five strokes, in remembrance of the five
wounds of Christ, that the King at the same time, sitting at dinner, had five stroks in his necke by a person invisible, and that the King himselfe, presently after his death, was stricken with a Leprosie, a manifest lye. They likewise reported, That a strange judgement hapned upon the Iudges who gave sentence against him: Which fabulous lying Legends, must not onely be generally bruited abroad (to cheate the people, justifie the Traytor, disparage this honorable Act of Justice slander the King and Judges, and all to secure the Bishops in their Treasons and Rebellions, that this Act might never bee made a pre∣sident to punish them capitally for such like offences in future times;) but likewise chronicled, to delude posterity, and animate all succeeding Prelates, under hopes of im∣punitie to attempt any Treasons, Trecheries or insur∣rections against their Soveraignes without feare. And to make the thing more odious, and the Prelates more presumptuous in this kinde, the Walsingh hist. & Ypodigm. An. 1406. p. 170. Pope himselfe excom∣municates tbe Authors of his death, and those that had any hand in his condemnation or execution, who must all ear∣nestly entreat for absolution before it would be granted. Loe here the quintessence of all Traiterous, Rebellious spi∣rits, and disloyall practises combined, and infused into our Prelates, in canonizing this Arch-Traytor, scan∣dalizing the very sentence of Justice pronounced and executed upon him, with the King and Judges that were the Authors of it, and making it a matter worthy an Anathema, to condemne and execute a Traytor, a Rebell too in the Suparlative degree. What confi∣dence can any Princes repose, or what fidelitie can they expect from such a desperate generation of Vi∣pers as these, who cannot be content to plot, to execute Treasons and Conspiracies, but thus boldly to justifie them and the Traytors to, when they are committed? I shall therefore close this story with the words of An 6. H. 4. f. 25. Edward Hall, our Chronicler: What shall a man say of such foolish and fantasticall persons, who have
written, of such erroneous Hypocrites and seditious Asses who have indited, of such superstitious Fryers and malicious Monkes, who have declared and di∣vulged both contrary to Gods Doctrine, the honour of their Prince and common knowne verity such ma∣nifest lyes as the fore-cited miracles and reports con∣cerning this Arch-Bishops death? What shall men thinke of such beastly persons which regarding not their bounden dtie and besance to their Prince and Soveraigne Lord enved the punishment of Traytors and torment of offendors? But what shall all men conjecture of such which favouring their owne worldly Dignitie, their owne private authority, and their owne peculiar profit, will thus juggle, rayle, and imagine fantasies against their Soveraigne Lord and Prince, and put them in memory as a miracle to his dishonour and perpetuall infamy well, let just men judge what I have said. So all. IOHN KEMP.Iohn Kemp Arch-Bishop of Yorke, was Holinshd, p. 620 to 627. a great op∣poser of the good Duke of Glocester, a Traytor and e∣vill instrument to King Henry the Sixth and the King∣dome, and the meanes of the Duke of Gloucesters mur∣ther, whose death was a most incomparable losse to the Realme; of which more at large in Henry Beaufort, Bishop of Winchester, with whom he confederated a∣gainst the Duke. GEORGE NEVILL.George Nevill Arch-Bishop of Yorke Godwin, p. 609, 610, 611, Halls Chron. An. 8 & 12. Ed. 4. f. 201, 202, 223, 224. Grafton, 8. & 12. Ed. 4. f. 678.714. Speeds Hist. l. 9. c. 17. p. 887. sect 88. Ho∣linshed, p. 683.693. conspired with his Brother Henry Nevill Earle of Warwicke, a∣gainst King Edward the Fourth, after hee had raigned almost nine yeares to pull him from his Throne; and being his hap to take King Edward Prisoner at Ownely in Northamptonshire, hee carryed the King with him Prisoner, first to Warwicke Castle, then to Midleham Castle in Yorkeshire; from whence the King at last, having liberty to ride abroad an hunting escaped, be∣ing rescued by his Friends: and within halfe a yeare after so handled the matter, as comming to London
suddenly, and entring this Arch-Bishops Palace by a Posterne Gate, hee surprized at once King Hnry and the Arch-Bishop, that had not long be∣fore taken him. Holinshed and some others relate, that the Arch-Bishop being lft by his Brother the Earle of Warwicke to keepe the Citie of London for King Henry against Edward the Fourth; hee per∣ceiving the affections of the people to incline to King Edward, and how the most part of the Citie were much addicted to him, sent forth secretly a Mes∣senger to him, beseeching King Edward to re∣ceive him againe into his former favour, promising to bee to him in time to come, and to acquit this good turn heereafter with some singular be∣nefit and service. That the King upon good con∣siderations was hereupon content to receive him a∣gaine into his favour; of which the Arch-Bishop being assured greatly rejoyced, and well and true∣ly acquitting him of his promise in that behalfe made admitted him into the Citie; where the king comming to the Arch-Bishops Palace, he prsented himselfe unto him, and having king Hery by the hand, delivered him treacherously to king Edwrd custodie; who being seized of his pesn, wet to Pauls from Westminster, where hee gave God heartie thankes for his safe returne and good successe. Thereupon they were both sent to the Tower where king Henry was pittifully mur∣thered but the Arch-Bishop the fourth of Iune ollowing was set at Libertie. About a yeare af∣ter his Enlargement, hee chanced to bee hunting at ore with the king, and upon occasion of some spot th ad seene there, hee made relati∣on to e king of some extraordinary kinde of Gme, wherewith hee was wont to solace him∣se at  hous hee had built and furnished very sumptuously, called the Moore, in Hartfordshire:
The King seeming desirous to be partaker of this sport, appointed a day, when hee would come thither to hunt and make merry with him: Hereupon the Arch-Bishop taking his leave, got him home; and thinking to entertaine the King in the best manner it was possible, sent for much Plate that hee had hid du∣ring the Warres between his Brethren and the King, and borrowed also much of his Friends. The Deae which the King hunted being thus brought into the toyle, the day before his appointed time, hee sent for the Arch-Bishop, commanding him, all excuses set apart, to repaire presently to him, being at Windsore. As soone as he came hee was arrested of High-Trea∣son, all his Plate, money and other moveable goods (to the value of 20000. l.) were seized on for the King, and himselfe a long space after kept prisoner at Calis and Guisues; during which time the King tooke to him∣selfe the profits and temporalties of his Bishopricke. Amongst other things that were taken from him, was a Miter of inestimable value, by reason of many rich stones wherewith it was adorned: that, the King brake and made thereof a Crowne for himselfe: This calamitie hapned to him, Anno 1472. Foure yeares af∣ter, with much entreatie, he obtained his Libertie, but dyed of griefe shortly after. This proud Pontifician made so great a feast at his installment, that neither our age, nor any other before it ever heard or saw the like; the particulars whereof you may read in Godwin, too tedious here to recite. THOMAS ROTHERAM.Thomas Rotheram Arch-Bishop of Yorke being Lord Chancellour in Edward the fourth his Raigne, upon his death Godwin. p. 616. Speeds hist. l 9. c 19. p 929.946. resigned his place, and delivered up his Seale to the Queene without the Councels consent, from whom he received it not, she having no right to require it: For which cause hee was committed to the Tower by the Lord Protectour, Richard Duke of Yorke; who afterwards usurping the Crowne, released
the Arch-Bishop out of prison; who thereupon sided and was vey inward with this Usurper, and at last dy∣ed of the Plague, May 29. 1500. I read nothing of Thomas SavageTHOMAS SAVAGE. his next successour, but this, Godwin, p. 617. That he was not preferred to this See for any extraordinary great learning: that he spent his time in a manner altogether (as our Prelates doe now) either in Temporall affaires being a great Courtier, or else in hunting; wherewith hee was unreasonably delighted, keeping a great number of tall Fellowes a∣bout him to attend his person: But of his preaching, or maintaining Ministers to instruct the people, I read not one word. It is likely his tall fellowes occasioned many a quarrell, and sometimes would take a purse for a need. Christopher Bambridge his Successor,CHRISTO∣PHER BAM∣BRIDGE. being Embassa∣dour from King Henry the 8. to the Pope and Lewis the 12. of France, Godwin, p. 617.618, Holinshd p. 835. perswaded King Henry to take the Popes part, and proclaime Warre against Lewis, in∣gageing his Soveraigne in a needlesse Warre, only to pleasure his Lord and Master the Pope: who for this good service, made him a Cardinall; he was at last poysoned by Raynaldo de Modena an Italian Priest, his Steward, upon malice and displeasure conceived for a blow this Bishop gave him (when as a Bishop should be no striker, 1 Tim. 3.3.) as Goodwin relates out of Pau∣lus Iovius. Thomas Wolsie (or Wolfesie,THOMAS WOLSIE. as Mr. Tyndall oft times stiles him) an Arch-Traytor, and most insolent do∣mineering Prelate, succeeded him in that See, Antiqu Eccles. Brit. p 355 to 374. Godw. p. 620. to 623. Mr. Tyndalls Practise of Po∣pish Prelates, p. 369. to 377. Hall, Grafon, Holinshed, Stow How in the life of Henry the 8. Speed hist. p. 1004, 1005. to 1027. Fox Acts and Mo∣numents, p. 899. to 99. See Holinshed, p. 835. to 930. hol∣ding likewise the Bishopricke of Bath and Wells first, and after that of Ely, Winchester, Worcester and Hereford, together with the Abbey of Saint Albanes, and divers other Ecclesiasticall Livings besides his Temporall Offices, in Commenda with it. This proud imperious Prelate, when he was once Arch-Bishop, studied day and night how to be a Cardinall, and caused King
Henry the Eighth and the French King to write to Rome for him, and at their request he obtained his purpose: Hee grew so into exceeding pride, that hee thought himselfe equall with the King; and when he said Masse (which hee did oftner to shew his pride then de∣votion) hee made Dukes and Earles to serve him with Wine, with He was afraid of poysoning, it should seeme. assay taken, and to hold to him the Ba∣son and the Lavatory. His pride and excesse in dyet, apparell, furniture and attendance and his pompe in going to Westminster Hall were intollerable, and more then Royall or Papall: Hee was much offended with the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, because he stiled him Brother, in a Letter, as though he had done him great injury by that Title. Hee quite altered the state of the Kings house, putting out and in what Officers he plea∣sed. Hee oppressed and vexed the Citizens of London, causing divers of them to be executed; siding with strangers (both Merchants and Artificers) against them. Confederating with the French King, he procu∣red King Henry to permit him to redeeme Tornaye, on his owne Termes: Hee procured a meeting of the King of England and France to their infinite expence, onely that he might be seene in his owne vaine pompe, and shew of Dignitie, himselfe drawing up the instru∣ment and termes of their meeting in his owne name, which began thus: Thomas Arch-Bispop of Yorke, &c. Hee committed the Earle of Northumberland, and wrought the Duke of Buckingham out of the Kings fa∣vour, and at last cut off the Dukes head, for opposing his pride and unjust proceedings. Hee began his Let∣ters to forraigne Princes and the Pope, for the most part, in this manner go & Rex meus, I, and my King, putting himselfe before his Soveraigne, making him but his underling and Pupill, swaying him like a Schoole-boy at his pleasure. Hee set his Armes like∣wise above the Kings over Christ-Church Colledge-gate in Oxford, which he founded: Hee stamped his Car∣dinalls
Cap on the kings Coyne (as our Bishops doe now their Armes and Miters on their Proces See 1. . 6 c. 2, and the Brevi∣ae of the re∣lates Encroach∣ments. instead of the Kings Seale and Armes:) Hee set up a Leganne Court here in England by Commissi∣on from the Pope, to which hee drew the Conu∣sans of all Ecclesiasticall Causes; and when the king had summoned a Convocation at Pauls in Lon∣don by vertue of his Writ, hee came most insolent∣ly into the Convocation House, and by his power Legantine, dissolved the Convocation, summo∣ning them all to appeare before him at Saint Peter in Westminster the Monday following, there to cele∣brate the Synod under him; which power Legantine brought him and all the Clergi into a Premunire, to his overthrow and their cost, they being enforced to grant the king an hundred thousand pounds, to ac∣knowledge him on earth supreme Head of the Church of England, and to renounce the Popes Supremacie, to buy their peace. He dissolved 40. Monasteries of good worth, converting all their goods and moveables into his own Coffers, which were so stuffed with Treasure, that 12. Barrels full o Gold and Silver, were laid a∣side to serve the Pope in his Warres, emptying the Land also of twelve score thousand pounds which he forced from the king; all which he sent to relieve and ran∣some the Pope then in prison, to the great impoveri∣shing of his Majesties Coffers and the Realm: His re∣venues one way or other were equall to the kings; he had no lesse then 1200. Hore for his retinue, 80. wag∣gons for his carriage, and 60. Mules for sumpter hor∣ses when he went into France. Hee carried the Great Seale of England with him in his Embassie without the kings consent, so that no Writs nor Patents could be sealed, nor busines of the kingdom dispatched in the interim. He proclaimed warres against the Emperor without the kings consent, stirred up the French king to warre against him, ayding him with Monies
without the Kings privity, and contrary to his likeing, he demanded he 5. part of the true value of every mans goods, by way of loane, toward the maintenance of the Warrs in France, putting men to confesse upon their Oathes, the true estimate of their Estates, with∣out the Kings privitie, which caused many insurrecti∣ons and mutinies in the Kingdome, the people rising up and denying to pay it: at which the King being very angry, released the loane as an intollerable oppres∣sion, sore against this Prelates will yet the Cardinall, the sole cause and urger thereof, would needs lay the odium of it on the King, to alienate the hearts of his Subjects from him and take the sole praise of the re∣lease of it to himselfe, as if hee with much suite and danger had obtained it. Richard Sta∣nihurst his Continuation of the Chronicles of Ireland, in Holinshed, Vol. 2. p. 85. to 8. Hee falsely prosecuted and imprisoned the Earle of Kildare, accusing him before the Counsell to take away his life, where hee pressed him so deeply with disloyalty, that the presumption (as the Cardinall did force it) being vehement, the Trea∣son odious, the King suspicious, the enemies eager, the friends saint (which were sufficient grounds to o∣verthrow an innocent person) the Earle was reprived to the Tower, whither on a night suddenly came a Mandate to the Lieutenant from the Cardinall, to exe∣cute Kildare on the morrow, before any judgement given, and without the kings privitie: who being ac∣quainted by the Lieutenant therewith at midnight, the king controlling the sawcinesse of the Priest, de∣livered the Lieutenant his Signet in token of counter∣mand; which when the Cardinall had seene, he began to breath out unseasonable Language, which the Lieu∣tenant was loth to heare, and so left him pattering and chanting the Devils Pater noster. Hee oppressed and and disquietted the whole Realme and Christian world all his time, endeavoured to set up the Popes power, all hee might, with prejudice to the kings, aspiring to the Papacie himselfe, and sending much
mony to Rome to bribe the Cardinals to elect him, though hee failed in that project: Hee was so proud, that hee had divers Lords, Earles and Knights atten∣ding on him and was served on the knee when hee went Embassadour into Germany: Hee was exceeding treacherous, false, and perfidious to the King, who trusted him with the government of the Realme, see∣king onely his owne ends and advancements: Hee caused him to breake off his firme League with the Emperour, and to make wrre upon him and side with France; stirring up likewise the French King against the Emperour, onely to wrecke his private spleene upon him, denouncing warres against him by an Herauld without the Kings knowledge; Hee set England, France, Germany, Flanders and Italy together by the eares; Hee bare such a hand upon the controver∣sies which ran betweene the King, the Emperour, the King of France, and other Princes, as all the world might acknowledge the resolution and expectation of all affaires to depend on him and his authoritie: Hee exceedingly abused and deluded the King about the matter of his Divorce, which himselfe first put him upon to spite the Emperour, delaying him from time to time, to his no small cost and vexation, and writing likewise secret Letters to Pope Clement to hinder the Divorce all hee might, which Letters an English Gen∣tleman then at Rome got into his hands, by meanes of one of the Popes Concubines. Holinshed, p. 908. The Queene most grievously accused Cardinall Wolsie in the presence of the whole Court of untruth, deceit, wickednesse, and malice, which had sowne dissention betwixt her and her husband the King; and therefore openly protested, that shee did utterly abhorre, refuse, and forsake such a Judge, as was not onely a most malicious enemie to her, but also a manifest adversary to all Right and Ju∣stice. Hee did many things when he was Embassa∣dour without the Kings privitie, and held correspon∣dencie
with his enemies. Practise of Po∣pish Prelates, p. 368. to 373. Mr. Tyndall (who notably descries and layes open his treacheries) writes That he calculated the Kings Nativitie (which is a common Practise of Prelates in all Lands) whereby hee saw whereunto the Kings Grace should be enclined all his Life, and what should bee like to chance him at all times; and (as he then heard t spoken of divers) hee made by craft of Necromancie graven imagery to beare upon him, wherewith hee bewitched the Kings minde, and the King to doat upon him more then e∣ver he did on any Lady or Gentlewoman (a tricke of the Devils suggestion usuall among Court Prelates and Priests) so that now the Kings Grace followed him as he followed the King. And then what he said, that was wisdome, what he praised, that was honoura∣ble onely. Moreover, in the meane time hee Note this en∣suing Policie which our Pre∣lates now pra∣ctise. spied out the natures and dispositions of the Kings play-fel∣lowes, and of all that were great, and whom hee spied meet for his purpose, him hee flattered, and him hee made faithfull with great promises, and to him hee sware, and of him hee tooke an oath againe, that the one should helpe the other, for without a secret Oath hee admitted no man unto any part of his privities. And ever as he grew in promotions and dignitie, so gathered he unto him of the most subtile witted, and of them that were drunke in the deire of honour, most like unto himselfe. And after they were sworne hee promoted them and with great promises made them in falsehood faithfull, and of them ever presented unto the kings Grace and put them into his service; say∣ing this is a man meet for your Grace. And by these spies, if any thing were spoken or done in Court a∣gainst the Cardinall, of that hee had word within an houre or two. And then came the Cardinall to Court with all his Magicke to pleade to the con∣rary. If any in the Court had spoken against the
Cardinall, and the same not great in the kings fa∣vour, the Cardinall bade him walke a Villaine, and thrust him out of the Court head-long: If hee were in conceit with the kings Grace, then hee flattered, and perswaded, and corrupted some with gifts, and sent some Embassadours, and some hee made Captaine at Calice, Hammes, Gynes, Iarnsie and Gernsie, or sent them to Ireland, or into the North, and so occupied them till the king had forgot them, or other were in their roomes, or hee sped what hee intended. And in like manner plaid he with the Ladies and Gentlewoman, whosoever of them was great, with her was hee familiar, and to her gave hee gifts. Yea, and where Saint Thomas of Canterbury was wont to come after, Thomas Cardinall went oft be∣fore preventing his Prince, and perverted the order of that holy man. If any were subtile witted and meet for his purpose, her made he sworn (O trechery) to be∣tray the Queene likewise, and to tell what shee said or did. I knew one that departed the Court for no other cause, then that shee would no lon∣ger betray her Mistresse. And after the same example hee furnished the Court Note this policie whch Cantrbury of late imitated. with Chap∣laines of his owne sworne Disciples and Children of his owne bringing up, to bee alwayes present, and to dispute of vanities, and to water whatsoever the Cardinall had planted. If among those Cormorants any yet began to bee much in favour with the King, and to bee somewhat busie in the Court, and to draw any other way then as my Lord Car∣dinall had appointed, that the Plough should goe, anone hee was sent to Italy or to Spaine, or some quarrell was picked against him, and so was thrust out of the Court as Stokesley was. Hee promo∣ted the Bishop of Lincolne that now is, his most faithful Friend and Old Companion, and made him Confessour: to whom of what∣soever
the Kings Grace shrove himselfe, thinke ye not that hee spake so loud that the Cardinall heard it? and not unright, for as Gods Creatures ought to obey God and serve his honour, so ought the Popes creatures to obey the Pope and serve his Majestie. Fi∣nally, Thomas Wolsie became what hee would, even partner of Heaven, so that no man could enter into promotion but through him. Being thus advanced hee begins to act his part like a sworne Vassall to the Pope, and a Traytor to his Prince, which Practise of Po∣pish Prelates, p. 369. to 373. Mr. Tyndall, who lived at that time, thus relates. About the begin∣ning of the Kings Grace that now in France was mighty, so that I suppose it was not mightier this five hundred yeares. King Lewis of France had won Naples and had taken Bonony from Saint Peters See where∣fore Pope Iuly was wroth, and cast how to bring the French men down; yet soberly, lest while he brought him lower, hee should give an occasion to lift up the Emperour higher. Our first Voyage into Spaine was to bring the French men lower; for our meynye were set in the Fore-front and borders of Spaine toward Gas∣coine; partly to keepe those parties, and partly to feare the Gascoynes, and to keepe them at home, while in the meane time the Spaniards wan Naverne. When Na∣verns was wan, our men came to lose as many as dyed not there, and brought all their mony with them home againe, save that they spent there. Howbeit, for all the losse of Naverne, the French men were yet able enough to match Spaine, the Venetians, and the Pope, with all the Souchenars that he could make; so that there was yet no remedie but wee must set on the French men also, if they should be brought out of Italy. Then Pope Iuly wrote unto his deare Sonne Thomas Wolsie, that hee would be as good, as loving, and as helping to Holy Church, as ever any Thomas was, seeing he was as able; then the new Thomas as glorious as the old, tooke the matter in hand, and perswaded the Kings Grace.
And then the Kings Grace tooke a Dispensation for his Oath made upon the appointment of peace between him and the French King, and promised to helpe the Holy Seate, wherein Pope Peter never ate. But the Emperour Maximilian might in no wie stand still, let the French men should money him, and get aide of him, since the Almaines refuse not mony whensoever it be proffered; then quoth Thomas Wolsie, O ho, and like your Grace, what an honour should it be unto your Grace, if the Emperour were your Souldier; so great honour never chanced any King christened; it should be spoken of while the World stood; the glory and honour shall hide and darken the cost that it shall never be seene, though it should cost your Realme. Dixit, & factum est. It was even so. And then a Parli∣ament, and then pay, and then upon the French Dogs, with cleane remission of all his sinnes, that slew one of them; or if hee be slaine (for the pardons have no strength to save in this life, but in the life to come on∣ly) then to Heaven straight, without feeling of the paines of Purgatory. Then came our King with all his might by Sea and by Land, and the Emperour with a strong, Armie, and the Spaniards, and the Pope, and the Venetians all at once against King Lewis of France. As soon as the Pope had that he desired in Italy, then peace immediately; and French men were chri∣sten men and pitty, yea and great sinne also were it to shed their bloud, and the French king was the most Christian king again. And thus was peace con∣cluded, our Englishmen, or rather Sheep, came home against Winter, and left their Fleeces behinde them: wherefore no mall number of them while they sought them better rayment at home, were hanged for their labour. When this peace was made, our holy Cardi∣nals and Bishops (as their old guise is to calke and cast 40. yea an hundred year before, what is like to chance unto their kingdome) considered how the Emperour
that now is, was most like to be chosen Emperour after his Grandfather Maximilian; for Maximilian had already obtained of divers of the Electours that it should so bee. They considered also how mighty hee should bee: First, King of Spaine, with all that pertai∣neth thereto, which was wont to be 6. or 7. King∣domes then Duke of Burgaine, Earle of Flanders, of Holland, Zeland, and Braband, with all that pertaine thereto, then Emperour, and his Brother Duke of Austria, and his sister Queene of Hungarie; wherefore thought our Prelates, if wee take not heed betimes, our Kingdome is like to be troubled, and wee to be brought under the feet; for this man shall be so mighty, that he shall with power take out of the French Kings hands, out of the hands of the Venetians, and from the Pope also, whatsoever pertaineth unto the Empire, and whatsoever belongeth unto his other kingdomes and Dominions thereto, and then will hee come to Rome, and be crowned there; and so shall hee over∣looke our Holy Father, and see what he doth, and then shall the old Heretickes rise up againe and say, that the Pope is Antichrist, and stirre up againe and bring to light that we have hid and brought asleepe with much cost, paine, and bloud-shedding more than this hun∣dred yeares long. Considered also that his Aunt is Queene of England, and his wife the King of Eng∣lands Siter; considered the old amitie betweene the House of Burgaine, and the old Kings of England, so that they could never doe ought in France without their helpe; and last of all, considered the course of Mar∣chandize that England hath in those parts, and also the naturall hate that Englishmen beare to French∣men: wherefore if we will use our old practise, and set the French King against him; then he shall lightly obtain the favour of the King of England, by the meanes of his Ant and his wife, and aid-with men and mony: wherefore wee must take heed betimes and breake this
amitie: which thing we may by this our old cra ea∣sily bring to passe: Let us take a Dispensation, and breake this Marriage, and turne the Kings Sister unto the French King: If the French King get a Male of her, then wee shall lightly make our King protectour of France; and so shall England and France be coupled together: and as for the Queene of England, wee shall trim her well enough, and occupie the king with strange love, and keepe her that shee shall beare no rule. And as the Gods had spoken so it came to passe. Our faire young Daughter was sent to the old pockie king of France that yeare before our mortall enemie, and a Miscreant worse then a Turke, and disobedient unto our Holy Father, and no more obedient then hee was compelled to bee against his will. In short space thereafter Thomas Wolsie now Cardinall and Legate a latere, and greatly desirous to be Pope also, thought it exceeding expedient for his many secret purposes to bring our king, and the king of France that now is, to∣gether; both to make a perpetuall peace and amitie betweene them, and that while the two kings and their Lords dalied together, the great Cardinalls and Bishops of both parties might betray them both, and the Emperour and all Christian kings thereto. Then he made a journey of Gentlemen arrayed altogether in silke, so much as their very shooes, and lining of their Bootes, more like their Mothers then men of warre; yea, I am sure that many of their Mothers would have beene ashamed of so nice and wanton array. How∣beit they went not to make warres, but peace for ever and a day longer. But to speake of the pompous appa∣rells of my Lord himselfe, and of his Chaplaines, it passeth the Twelve Apostles. I dare sweare that if Peter and Paul had seene them suddenly and at a blush, they would have been harder in beliefe that they or any such should bee their successours, then Thomas Didimus was to beleeve that Christ was risen againe
from death. When all was concluded betweene the king of France and ours, that Thomas Wolsie had devised, and when the Prelates of both parties had cast their penny-worths against all chances, and devised reme∣dies for all mischiefes; then the right Reverend Fa∣ther in God Thomas Cardinall and Legate, would goe see the young Emperour newly chosen to the roome, and have a certaine secret communication with some of his Prelates also: And gat him to Bridges in Flan∣ders, where hee was received with great solemnitie as might belong to so great a pillar of Christs Church, and was saluted at the entring into the Towne of a merry Fellow, which said, Salve Rex Regis tuì, atque Regni sui; Hayle both King of thy King, and of his Realme.Nota. And though there were never so great strife betweene the Emperour and the French king, yet my Lord Car∣dinall jugled him favour of them both, and finally brought the Emperour to Cales to the kings Grace, where was great triumph and great love and amitie shewed on both parties; insomuch, that a certaine man marvelling at it, asked the old Bishop of Durham, How it might be that we were so great with the Em∣peror so shortly, upon so strong and everlasting a peace made betweene us and the French men, the Emperour and the king of France being so mortall enemies? My Lord answered, That it might be well enough if hee wist all; but there was a certaine secret (said hee) whereof all men knew not: yea verily, they have had Note this. secrets this 800. yeares, which though all the Lay∣men have felt them, yet few have spied them, save a few Judases, which for lucre have beene confederate with them to betray their owne kings and all other. Then were wee indifferent, and stood still, and the Emperour and the French king wrastled together; and Ferdinandus the Emperours Brother wan Millaine of the Frenchmen; and the Emperour Turnay our great Conquest, which yet after so great cost in buil∣
a Castle we delivered up againe unto the French∣men, in earnest and hope o a marriage betweene the Dolphine and our Princesse. After that e Emperour would into Spaine, and came through England, where hee was received with great honour, and with all that pertaineth to love and amitie. The Kings Grace lent him Monie, and promised him more; and the Em∣perour should tarry a certaine time and marry our Princesse; not that the Cardnall intended; that, thou maist be sure; for it was not profitable for their Kingdome; but his minde was to dally with the Em∣perour, and to keepe him without a wife (insomuch as hee was young and lustie) hee might have beene nozeled and entangled with Whores, (which is their nurturing of Kings) and made so effeminate and beastly, that hee should never have beene able to lift up his heart to any goodnesse or vertue; that Cardi∣nalls and Bishops might have administred his Domi∣nions in the meane time, unto our Holy Fathers profit. The King of France hearing the favour that was shew∣ed unto the Emperour sent immediately a Defiance unto our King, not without our Cardinals and Bi∣shops counsell thou mayst well witt. For French∣men are not so foolish to have done it so unadvisedly and so rashly, seeing they had too many in their tops already. Then our King spake many great words, that he would drive the French King out of his Realm, or else the French King should drive him out of his: But had he added as the Legate Pandulph taught King Ion, with the Popes License, his words had sounded much better: For there can no vow stand in effect, except the Holy Father confirmed it. Wee sent out our Souldiers two Summers against the French men,Note this unto whose chiefe Captaines the Cardinall had ap∣pointed how farre they should goe, and what they should doe; and therefore the French king was no∣thing araid, but brought all his power against the
Emperour in other places; and so hee was ever be∣trayed: And thus the Cardinall was the Emperors Friend openly and the French Kings secretly. For at the meeting with the French King beside Caes hee ut∣terly betrayed the Emperour, yet for no love that he had to France, but to help the Pope, and to have beene Pope happily, and to save their Kingdome; which treason, though all the World smelled it, y brake not out openly to the eye, till the ge of . And the Cardinall lent the Emperour much money open∣ly, and gave the French King more secretly. Hee plaid with both hands to serve their secret that all men know not as the Bish. of Durham said. But whatsoever the Frenchmen did they had ever the worse notwith∣standing the secret working of our holy Prelates on their side. Finally, unto the siege of Pavia, came the French king personally with 60. thousand men of warre, of which 12. thousand were horse-men, and with monie enough. And the Emperours host was under 20. thousand, of which were but 3. thousand Horse-men, with no money at all: For hee trusted unto the Pope for aide of men, and unto our Cardinall for Money. But the Pope kept backe his men till the French-men had given them a field; and our Cardi∣nall kept backe his money for the same purpose. And thus was the silly Emperour betrayed, as all his prede∣cessours have beene this 8. hundred yeares. Howbeit there bee that say, that the Emperours Souldiers so threatned Stace the kings Graces Embassadour, that he was faine to make chevisance with Merchants for mo∣ney in the kings name, to pay the Souldiers withall; Wherefore the Cardinall tooke from him all his pro∣motions, and played the Tormentor with him, when he came home, because hee presumed to doe one jot more then was in his Commission. But howsoever it was, the Emperours men in tarrying for helpe had spent all their Victualls: Whereupon Burbon the
chiefe Captaine of the Emperour, said unto his un∣der Captaines; Yee see, helpe commeth not, and that our victuals are spent: wherefore there is no remedy but to fight, though wee bee une∣qually matched. If wee winne, wee shall finde meate enough; if wee lose, wee shall lose no more then wee must lose with hunger, though we fight not. And so they concluded to set upon the French-men by night. The King of France and his Lords supposing that the Moon would sooner have fallen out of the skie, then that the Emperours host durst have fought with them, were somewhat neg∣ligent, and went the same night a mumming that Burbon set upon them. The Emperours Hoste therefore, with their sodaine coming upon them, a∣mazed the Frenchmen, and drave them upon heapes together, one on another, so that they never could come in array againe, and tooke the King,Note this and di∣vers of his Lords, and slew many, and wanne the field. And there came out all the Cardinals privy treason. For in the French-Kings Tent (say men) were Letters found, and beside that in the French-kings Treasure, and in all the Hoast among the Souldiers were English Shippes found innumera∣ble, which had come sayling a thousand miles by Land. But what wonder? Shippes be made to sayle over the Sea, and wings to flye into farre Countries, and to mount to the toppe of High hills. When the French King was taken, wee sang, Te Deum. But for all that singing, wee made peace with French-men. And the Pope, the Venetians, France and England were knit to∣gether, least the Emperours Army should doe any hurt in France: whereby you may conjecture of what minde the Pope and the Cardinall were to∣ward the Emperour, and with what heart our spiritualty with their invisible secrets, sang Te Deum.
And from that time hitherto, the Emperour and our Cardinall have beene twaine, After that, when the King of France was delivered home againe, and his Sonnes left in pledge, many wayes were sought to bring home the sonnes also; but in vaine except the French King would make good that which hee had promised the Emperour. For the bringing home of these children no man more busied his wits then the Cardinall: Hee would in any wise the Emperour should have sent them home, and it had beene but for our Kings pleasure for the great kindnesse that he shew∣ed him in times past. Hee would have married the Kings Daughter our Princesse unto the Dolphine a∣gaine, or as the voyce went among many, unto the second Brother, and hee should have beene Prince in England, and King in time to come; so that he sought alwayes to plucke us from the Emperour, and joyne us unto France, to make France strong enough to match the Emperour, and to keepe him downe that the Pope might raigne a God alone and doe what pleaseth him, without controlling of any over-seer. And for the same purpose hee left nothing unprovided to bring the Mart from Anwerpe to Cales. But at that time, the Pope taking part with the French King had warre with the Emperour: And at the last the Pope was taken, which when the Cardinall heard, hee wrote unto the Empe∣rour, that he should make him Pope: And when hee had gotten an answer that pleased him not, but accor∣ding unto his deservings toward the Emperour, then hee waxed furious mad, and sough all meanes to dis∣please the Emperour, and imagined the divorcement betweene the King and the Queene, and wrote sharply unto the Emperour with manacing Letters, that if hee would not make him Pope, hee would make such ruf∣fling betweene Christian Princes as was not this hun∣dred yeares, to make the Emperour repent; yea, though it should cost the whole Realme of England,
The Lord Jesus be our shield, what a fierce wrath of God is this upon us, that a mishapen Monster should spring out of a Dunghill into such an height, that the dread of God and man laid apart, he should be so ma∣lepert not onely to defie utterly the Majestie of so mightie an Emperour, whose Authoritie both Christ and all his Apostles obeyed and taught all other to obey, threatning damnation to them that would not: But should also set so little by the whole Realme of England which hath bestowed so great cost and shed so much bloud to exalt and mainetaine such proud, chur∣lish, and unthankfull Hypocrites that hee should not care to destroy it utterly, for satisfying of his villanous lusts. Godly Master Tyndall was so farre affected with the treacherous practises of this Cardinall, that hee laid them open in two severall Discourses; the one entitu∣led, The Ohedience of a Christian man; the other, The Pra∣ctise of Popish Prelates. In the last whereof after the re∣citall of these his perfidious actions, he breakes out in∣to this Patheticke Supplication: Pag. 375. Note this. I beseech the Kings most Noble Grace therefore, to consider all the wayes by which the Cardinall and our holy Bishops have led him, since hee was first King, and to see whereunto all the pride, pompe, and vaine boast of the Cardinal is come, and how God hath resisted him and our Prelates in all their wiles; we who have nothing to doe at all have medled yet in all matters, and have spent for our Prelats causes more then al Christendom, even unto the utter beggering of our selves, and have gotten nothing but rebuke, and shame, and hate among all Nations, and a mocke and a scorne thereto, of them whom wee have most holpen. For the French men (as the saying is) of late dayes made a play or a dis∣guising at Paris, in which the Emperour danced with the Pope and the French king, and wearied them, the king of England sitting on a high bench and looking on. And when it was asked, why hee danced not, it
was answered, that he ate there, but to pay the Min∣strels their wages only. As who shoald say, we payd for all mens dancing, we monyed the Emperour only, and gave the Frenchmen double, and treble secretly, and to the Pope also. Yea and though Fardinandu had money sent him openly to blind the world withall, yet the saying is throughout all Duchland, that we sent money to the King of Pole, and to the Turke also, and that by helpe of our money Fardinandus was driven out of Hungary: which thing, though it were not true, yet it will breed us a scab at the last, and get us with our medling more hate than we shall be able to beare, if a chance come, unlsse that wee waxe wiser betime. And I beseech his Grace also to have mercy of his owne soule, and not to suffer Christ and his holy Te∣stament to be persecuted under his name any longer, that the sword of the wrath of God may be put up a∣gaine, which for that cause no doubt is most chiefely drawne. And I beseech his Grace to have compassion on his poore subjects, which have ever bene unto his Grace, both obedient, loving and kinde, that the Realm utterly perish not with the wicked Counsell of our pestilent Prelats. So Tyndall. After this the Cardi∣nall was attainted in aHalls Chron. 21. H. 8. f. 184, 185, 189, 190. praemunire, wherupon the King seised on all his goods, tooke away the great Seale of England from him, thrust him from the Court, yet left him the Arch-Bishopricke of Yorke and the Bisho∣pricke of Winchester. The Parliament exhibited sun∣dry Articles of High-Treason against him. As, that hee had exercised a Legantine power here in England, derived from the Pope without the Kings License, contrary to the Lawes of the Realme, that in all his Letters to the Pope and other orragne Princes he put himselfe before the King in these words, I, and my King: that he carried the Great Seale of England over into the Low-countries with him, when hee went Embassa∣dour to the Emperour: That hee proclaimed open
warre by an Herauld against the Emperour without the Kings privitie; that he had sent Gregory of Cassido a Knight, into Italy, to make a new League betwene the King and the Duke of Farrar without the kings know∣ledge; That being almost rotten with the French Pox he preumed to breathe with his stinking and rotten mouth in the kings face; That he set his Cardinalls Hat on the kings Coyne; and that he exported an in∣finite Masse of Money out of the kingdome into Italy, that he might most impudently compasse the Papacie, with other particulars fore-cited.. All which, toge∣ther with the Cardinalls attainder in the Praemunire (Mr. Practise of Po∣pish Prelates, p. 373. Tyndall) saith, were done only in policie by the Cardinall, to bleare the eyes of the World withall, be∣cause nought worthy a Traytor was done unto him, it being seldome heard or read, that so great a Traytor was so easily put to death or punished; because Sir Thomas Moore his chiefest Secretary, one nothing infe∣riour to his Master in lying, faining, and bearing two faces in one hood, and the chiefest stale wherewith the Cardinall caught the kings Grace, whom he called to the confirmation of all that hee intended to perswade, was made Chancellour in his place; because his Bi∣shopricke of Durham was bestowed on one of his old Chaplaines and chiefe Secretaries his fast friends; and because as soone as the Parliament brake up, the Car∣dinall had his Charter of pardon and got him home, and all Bishops got them every Fox to his hole, leaving their Attournies yet behinde them, thinking to come again themselves as soon as the constellation was some what over-run, whereof they were afraid. But however it were either in policie only or earnest, it turned to re∣ality at last: For the Cardinall thus put from the Court, and his Chancellorship, nothing abating his pride or spirit to beard the king & flater the people, appointed to be installed at York in great pomp, inviting all the lords and Gentlemen in the countrey, to accompany him from Cawood to Yorke; complaining likewise by degrees
to many of the great injuries the king had done him to stirre up the people to sedition; inveighing likewise very bitterly in his Letters to the Pope and other For∣raigners against the king; which railing Letters and reproaches of his, comming to the kings Embassadors eares they acquainted the king therewith: Holinshed, p. 915, 916. The king acquaintd with these his Seditious and disloyall pra∣ctises, and understanding of his intended pompous in∣stallment at Yorke, commanded the Earle of Northum∣berland to arrest him at Cawood of High-Treason, which hee did about the beginning of November, 1536. The Cardinall wondering at this sudden arrest, stood first upon his termes of contest with the Earle, telling him that hee was a Cardinall, a Member of the Court of Rome, and the Popes Legate, not subject to any mans or Princes arrest, on whom to lay violent hands was a great wickednesse; but at last, fearing the successe and the Earles power, submitted himselfe against his will. The Earle hereupon removed his followers sei∣zed on all his plate and goods, brought him to Shef∣field Castle, where he delivered him to the High She∣riffe of Shropshire to be conveyed to London. Thither the Captaine of the Guard, and Lieutenant of the Tower with certaine Yeomen of the Guard, were sent to fetch him to the Tower, at which the Cardinall was sore astonied, and fearing the worst grew sicke upon it, whereupon he willingly tooke so much quan∣titie of a strong purgation that his nature was not able to beare it, and thereof dyed at Leicester Abbey the 27. day of November, his body lying dead was blacke as pitch, and so heavie that sixe could scarce beare it; Furthermore, it did so stinke above the ground, that they were constrained to hasten the buriall of it in the night season, before it was day. At the which buriall, such a tempest, with such a stinke there arose, that all the Torches went out, and so he was throwne into the Tombe, and there left. By the ambitious pride and
excessive worldly wealth of this one Cardinall (writes Master Fox) all men may easily understand and judge what the state and condition of all the rest of the same Order (whom we call Spirituall men) was in those dayes, as well in all other places of Christendome as specially here in England; whereas the Princely pos∣sessions and great pride of the Clergie, did not onely farre surpasse and exceed the common measure and order of Subjects, but also surmounted over kings and Princes, and all other Estates, as may well ap∣peare by hs doings and order of his Story above de∣scribed, In which I have beene the more prolix, be∣cause it notably paints out unto us the ambitious, tre∣cherous, lye practises and designes of our Prelates, with the ordinary wayes whereby they creepe into Princes favours; as likewise their insolent behaviour and strange perfidiousnesse when they are growne great; and is a lively patterne of the Bishops practises in our age, who tread in these his foot-steps, and fol∣low them to an haires breadth: I would therefore advise them to remember his last words (as well as i∣mitate his Actions) with which I shall close up his Story, Holinshed, p. 917.Godwin, p. 621. If I had served God as diligently as I have done the King, he would not have given me over in my gray haires. But this is the just reward that I must receive for the paines and study that I have had, to doe him service, not regarding my service to God, so much as the satisfying of his pleasure. Speed hist. l. 9. c. 21. p. 1034. to 1043. Graf∣ton, An 27. H. 8. p. 1233. to 1237. Edward Lee,EDWARD LEE. who succeeded him in his Arch Bisho∣pricke, in the great Rebellion of the North, An. 1535. and 1536. joyned with the Rebels against his Prince; some say, it was against his wil, but certain it is, that the Abbots, priests, and Clergi-men were the chief cause & ring-leaders in this Rebellion, the principall pretence wherof, was the reformation of religion, the abolishing of the heresies of Luther, Zuinglius, Wicklif, and other Pro∣testant Writers the removing of Cranmer & other here∣ticall Bishops and Privie Counsellors, the restoring of
and Prioris and all points of Popery formerly main∣tained with the confirmation of the priviledges of this in speciall, that Priests might not suffer for any treason or felony, unlesse they were first degraded. Now the Abbots, Priests, Monkes and Clergie, be∣ing the stirrers up and chiefe Captaines of this Re∣bellion upon these points of Religion and priviledge of the Church, which mainely concerned the Clergie, it is likely the Arch-Bishop was as forward as any of the rest in this Insurrection, and that he accompanied and encouraged the Rebels not out of  or con∣straint, as hee afterwards pretended, but willingly, though he King pardoned him, as he did all the other wilfull Rebels. Some of them making a new insurre∣ction, were aferwards taken and executed as Tray∣tors to the Crowne; among which number, Palaw Abbot of Whaley in Lincolnshire, Iohn Castlegate and Wil∣liam Haydocke Monkes of the same house, Robert Hobs Abbot of Woborne in Bedfordshire, Adam Sudbury Abbot of Germany with Astbeed a Monke of that House, the Abbot of Sawly in Lanashre, and the Prior of the same, William Wld Prior of Birlingto, the Parson of Pading∣ton, 5. priests of Lincolnshire, Doctor Markerell, who stiled himselfe Captaine Cobler, and Iohn Allen Priests (the chiefe fire-brands in this Rebellion) were han∣ged for Rebellion, as they well deserved, though they named their enterprise an holy blessed Pilgrimage, and had certaine Banners in the field, wherein was planted Christ hanging on the Crosse on the one side, and a Chalice with a painted Cake in it, on the other side. ROBERT HOLGATE.For other Arch-Bishops since, I finde not much concerning them; onely I reade, that Godwin, p. 624. Robert Hol∣gate his next Successour, was committed prisoner to the Tower in the first yeare of Queene Mary, where he lay an yeare and halfe; and that Edwin Sands another of his Successours, was long imprioned by Queene
Mary: Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 1891. to 1894. Godwin. p. 625. he being Vice-chancellour of Cambridge when the Lady Iane was proclaimed Queene preached a Ser∣mon upon that ocsion, which was like to cost him his life. Samuel HarsnetHARSNT the last Archbish. but one being made a Privie Councellour by our present Soverigne King Charles, was such a furious Hildebrand, that like Davus in the Comedie, he perturbed all things where ever he came; insomuch, that the Lords and Court growing wearie of him and his domineering outrage, caused him to be sent from Court to his Arch-Bishopricke, and there to keepe residence till he should be sent for: Where having no other imployment, hee falls by the eares with Doctor Howson Bishop of Durham, whom he excommunicated, for refusing to admit him to visit in his Diocesse as his Metropolitane, he being a Count Palatine in his Bishopricke; and withall falling to persecute the godly Ministers of his Diocesse, he was smitten mortally with a dangerous disease, whereof he died the very night before he resolved to suspend and silence some good men summoned to appeare before him the next morning. This furious Arch-Prelate was such an enemie to the Lawes and Liberties of the sub∣ject, that in the case of Mr. Walter Long, censured in Star-chamber about 4. Caroli, for comming up to the Parliament House, whereof he was a member, whils he was Sheriffe of Wiltshire, contrary to his Oath, (as was pretended) when as his Counsell produced divers ancient Records and Presidents touching the Privi∣ledges of Parliaments and the members of it, to exempt him from the Jurisdiction and sentence of that Court; this Arch-Bishop checked his counsell for troubling them with Moth-Eaten Records, saying, That they sate there not to be guided by Presidents, but to make Presidents; and so proceeded to censure in the cause. In a word, I may conclud of him as Saint Epist. 237. f. 233. Bernard long before, did of one of his predecessors: Nonne Eboracensis ipse est cui
te praesnte, fratres tui restiterunt in faciem, eo quod reprehen∣sibilis erat? sed speravit in multitudine divitiarum suarum, & praevalut in vanitate sua: Certm est tamen quod non intra∣vit per ostium in ouile ovium, sed ascendit aliunde. Si Paston fuiset, diligendus erat; si mercenarius, tolerandus; Nunc autem cavendus et repellendus utpote fur & latro. RICHARD NEALE.Richard Neale the last Arch-bishop of York, before his comming to that See, about the 13 yeare of King Iames not long after hee was created a Bishop, was highly questioned in Parliment for seditious speeches against the Commons House, for which he had suffered con∣digne punishment, had he not beene an active instru∣ment to dissolve that Parliament, to avoid the censure of it. Since that he had a hand in dissolving other Par∣liaments, to the prejudice of the King and Kingdome. In the Remonstrance of the Commons House of Parlia∣ment, presented to King Charles our Soveraigne in the 3. yeare of his Raigne; hee was by name complained against as one of the chiefe heads of the popish and Ar∣minian Factions, which disquietted both our Church and State; and as a persecuter of good Ministers, and suppressour of Lectures. How many godly Ministers he prosecuted, silenced, suspended, deprived, both in the High Commission, and all the Diocesse under his Jurisdiction, whiles hee continued in favour at the Court, is so well knowne to all, that I need not relate it: And his disfavour at Court (as most conjecture) was the cause of his unexpected Clemencie to the Mi∣nisters of the province of York some few years before his death. He was the first advancer of William Laud Arch-bishop of Canterbury, of Doctor Cousins, with sundry other Incendiaries and Innovators both in Church and State, who were entertained by him for his Chaplaines and then promoted by his meanes to the ruine almost of our Religion and Kingdome. He was a great enemy to Parliaments. Prohibitions, the Li∣berties of the Subject, and Lawes of the Land: Hee
seldome or never preached himselfe, and therefore could not endure frequent preaching in others: Hee was a great furtherer of the Booke for sports on the Lords day, and an enemy to puritie, Puritans, and the sincere practise of pietie. Hee had a hand in ratifying the late Canons and Oath, in affront of his Majesties Prerogative, the Parliament, Lawes, and Liberties of the Subject; And no doubt he had a finger in the late Scottish Warres and Combustions; whereupon hee burnt all his Letters concerning Church and State-affaires, as soone as he heard the Scots had entred into England, for feare they should have beene surprized and his fellow-Prelates machinations against the Scots by their surprisall discovered. He had a chiefe hand and influence in the unjust and bloudy sentences against Dr. Layton and Mr. Pryn in the Star-chamber; against Mr. Smart Dr. Bastwicke, Mr. Huntly, and sundry others in the High Comission; in the vexatious and most ex∣orbitant proceedings against Calvin Bruen, Peter Lee, Mr. Inch, and sundry others of Chester,See a new dis∣covery of the Prelates Ty∣ranny, p. 92. to 108. for visiting M. Pryn in his passage through that Citie towards Carnarvan Castle and by 2. Orders under the high Commission Seale of Yorke, signed with his owne and other Commissioners hands, bearing date the 10. Novem. and 4. Decem. 1637. commanded 5. Pictures of the Portraiture of M. Pryn to be defaced, and then burnt at the high Crosse in Che∣ster, before the Maior, Alderman, and Citizens out of an hatred to Mr. Prynnes person (which no doubt hee would have burned to, as well as his picture, had it bin in his power.) This Arch-Prelate by the aide of his quondam Chaplain Canterbury, incroached much on the liberties of the Lord Maior and Citizens of Yorke, with whom he had many contests; and procured a Mandate to the Lord Maior, not to carry his sword before him within the Close and Cathedrall at Yorke, though his Predecessours had ever used to do it from K. Richard the 2. his daies, who gave them this priviledge by a Charter, and yet the Deane and Prebends of Yorke in the meane
have intruded themselves (contrary to divers Char∣ters) into the civill Government of the Citie of Yorke, which no wayes appertaine unto them. The Maior of Yorke is the Kings Lieutenant there, and his Sword of Justice the Kings, not his owne. Therefore the Arch-Bishops putting downe of his Sword within the Precincts of the Close, is a direct incroachment upon his Majesties Prerogative Royall, and a denying of his Supremacie and Jurisdiction over him, or his Cathedrall at Yorke. This Prelate being scarce Parlia∣ment proofe, to prevent all questioning; at the ap∣proach of this present Parliamentary Assembly fell sicke and dyed, being now gone to answer all his E∣piscopall extravagancies before a greater Tribunall. For my part, I meddle not with him as he was a man but onely as he was a Prelate; not to defame his person, or posteritie, but to discover the evill effects of his Prelacie: His See continueth yet void since his death And for ever may it so remaine, unlesse his Succes∣sours prove more loyall to their Soveraignes, more profitable to our Church and State, then hee and his fore-mentioned Predecessours have beene.
CHAP. III. Comprising the severall Trea∣sons, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Contu∣macies, Disloyalties, Warres, Dissentions, and State-Schismes of the Bishops of London, Winchester, Durham, Salisbury, and Lincolne. HAving thus presented you with the History of the Treasons, Conspira∣cies, &c. of the Arch-Bishops of Canterbury and Yorke, I shall now proceed to those of our inferiour Prelates of London, Winchester, Dur∣ham, Salisbury and Lincolne; who, as the old Cockes of Canterbury and Yorke did crow in this behalfe, so the young Cockrels of these and other Sees did imitate their demeanour, (as In his Descrip∣tion of Eng∣land, l. 2 c. 1. p. 133. William Har∣rison well observeth) which may appeare by these en∣suing Examples and Histories of their lives.
Bishops of London. VODINUSVodinus Arch-Bishop of London, Speeds hist l 7. c 4. p. 207. Godw. p. 182. reprehended Vor∣igern the British king for marrying with Rowen, Hen∣gists Daughter, being an Infidell, telling him, That he had endangered both his Soule and Crowne; which words were so ill digested by Vortigern, that shortly af∣ter it cost the Arch-Bishop his life, who was slaine by Hengist his procurement, the first Saxon king. This king Vortigern, An. 450. was Math. West An. 450. Hen∣ricus Huntin∣don, hst l. 2. p. 310. Polychron. l. 5. c. 1. excommunicated by St. Germaine Bishop of Auxerre, and an whole Synode of Brittish Bishops, for marrying his owne daughter; and afterwards was deposed by Saint Germaine from his Crowne, upon this occasion. olychron l. , c. 1. f. 84. Ia∣cobus Vsserius de Brit. ccles. Primordiis, p. 334. Ant nini Chron Tit. 11. c 18. sect. 3 f. 51. B. Vincenti spec. hist. l. 20. c. 11. Vortigerus denied Saint Germain lodging in a cold frosty night, and an Heard that kept the kings beasts, seeing that Gods ser∣vants were grieved, lodged Saint Germain, and slew a Calfe for his Supper: But after supper Saint Germaine causing them to gather all the bones of the Calfe toge∣ther after they had eaten the flesh, raised the Calfe a∣gaine from death to life, so that standing by his Dam alive he began to eate Hay before them. The next day by commandement of God Germain put downe Vorti∣gern from his kingdome and took the fore-said Heard, and made him king. Then all men were astonied for wonder. And from that time forth the kings of Brit∣taines came of the Heards kinde. But Gyldas in his story saith, That this befell by the king of Powsie called Buly, and not of Vortigerus; and saith that Bu∣lies Successours came of this Heards kinde, that were kings in that side of Wales. Thus was Vortigerus (an ill king I confesse) vexed by these proud and insolent Prelates, and at last deposed. ROBERT DE SIGILLO.After William Har∣risons Descrip∣tion of England, l 2. c 1. p. 133.134. the death of Bishop Gilbert, 1133. one An∣selme Abbot of Bury, Nephew to Saint Anselme, was elected Bishop of LONDON, and had his
his election confirmed at Rome: but presently such exceptions were taken against him, as thereupon hee was not onely stayd from conscration, but deprived also of his Abbotship. His Electors were William Deane of Pauls, Ralph Langford and Richard eauveys, (the same I beleeve) that afterwards was Bishop. The King who very much misliked this Election (having made request for some other) amongst other effects of his displeasure, caused the wives of these Canons (as Bale reporteth) to be imprisoned, and o∣therwise shamefully intreated. By reason of the stirres that were about this Election, the See continued voyd a long time. Anno 1140. Mawde the Empresse ha∣ving taken King Stephen Prisoner, came to London, and finding the Bishoppricke voyd, caused one, Robert de Sigillo a Monke of Reading (or as others say Arch∣deacon of London) to be elected and consecrated Bishop. Within a yeare or two after, this Bishop was taken prisoner at ulham, by Geofry de Mandevill, a Captaine of King Sephens, who ye may be sure could ill brooke any man that the Empresse favoured. This Bishop of London would not so much as sweare to be true subject to King Stephen; wherein he was main∣tained by the Pope, as appeareth by these Letters. Eugenius Episcopus servus Servorum Dei, dilecto in Christo filio Stephano illustri Regi Anglorum salutm, & Apostolicam benedictionem. Ad haec superna providentia in Ecclesia Pon∣fices ordinavit, ut Christianus populus ab eis pascua vitae re∣ciperet, & tam principes seculares, quam inferioris conditionis homines, ipsis Pontificibus tanquā Christi vicariis reverentiam exhiberent. Venerabilis siquidem frater noster Robertus London Episcopus, tanquam vir sapiens & honestus & religi∣onis amator, a nobiliate tua benigne tractandus est, & pr collata a Deo prudentia propensius honorandus. Quia ergo sicut in veritate comperimus cum animae suae salute, ac suae ordinis periculo, fideliate qu ab eo requeritur astringi non potest, volumus, & ex patero ibi affect consulimus, qaenus prae∣dictum
fratrem notrum super hoc nullatenus inquietatis, imm pro beai Petri & nostra reverentia, eum in amorem & gratiam tuam recipias. Cum autem illud jurmentum praestare non possit, sufficiat discretioni tuae, ut simplici & veraci verbo promittat, quod laeionem tibi, vel terrae tuae non inferat. Vale Dat. Meldis 6. Cal Iulii. Thus we see that Kings were to rule no further than it pleased the Pope to like of, neither to chalenge more obedience of their subjects than stood also with their good will and pleasure. He wrote in like sort unto Queene Maud about the same matter, making her Sampsons Calfe (the better to bring his purpose to passe) as appeareth by the same Letter here insuing. Solomone attestante didicimus, qd mulier sapiens aedificat domum, insipiens autem constructam destruet mani∣bus. Gaudemus prote & devotionis studium in Domino collauda∣mus, quoniam sicutreligiosorum relatione acceptmus timorem Dei praeoculis habens operibus pietatis intendis, & personas ecclesia∣sticas & diligis & honoras, ut ergo de bono in melius (inspirante Domino) proficere valeas, nobilitatem tuam in Domino roga∣mus & rogando monemus & exhortamur in Domino, quatenus initis exitus meliores injungas, & venerabilem fratrem no∣strum Robertum London Episcopm pro illius reverentia, qui cum olim Dives esset, pro The Bishop re∣fused to sweare fealty to the King, onely to please the Pope. nobis pauper fieri volut, atten∣tius diligas & honores apud virum tuum, & dilectum filium nostrum Stephanum, insignem Regem Anglorum efficere studeas, ut monits, hortatu, & consilio tuo ipsum in benigni∣tatem & dilectionem suam suscipiat, & pro beati Petri & no∣stra reverentia propensius habeat commendatum. Et quia sicut (veritate teste) attendimus eum sine salutis, & sui ordinis pe∣riculo, praefato filio nostro astringi non posse, volumus, & pa∣terno sibi & tibi affectu consulumus, ut vobis sufficiat, veraci, & simplici verbo promisstonem ab eo suscipere, quod laesionem vel detrimentum ei vel terrae suae non inferat. Dat. ut supra. Is it not strange that a peevish order of Religion (devised by a man) should breake the expresse Law
of God, who commandeth all men to honour and o∣bey their Kings and Princes, in whom some part of the power of God is manifest, and laid open to us? And even uuto this end the Cardinall of Hosia also wrote to the Canons of Pauls after this manner, co∣vertly incouraging them to stand to their election of the said Robert, who was no more willing to give over his new Bishopricke, than they carefull to offend the King, but raher imagined which way to keepe it still maugre his displeasure, and yet not to sweare obedi∣ence unto him, for all that he should be able to doe or performe unto the contrary. Humilis, Dei gratia Hostiensis Episcopus, Londinen sis Eccle∣siae canonicis spiritum consilii in Domino. Sicut rationi contra∣ria prorsus est abiicienda petitio, ita in his quae juste deside∣rantur, effectum negare omnino non convenit. Sane nuper ac∣cepimus, quod Londinensis Ecclesia, diu proprio destituta Pa∣store, communi voto, & pari assensu cleri & populi, venerabi∣lem ilium nostrum Robertum, ejusdem Ecclesiae Archidiaco∣numin Pastorem & Episcopum animarum suarum susceperet & elegerit. Novimus quidem eum esse personam quam sapi∣entia desuper ei attributa, & honestas conversationis, & mo∣rum reverentia plurimum commendabilem reddidit. Inde est quod fraternitati vestroe mandando consulimus, ut proposito vestro bono (quod ut credimus ex Deo est) & ut ex literis Do∣mini Papae cognoscetis, non lente dehitum finem imponatis, ne tam nobilis Ecclesia sub occasione hujusmodi spiritualium, quod absit, & temporalium detrimentum patiatur. Ipsius namque industria credimus, quod antiqua religio, & forma disciplinae, & gravitas habitus, in Ecclesia vestra reparari, & si quae fu∣erint ipsius contentiones, ex Pastoris absentia, Dei gratia co∣operante, & eodem praesente, poterint reformari Dat. &c. Hereby you see how King Stephen was dealt withall. And albeit that Canterbury is not openly to be touched herewith, yet it is not to be doubted but he was a doer in it, so farre as might tend to the maintenance of the right and prerogative of the holy Church. Thus farre verbatim out of Harrison.
William de Sancta Maria.William de Sancta Maria Bishop of London, was Matth Wstm. Ann 1208. Matth. Paris An. 1208 p. 217.218 224. Godwin p. 194. Fabians Chron. part 1. Anno 1205. p. 28. Polichron. l. 7. c. 33 Holinshed p. 171.172. Martins Histo∣ry. p. 46.47.48. one of those undutifull Bishops, who about the yeare of our Lord 1208. interdicted the whole Realme, and excommunicated King Iohn by the Popes Com∣mandement: they all endured five yeares banishment for this their trechery and conumacy, together with confiscation of their goods, and the King being speci∣ally incensed against this man, in token of his great displeasure, Anno 1211. threw downe to the ground his Castle of Stortford, which William the Conqueror had given to his Church. Besides he joyned in the publication of the Popes sentence for deposing the King, and stirred up the French King, and all other Christians to invade England in an hostile manner, and to depose King Iohn from the Crowne, and pro∣mised them remission of all their sinnes for this good Service. After which hee voluntarily resigned his Bishoppricke, Anno. 1221. Roger Niger.Roger Niger Bishop of London Matthew Pa∣ris p 374 375. Godwin p. 194.195. Mathew Westm. An 1235 p. 140. excommunicated the Kings Officers, Ano 1233. for that they, acording to their duty, had lad hands upon, and hindred Walter Mauclerke Bishop of Carlile to passe over the Seas, he ha∣ving no license to depart the Realme; and riding flreight unto the Court, he certified the King what hee had done, and there renewed the same sentence a∣gaine: the King himselfe not a little murmuring at this his insolent act as he had cause, and prohibiting him to doe it: the Bishops then at Court, notwith∣standing the inhibition, excommunicated these his Officers likewise for doing their duty. Matth. Paris. p. 365.366. Matth. Westm. An 1232. p. 132.133.134. Speed. p. 606. About the same time King Henry the third gave commandement for the appehending of Hubert de Burge Earle of Kent, upon some pretence of Treason: who having suddaine notice thereof at midnight, fled into a Chapple in Essex belonging to the Bishop of Norwich. The King hearing this was exceeding angry, and fearing least he should raise some tumults in his Realme, if he esca∣ped
thus, sent Sir Godfrey de Cranecomb with 300. ar∣med men, to apprehend, and bring him to the Tower of London, under paine of death: who hasting to the Chapple, found the Earle (who had some notice of their comming) kneeling there upon his knees before the high Altar, with a Crucifix in one hand, and the Hostia in the other. Godfrey and his associates en∣tring into the Chapple, commanded him in the Kings name, and by his direction, to come out of the Chap∣ple, and repaire to him to London, which he refusing, saying, that hee would upon no tearmes depart from thence, they taking the Crosse and Lords body out of his hands, bound him in chaines, carried him to the Tower, and acquainted the King therewith who was glad of the newes. Roger hearing this, and taking it to be a great infringment of the Churches liberties, goeth in post hast to the King, and boldly reproves him for violating the peace of the Church, and threatens to excommunicate all those that apprehended him, unlesse the King would immediatly restore him to the Chappell whence he was extracted and thereupon enforceth the King, sore against his will to remit him o the Chappell. The King hereupon commanded the Chapple to be strictly guarded by the Shrieffe of Essex, till Hubert should be starved or forced out thence. Matth. Paris p 374.375. Matth. Westm. An. 1233 p. 141. Speed p. 608. About a yeare or two after, this Hubert be∣ing imprisoned in the Castle of the Devises, within the Diocesse of Salisbury, escaped and fled to the Church there; his keepers missing him, ranne out to seeke him with lanternes, clubbes, and weapons, and fin∣ding him in the Church, carrying the Lords crosse in his hands before the Altar, they bastina∣doed and dragged him thence into the Castle, where they imprisoned him more strictly than before. Hereupon the Bishop of Salisbury excommunicated them because they refused to bring the Earle backe againe to the Church, saying, they would rather the
Earle should be hanged, than they for suffering him to escape; whereupon the Bishop of Salisbury, and this Robert Niger Bishop of London with other Bishops went to the King, and never left till they had by per∣swasions and threats against his will, procured the Earle to be sent backe to the Church. FVLCO BSSET. Matth. Paris p 944.957.886.887 and Godwin p. 194.195. Fulco Basset his next successor a man of a haughty & stout spirit, as he opposed the Popes exactions & Rustands his Legate, so he had many contsts with King Hnry the third, and was the maine pillar of the Barons, who reposed all his hope in him (before such time he grew cold and remisse, in standing for the publike liberties whereby hee much blemished his fame, and incensed the Barons and people against him) in so much that the King reviled him in these words, that neither he, nor any of his name were ever true unto him, threatning to finde meanes to correct him for his obstinacy. In the presence of some whom hee knew would tell the King of it, he sticked not to use this bold and couragious speech unfitting a Pe∣late. My Bishopricke, my Myter, and Crosier, the King and the Pope may take from me, but my helmet and sword. I hope they will not: yet neither of these two could secure him from Gods stroke, for he died of the Plague at London, Anno 1258. HENRY SANDWICH.Henry Matth. Wst. Anno. 1259. p. 182. Matth. Westm. Anno. 1265. 1266. p. 330.332.336.337.342.343. Matth. Paris p. 961.970. Godwin p. 196. Speed p. 641. Holinshed. p. 271. Sandwich Bishop of London tooke part with the Barons, who rebelled against King Henry the third, for which cause he was excommunicated by Ottobon the Popes Legate, with other, Bishops being the chiefe incendiaries in these warres; of whom Matthew West∣minster writes thus, The high Priests, that I say not the Pharises gathered a counsell together against the Lord, and against his annoynted, saying, Ye see that we have profitted nothing, if we let the King escape thus. The Romans will come and take away our purses with the money; let us therefore ordaine 24 Elders round about his Throne, who excluding the
Parthians, Meedes, Elamites, and strangers of Rome, and freeing Ierusalem from Egyptian bondage, may go∣verne and order all and singular the affaires of the Realme. The Knights, Barons, and Prelates, there∣fore meeting together at Oxford, in the 42. yeare of King Henry the third his reigne; the King, and Ed∣ward his eldest sonne being present, ordained by common consent, that twelve men nominated by the King, and twelve by the Barons and Prelates should governe the Realme, to which order the King and his sonne, for feare of perpetuall imprisonment, assented: all and singular the Prelates, except Ethelma Bishop elect onely of Winchester the Kings brother, tooke a corporall oath faithfully to observe this infidelity, and a sentence of excommunication was denounced by all the Archbishops and Bishops of the Kingdome a∣gainst the transgressors of it. Moreover (saith he) it is not without admiration with what face these Se∣nators, that aged Bishop of Worcester, and other Pre∣lates, the Fathers & Iudges of mens consciences should give such free assent to take away the Kings royall power, when as they had taken a corporall Oath of giving terrene honour to the said King and his Lords: which they very ill observed in ordaining, that they should never governe but ever be governed by o∣thers. After which the Lords and Knights perceiving the generall inconvenience of this Ordinance, in set∣ting up so many Kings in stead of one, the Bishop of Worceter would by no means yeeld to alter it, saying, that this ordinance was ratefied by an Oath, and that the Pope could not dispence with the Oath, making conscience of this unjust Oath like Herod, and of Schisme and error, contrary to the Lawes and Can∣nons, drawing many false Prophets to him to foment this his error. After this the King commanded the Bishop of Hereford, (a great stickler against him in these rebellious courses & an oppressour of his subjects)
apprehended, imprisoned, and his goods confiscated Not long after the Prelates, Earles, and Barons, who so sediciously held their King captivated, meete at London, where they ordained, that two Earles, and one Bishop on the behalfe of the Comonalty should elect nine persons, whereof three should alwayes be as∣sisting to the King, and that by the advise of those three, and the other nine, all things in the Kings house, as well as in the Kingdome should be ordered, and that the King should doe nothing without their ad∣vise, at least without the consent of these three. Where∣upon the Earles of Lecester, Worcester, Glocester, and the Bishop of Chechister, (who the day before the battell of Lewes absolved all those who fought against his So∣veraigne Lord the King from all their sinnes) were chosen out to be the chiefe Councellers and Cap∣taines, who eleted other nine. The King for feare of perpetuall imprisonment, and that they would chuse another King, consented to the ordinance; OMNI∣BVS EPISCOPIS, all the Bishops, Earles, and Barons consenting thereunto, and sealing it with their Seales. The Bishops of London, Winchester, Worcester, and other Bishops were sent to the Popes Legate, Cardinall of Sabine, (whom they would not suffer to come into the Realme) to confirme this agreement, who sharply reprehended the Bishops, because they consented to so great a depression of the Kings power, citing them three dayes after to appeare before him at Boone about the affaires of the Kingdome: who nei∣ther appearing by themselves nor their Proctors; the Legate thereupon suspended them, & excommunica∣ted the Barons, the Cinque ports, the city of London, and the Bishops to, for hindring him from comming into England, and for their default. But the said Bishops, and the rest, not regarding this thunderbolt, appealed from it, to the Pope and the next generall Councell, and to the Church as well Triumphant as Militant,
and trusting to the defence of the Martiall sword, little esteemed the spirituall, the Bishops presuming to be present at, and to exercise divine offices, notwithstan∣ding this suspention and excommunication, till Otho his comming into England; who calling a Councell at Wiminster suspended this Henry Bishop of London Iohn Bishop of Winchester, and Stephen Bishop of Chi∣chester both from their office and Benefice, who o∣stered and incouraged the part of the Kings enemies; excommunicating the Bishop of Lincolne for the same cause; who at last supplicated for mercy not judge∣ment; with Walter Bishop of Worcester, who lying at the point of death confessed he had erred, fovend, in fomenting and fostering the part of Simon Montford and thereupon sent Letters to the Legate, desiring the benefit of absolution, which he obtained and so died. By which relation of Matthew Westminister, seconded by the continuer of Matthew Paris, and other of our Chroniclers, it is most apparant, that this Bishop of London, and the other Prelates were the chiefe fomen∣ters of all the warres and rebellions against the King, and those that stirred up, and encouraged the Barons in their unnaturall bloody wars against their Sove∣raigne Henry the third, as Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury was the principall author and contriver of those against King Iohn. Anno. 1329. & 1330. Richard Wentworth Bishop of London,RICHARD WENWORTH was Holinshed, p. 348. Yh Wal∣singham. Hist. Angl. pag. 110.111. accused by Edmond Woodstocke, Earle of Kent, for conspiring with him to helpe set up a new King Edward the second after his death, whom Thoraas Dunhead a Fryer,WILLIAM COVRTNEY. affirmed for cetaine, by a spirit of divination, to be alive. The Bishop was permitted to goe at liberty under sureties for his good behaviour, and forth comming; but the Earle was condemned of high treason, and beheaded, though set on by the Bishop, the greatest delinquent. In the yeare 1378. Holinshed p. 420.421. Walsing∣ham. Hist. Angl. p. 216.217.218. Robert Hall, and Iohn Shakell Es∣quires,
were committed Prisoners to the Tower, whence they both escaped to Westminster, and there kept sanctuary. Sir Alane Boxhul, Constable of the Tower grieved not a little that these Prisoners were broken from him, and sheltered in that Sanctuary, taking with him Sir Ralph errers with other men in armour, to the number of fifie, and some of the Kings servants, on the fifth of August, entred into Westraini∣ster Church, whilst Masse was saying at which the said two Esquires were present. And first laying hands upon Iohn Shakell, they used the matter so, that they drew him forth of the Church, and led him streight to the Tower; but Robert Hall drawing his short sword, resisted them along time, traversing twise round about the Monkes Quire, so as they could doe him no hurt till they had beset him on each side, and then one of them cleaft his head to the very braines, and another thrust him through with a sword, and so they murthered him among them, and one of the Monkes who would have had them save his life. Much adoe was made about this matter, for this breach of the Sanctuary, insomuch, that the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, Simon Sudbury, and five other Bishops his Suffragans, openly pronounced all them that were present at this murder accursed, and like∣wise all such as ayded and counselled them to it, chiefely the said Sir Alane, and Sir Ralph: The King, Queene, and Duke of Lancaster were yet excepted by speciall names. The Bishop of London (William Court∣ney) along time after every Sunday, Wednesday, and Fryday, pronounced this Excommunication in Pauls Church in London. The Duke of Lancaster, though ex∣cepted in the same, yet in the behalfe of his friends, was not a little offended with the Bishops doings for justifying these leude persons, and making the Church a sanctuary for Rebells and Traytors, and his excom∣munications, a scourge to punish the Kings Officers
for doing their duties in reapprehending these fugi∣tives; insomuch that in a Councell held at Windsore (to the which the Bishop of London was called, but would not come, such was his pride and disdaine nor yet cease the pronouncing of the curse, albeit the King had requested him by his Letters) the Duke said open∣ly, That the Bishops forward dealings were not to to be borne with; but saithe he, if the King would command me, I would gladly goe to London, aud fetch this disobedient Pe∣late in despite of those Ribauds (so he then termed the Londoners,) which procured the Duke much evill will, who caused the next Parliament hereupon to be held at Gloster. Anno. 1388. Walsingham. Hi. Angl. p 217.218. Holinshed p. 457, 458. King Richard the second, by the ad∣vise of the Archbishop of Yorke,ROBERT BRAYBROOKE and others, retained men, of warre against his faithfull and Loyall Lords, who were stricken with great heavinesse at the newes. The Duke of Glocester meaning to mitigate his displeasure, received a solemne Oath before Robert Braybrooke Bishop of London, and divers other Lords, that he never imagined, nor went about any thing to the Kings hinderance, &c. and besought this Bishop to declare his words unto the King. The Bishop comming hereupon to the King, made report of the Dukes protestation confirmed with his Oath, in such wise, that the King began to be perswaded it was true: which when the Earle of Suffolke perceived, he began to speake against the Duke, till the Bishop bad him hold his peace, and told him, that it nothing became him to speake at all. And when the Earle asked why so? Because, said the Bishop,Stout Words of the Bishop of London. Thou wast in the last Parliament condemned for an evill person, and one not worthy to live, but onely it pleaseth the King to shew thee favour. The King offended with the Bishops pre∣sumptuous words, commanded him to depart and get him home to his Church, who forthwith departed, and declared to the Duke of Glocester what hee had
heard and seene. Hereupon the great misliking that had beene afore time betwixt the King and the Lords was now more vehemently encreased, the Duke of Ireland, the Earle of Suffolk, the Archbishop of Yorke, and the Lord chiefe Iustice Robert Trisilian still procu∣ring stirring and confirming the Kings heavy displea∣sure against the Lords. Walsingham Hist. Angl.. p. 188.189.The yeare before this, Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, giving some ill words to this Bishop, the Londoners thereupon rose up in a tumul∣tuous manner in armes, purposing to kill the Duke, and to burne his house at the Savoy, which they furiously assaulted, reversing the Dukes armes: whereupon the Duke complaining to the King, the Major and Aldermen of London were put out of office, and others Surrogated in their places. NICHO∣LAS RIDLY.Nicholas Ridley a Martyr, after his deprivation from his Bishopricke, and one of the best Bishops that ever sat in this See, in th yeare 1553. (being the first of Queene Maries raigne) was Holinshed. p. 1089. hastily displaced, depri∣ved of the Sea of London, and committed Prisoner to the Tower. The cause of which extremity used to∣wards him, was, for that in the time of Lady Iane, he preached a Sermon at Pauls Crosse by commande∣ment of King Edwards Councell, wherein he disswa∣ded the people for sundry causes, from receiving the Lady Mary, as Queene, though lawfull heire to the Crowne. EDMOND BONNER. Holinshed. p. 159.1160. Anno. 1558. One Robert Farrier said of the Lady Eli∣zabeth, (afterwards Queene) That this Gill hath beene one of the chiefe doers of this rebellion of Wiat, and before all be done, she, and all Heretiques her partakers shall well under∣stand it. Some of them hope, that she shall have the Crowne, but she, and they, I trust, that so hope, shall be headlesse, or be fried with fagots before she corae to it. Laurence Sherieffe, the Lady Elizabeth sworne servant complaining of these contumelious words to Bonner the Bishop of London, and the commissioners sitting in Boners house:
Bonner excused Farrer, saying, that he meant nothing a∣gainst the Lady Elizebeth, and that they tooke him worse than he raeant. And so Sherieffe came away, and Farrer had a flap with a Foxe taile. This Edmond Bon∣ner an hypocriticall zealous Protestant at first, after an Apostate, whiles the Bishop of London, was a Fox Acts and Monu∣ments, Ediit. ult vol. 2. p. 215. l. 378.379.38 350.554.672. to 699. vol. 3 p. 105.106.107.251.254. to 384 759.879, 898 974. Mar∣tins History p. 453. Godwin. p. 144. most bloody persecuter and murtherer of Gods Saints all Queene Maries dayes, a chiefe reviver and advancer of the Popes Supremacy, which he had ab∣jured, to the great ecclipse and diminution of the pre∣rogative royall, yea a most furious Bedlam and most unnaturall beast, sparing none of any condition, age, or sexe, and burning hundreds of good subjects into ashes. He was a great enemie to Queene Elizabeth, and the first Author of Bishops Visitation Oathes, and Articles, that I have met with. He commanded the Scriptures written on Church walls to be blotted out, (as Bishop Wren, and Bishop Peirce have since done in some plaees by his example.) In a word, he was the worst persecuting Bishop in his age, and was twice de∣posed from his Bishopricke for his misdemeanors; first in King Edwards dayes, and after in the beginning of Queene Eizabeths raigne by authority of Parliament at which time he was committed to the Marshashey among Rogues and murtherers, where he died, and was buried at midnight in obscurity. Richard Fletcher the 42. Bishop of London,RICHARD FLETCHER. incur∣red Queene Elizabeths just displeasure for his misde∣meanors;Martins Hist. p. 810. Godwin. p. 156. whereupon he fell to cure his cares by im∣moderate drinking of Tobacco, and Iune the fifteenth, 1596. died suddenly at his house in London, being (to see) well, sicke and dead in one quarter of an houre. Richard BancroftRICHARD BANCROFT. Bishop of London consecrated the eleventh of May, 1597.O whom see more before in Cante. was a great persecuter of godly Ministers,See Lews Hughes his grie∣vances, p. 14.15. a favourer and harbourer of Priests and Jesuites, and caused Dolmons Book of Succession
against See p. 151.152. King Iames his tittle to the Crowne, to be Printed in his house, and published: hee was the chiefe Author of the Canons and Constitutions Ec∣clesiasticall, set forth in the first yeare of King Iames, which afterwards did breed much trouble and distur∣bance in our Chuch, and are now voted in Parlia∣ment, to be made without any lawfull authority, and to be repugnant to the Lawes of the Realme, and liberty of the subject. WILIAM LAVD.William Laud, the last Bishop of London but one, whilst he continued in that See, was very like to his predecessors Bonner and Bancroft in his practises and proceedings; for some of which, and others since, he now stands charged of high treason by the Parlia∣ament. Of which more before, p. 157. &c. WILLIAM IVXON.The present Bishop of London William Iuxon was Bishop Laudes creature, advanced by him, and the first Prelate in our memory, who relinquished the cure of soules and preaching of Gods Word to be∣come a Lord Treasurer, and sit as a Publican at the receit of Custome. His disposition and carriage as a man, have beene amiable & commendable; but how farre forth he hath concurred with Canterbury in his evill counsells and designes as he is a Prelate, time will discover. How ever in the interim, his forward∣nesse in compiling and pressing the late new Canons, Loane and &c. Oath, and his last Visitation Arti∣cles, wherein these new Canons and Oath are infor∣ced upon the Subjects, against the Lawes and their Liberties, with some censures of his in the Starre∣chamber and high Commission (resolved by Parlia∣ment to be against the Law and liberty of the Sub∣ject) See the Arti∣cles of the Scot∣tish Commissio∣ners against Canterbury. and his Innovations in Scotland are inexcusable. Winchester. From the Prelates of London, I now passe to those of Winchester; of whomWilliam Har∣rison his De. scrip. Engl. lib. 2. c. 2. p. 141 William Harrison, in the discrip∣tion
of England, hath made this true observation; If the old Catalogue of the Bishops be well considered of, and the Acts of the greatest part of them weighed, as they are to be read in our Histories, ye shall finde the most egregious hypocrites, the stoutest warriours, the cruellest tyrants, the richest mony-mongers, and politicke Councellours in temporall affaires, to have (I wote not by what secret working of the divine providence) beene placed here in Winchester, since the foundation of that See; which was erected by Birinus An. 639. (whom Pope Honorius sent hither out of Italy) and first planted at Dorcester, in the time of Kimgils, then translated to Winchester where it doth yet continue. Wina the third (or rather the first Bishop of Win∣chester,WINA. from whence some write this city tooke its name) Matth Wesm. An. 666 p. 234. Godwin p. 132.160. about the yeare of our Lord, 666. I know not for what misdemeanour, so highly offended Ken∣walchus, King of the West Saxons, who advanced him to this See, that the King fell into great mislike of him and drave him out of his Country; who thereup∣on flying to Wulfher King of Mercia bought of him for a great summe of money the Bishopricke of London; being the first Symonist that is mentioned in our Hi∣storyes, whence ater his death, he was deservedly o∣mitted out of the Catalogue of the Bishops of London. Matth West. An. 834. p. 301. Godwin. p 162. Herefridus the fifteene Bishop of Winchester,HERRE∣FIRDVS. and Si∣gelmus Bishop of Sherborne, An. 834. accompanied King Egbert to the warres against the Danes, and were both slaine in a battell against them. About the yeare of our Lord, 1016. Edmond Ironside succeeding his father in the Kingdome,EDSINVS. was crowned at London by the Archbishop of Yorke; Matth. Westm. An. 1016. p. 397.398 Poli∣chron l. 6. c. 7. Holinshed. Hist. of England. l. 7. c. 9, 10. p. 175.176. Speed p. 425.426. but the rest of the Bishops, Abbots, and spiritualty (among whom Edsinus the 32. Bishop of Winchester was one) favouring Cnute a Dane) who had no right nor title to the Crowne, assembling together at Southampton (within
Winchester Diocesse)  proclaimed and ordained nue for their King, and submitted themselves to him as their Soveraigne; which occasioned many bloody battells and intestine warres almost to the utter ruine of the Kingdome; of which you may read at large in our Historians. nute not long after his inauguration being put to the worst at Durham by Edmd, immedi∣aly tooke into Wincheser to secure himselfe; a good proofe this Bishop sided with him against his Sove∣raigne Emond, though a most heroicke Prince. ALWYN. Antiq. Eccl. Brit p 73 to 79. Speed, p. 203.413.41 God∣win p 168. Holinshed Hist. of Engl l. 8. c. 1, 2 4. Alwyn the 33. Bishop of Winchester was impriso∣ned by Edmond the Confessor for the suspition of in∣continency with Emma the Kings mother, and that upon the accusation of Robert Archbishop of Canter∣bury, who likewise accused Queene Egitha of adultery more out of envy to her father, than truth of so foule a fact in her: whereupon the King expulsed her his Court and bed, and that with no little disgrace: for taking all her Jewels from her, even to the uttermost farthing, he committed her prisoner to the Monastery of VVilton, attended onely with one Mayde, while she for a whole yeares space almost, in teares and prayers, expected the day of her release and comfort. The Clergy at this time were altogether unlearned, wan∣ton, and vicious: for the Prelates neglecting the office of their Episcopall function, which was to tender the affaires of the Church, and to feede the flocke of Christ, lived themselves idle and covetous, addicted wholely to the pompe of the world, and voluptuous life, little caring for the Churches, and soules com∣mitted to their charge: and if any told them (faith Polichrn. l 6. . 24 Higden) that their lives ought to be holy, and their conversation without coveteousnesse, according to the sacred prescript and vertuous examples of their Elders, they would scoffingly put them off. Nunc aliud tempus, alii pro tempore mores, Times have mutations; So must mens fashions; and thus (saith he) they
plained the roughnesse of their doings, with smooth∣nesse of their answers. Stigand,Stigand. Anno 1047. was translated to Winchester; from whence also he was removed to Canterbury in the yeare 1052.Godwin p 168 169. But whether he mistruted his Title to Canterbury, Robert the former Arch-Bishop being yet alive, or whether infatiable covetousnesse provoked him thereunto, I cannot tell; hee retained still Win∣cheser, notwithstanding his preferment to Canterbury, which was the cause of his undoing at last: For the Conqueror who came into this Realme while he was Arch-Bishop being desirous to place his own Coun∣trey-men in all roomes of speciall Authoritie; and besides, having a private grudge at Stigand for forcing him to yeeld Kentish men their ancient Liberties (whereof see more in Canterbury) procured him to be deprived of both his Bishoprickes upon this point, that he had contrary to the Law, held them both together. He was deprived, An. 1069. and dyed a prisoner in the Castle of Winchester soon after. About the yeare 1107. Holinshed p. 30 Godwin p. 169, 170. Math. West A. 102. p. 23. & An. 1107. p. 25, 29. King Henry the first ta∣king upon him to bestow Bishoprickes,William Gif∣fard. giving inve∣stiture and possession of them, by delivering the Ring and the Crosier, placed divers of his Chaplaines in Bi∣shoprickes (without election) commanding the Arch-bishop to consecrate them. Among divers o∣thers hee appointed William Giffard, Bishop of Win∣chester, and required Anselme the Arch-bishop to con∣secrate him: Anselme utterly denyed to afford conse∣cration either to him or any other in the like case. The King then sent unto Girard Arch-bishop of York whom he found nothing strange: but Gffard (saith Matthew Westminster) timens rigorem sancti Anselmi spernit conse∣crationem ejus, stood so much in awe of Saint Anselme, as hee durst not but reject the offer of the others conse∣cration. The King angry hitherto with the Arch-bishop onely, was now much more incensed against
this Giffard, and in great displeasure banished him the Realme. In the end, the King and the Arch-bishop grew to this agreement, that the gifts of the King al∣ready passed should be ratified, and his Clerkes nomi∣nated to Bishoprickes, have consecration, upon pro∣mise, that hereafter he should not disturbe Canonicall Elections, and utterly renounce his pretended privi∣ledge. So after much adoe he was consecrated, toge∣gether with divers others, An. 1107. HENRY DE BLOYS.Henry de Bloys, being Bishop of Winchester when King Henry the first dyed, Malms No∣vel. l. 1. & 2. p. 178 to 194. Matth. Paris p. 71. to 76. Matth Westm. An. 1135. to 1150. Speed l. 9 c. 5. p. 483, 484, 493, 494, Godwin, p. 221, 222, 223, Neuhrig. Hist. l. 1.2 4 to 21. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 181. Hoveden An. pars prior, p. 481, 482. Holinshed, p. 54. although he with the other Bishops of the Land had sworne fealtie unto Maud the Empresse, yet she being absent in Normandy, this Bi∣shop doubting left some other stepping up before her arrivall the Kingdome might be rent away quite from his kindred and passe to some stranger by vertue of his power Legantine called a Councell of the Clergie (who swayed all in those dayes) and drawing Roger Bishop of Salibury to his partie, easily procured his Brother Stephen Earle of Boloigne, to be elected King, whom they crowned, and submitted to as their Sove∣raigne, disinhereting Maud the right Heire. The King not long after falling out with these two Bishops, sei∣zed upon their Castles, and imprisoned the Bishop of Salisbury, who dyed for griefe. The Bishop of Win∣chester summons a Counsell there, to which the Bishop was cited; the Case of the Bishops concerning their Castles, was there long debated betweene the Pope the Bishops, and those on the Kings side; he would yeeld to nothing; whereupon they moved the Legate to Ex∣communicate him; who replied, he durst not doe it without the Popes privitie. The Kings unthanke∣fulnesse to the Bishops who onely had set him up, did so alienate them from him, that thereupon they joyned with Maud the Empresse against him, who by their meanes became able to make her part good with Ste∣phen, and tooke him prisoner; the Bishop of Winchester
and a great part of the Realme too, receiving her for their Queene; Hereupon this Prelate accurseth and excommuncates al the opposites of Maud the Empresse, who denying him a suite in the behalfe of his Brother Eustace; He thereupon revokes hs Excommunication, secretly falls from her, stirres up the discontented Lon∣doners against her, mans divers Castles to resist her, e∣quivocates in his words and actions with her to worke her ruine, fiers Winchester upon her, and at last entraps her. Thus this turne-coat trecherous Prelate with the rest, were Traytors and Rebels on both sides; of which see more in William Corbell Arch-Bishop of Can∣tebury, and Roger of Salisbury, and in the Historians hereunto quoted. The Pope sent a Pall to this Bishop, desirous to constitue a new Arch-Bishoprick at Win∣chester, and to assigne 7. Bishops to him. Peter de la Roche,Peter de la Roche. or de Rupibus, Bishop of Winchester, who Math Paris p. 370.372, 373, 393. to 397. Mat. West An. 1233. p. 134, 135 &c. Speed, p. 607 to 612. Holinshed. p. 1075. was Protectour, and had greatest sway in the Government of the Realme, in the beginning of King Henry the 3. his Raigne, by his evill Counsell to the King, became the chiefe Incendiary and occasion of the Barons warres: For having by his false accusations and policies wrought Hubert Earle of Kent out of the Kings favour, and plotted his death, that hee might solely raigne and predominate over the gentle young King: The better to effect this his designe, he procures him to displace the English Officers, and in their roomes to surrogate Poictovines and Britons; who com∣ming over to the number of about 2000. hee stuffed his Castles with them, and did as it were wholly in∣trust himselfe, his Treasures, strength, and the Realme to them; So that Judgements were committed to the unjust, Lawes to the out-lawes peace to wranglers, and Justice to wrong-doers. Such as would have prayed redresse for these abuses, were interrupted and put off by this Bishop of Winchester. Among them who were removed from their places in Court, was one Sir
William de Redune,The King by ad∣vancing Strang∣ers discontnts his Nobles a Knight, and Deputie Marshall to Richard Earle of Pembroke. This was to the Earle very displeasant, which joyned with a consideration of the publicke cause and danger, hee associates to him cer∣taine of the great Lords (as was the fashion of those Lording times upon every discontent) and in the com∣pany of them advanceth confidently to the King whom in the hearing of many he reproveth, for that hee had through finister advice, called in the oictovins to the oppression of the Realme and of his naturall Subjects of their Lawes and Liberties; humbly therefore hee beseecheth him that he would speedily reforme such a∣buses, which threatned the imminent subversion both of the Crowne and Kingdome; which if hee did not, himselfe and other Lords would so long withdraw their attendance, as hee entertained strangers. The Bishop hereunto makes answer, That the King might well and lawfully call in what strangers himselfe thought good for the defence of the Crowne and Realme, and such and so many of them, as might be able to compell his proud and rebel∣lious people to due obedience.The English Peeres confede∣rate against the strangers. When the Oracle would speake no otherwise, they departed from Court, great∣ly discontented, firmly promising one to the other, that in such a cause which did so touch them all, they would like men stand together while any breath was in their bodies. Those who were now most potent a∣bout the King, nothing sorry for the discontentment of so great a Peere as the Earle Marshall, but counting it a part of their strengths to use the Regall power towards the weakning of the English; nourish in the King his aversion. The Poictovins and other strangers thus bearing the sway so as the Kings person went guarded with troopes of such, the Earles and Barons being by the Kings command summoned to antoher Parlia∣ment at Oxford,The arons con∣temne the Kings Summons. refused to come. While the King was there, one Paris calls him Bacum. Robert Bacon, who used there to preach be∣fore the King and Prelates, feely told him, That if hee
did not remove from him Peter Bishop of Winchester, and Peter de Rivallis, he could never be in quiet.The frank speech of a Preacher. The King did hereupon a little come to himselfe, and Roger Bacon, a Clergie-man also of a pleasant wit, did second Roberts advise, telling the King, that That is Rockes and Stones. Petrae and Rupes were most dangerous things at Sea, alluding to the Bishops name Petrus de Rupibus. The King therefore (as hee had the happinesse in his mutabilitie to change for his more securitie) taking that good advise of Schollers, which he would not of his Peeres, sum∣mons a Parliament to be holden at In Iuly. VVestminster, gi∣ving the World to know withall, that his purpoe was, to amend by their advise whatsoever ought to be a∣mended. But the Barons considering that still there arrived sundry strangers, men of warre, with Horse and Armour and not trusting the Poiovine faith came not,The Barons se∣cond contempt to the Kings com∣mand. but presumed to send this message to the King; that if out of hand he removed not Peter Bishop of Winchester, and the Poictovines out of his Court they all of them by the common consent of the Kingdome, would drive him and his wicked Counsellours toge∣ther out of it, and consult about creating a new Sove∣raigne.The traiterous errand to the King. The King (whom his Fathers example made more timerous) could easily have beene drawne to have redeemed the love of his naturall Liege-men with the disgrace of a few strangers; but the Bishop of VVinchester and his Friends, infused more spirit into him: Whereon, to all those whom hee suspected, the King sets downe a In August nex. Rog. de Wend. M. S. day, within which they should deliver sufficient pledges to secure him of their loyalty. Against that day the Lords in great numbers make re∣paire to London; but the Earle Marshall (admonished of danger by his Sister the Countesse of Cornewall) lyes backe to VVales, and chiefely for want of his In August new. Rog. de Wend. M. S. presence, nothing was concluded. The King not long after is at Gloster with an Armie, whither the Earle and his Adherents required to come, refused;
the King therefore burnes their Mannors,The Earle Mar∣shall in Armes. and gives away their inheritances to the Poictovines. This Re∣bellion had not many great Names in it, but tooke strength rather by weight then number; the knowne Actors were the Earle Marshall, the Lord Gilbert Ba∣sset, and many of the inferiour Nobles. The Bishops arts had pluckt from him the Kings brother, and the two Earles of Chester and Lincolne, who dishonou∣rably sold their love Matth. Paris. for a thousand Markes, and o∣therwise, as it seemed, secured the rest; Neverthe∣lesse, they may well bee thought, not to have borne any evill will to their now forsaken confederate the Earle Marshall, who tooke himselfe to handle the com∣mon cause; certainely hee handled his owne safety but ill, as the event shall demonstrate: The Earle hearing these things contracts strict amity with Lewe∣lin Prince of Wales,Confederates himselfe with Lewelin Prince of Wales. whose powers thus knit together, by advantages of the Mountaines, were able to coun∣terpoise any ordinary invasion. To the kings ayde Balwin de Gisnes with many Souldiers came out of Flanders: The king now at Hereford in the midst of his Forces, sends from thence (by VVinchesters counsell) the Bishop of Saint Davids to defie the Earle Marshall; How farre soever the word defie extends it selfe; sure it seemes that the Earle hereupon understood himselfe discharged of that obligation, by which hee was tyed to the king, and freed to make his defence; the king notwithstanding,Rog. Wend, M. S. Math. Pais. after some small attempts and better considerations, did promise and assume, that by advise of counsell, all that was amisse should at a The Sunday after Michael∣mas. day ap∣pointed bee rectified and amended; About which time Hubert de Burgo having intelligence that the Bi∣shop of VVinchester who was a Poictovine Math Westm. Roger Wend. Math Paris. plotted his death, escaped out of the Castle of Devises where hee was prisoner, to a Neighbour Church, but was ha∣led from thence by the Castle-keepers. The Bishop of Sarisbury (in whose Diocesse it hapned) caused him
to be safe restored to the same place, from whence by the Earle Marshall and a troope of armed men his friends,Hubert de Br∣go escapes into Wales, Ypod. Neust. hee was rescued and carryed into VVales. The king at the day and place appointed holds his great Counsell or Conference with the Lords, but no∣thing followed for the peace of the Realme; it was not an ordinary passage of speech which hapned there betweene the Lords and Bishop of VVinchester; For when the English Bishops and Barons humbly be∣sought the king for the honour of Almightie God to take into grace his naturall Subjects whom (with∣out any tryall by their Peeres) hee called Tray∣tors; the Bishop offended it seemes at Peeres) takes the words out of the kings mouth and answers, That there are no Peeres in England as in the Realme of France, and that therefore the king of England by such Justiciars as himselfe pleaseth to ordaine, may banish offenders out of the Realme and by judi∣ciall processe condemne them. The English Bishops relished his speech so sharply, that with one voyce they threatned to excommunicate and accurse by name the kings principall wicked Councellours; but VVinchester appealed: Then they accursed all such as alienated the heart of the king from his Naturall Subjects, and all others that perurbed the peace of the Realme. An. 1205 p. 134, 135 See Godwin, p 172. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit p. 160, 16 Matthew VVestminster writes of this Peter de la Roche, that hee was more expert in Military than Scholasticall affaires. That the king by his Counsell removed all English Officers out of his Court, and precipitately cast away all his Counsellours, as well Bishops as Earles, Ba∣rons, and other Nobles of his kingdome, so as hee would beleeve none but this Bishop (whom hee adored as his God) and his Darling Peter de Ri∣vales. Whence it came to passe, that expelling all Gardians of Castles almost through all England the King committed all things under the custodie of
this Peter. Then this Prelate drew into his confe∣deracie Stephen de Segrave, too much an enemie both to the kingdome and Church (who had given most detestable counsell formerly to Stephen the Popes Chaplaine, to the inestimable dammage of the Church many wayes) and Robert de Pas∣selewe, who with all his might, and with effu∣sion of no small summe of money, had plotted treason and grievances at Rome against the king and kingdome. This man kept the kings trea∣sure under Peter de Rivalis; and so it came to passe, that the Reines of the whole kingdome were com∣mitted to Strangers and base persons, others be∣ing rejected. Yet Godwin (for the honour of his Rochet) magnifies this Prelate for his notable Wis∣dome; so as the Counsell of England received a great wound by his death, though it and the whole Realme received such prejudice by his life. The Earle Marshall (writes Speed) encreasing in strength and hatred against such as were the kings reputed Seducers, makes spoile and bootie on their pos∣sessions, and after joyning with the power of Leoline, Prince of Wales,Roger Wendever. puts all to fire and sword, as farre as Shrewesbury, part whereof they burnt to Ashes, and sackt the Residue. The king then at Gloster, for want of sufficient forces, departed thence (sore∣ly grieved) to Winchester, abandoning those o∣ther parts as it were to waste and ruine.The King gives way to the fury of the rebellious. It there∣fore seemes, that hee was not growne stronger, or richer, by the displacing of Hubert Earle of Kent, and the rest, and by taking new into their roomes, who commonly bite and sucke hard till they have glutted themselves, (if at least-wise there bee any satietie in Avarice;) whereas the old and ancient Officers, (having provided in a manner for the maine chance,) have the lesse
reason to be grievous. Therefore the Lyons skinne not being large enough for the Bishop of VVinchester, and his factious purposes, they peece them out with the Foxes case, an inevitable stratageme is devised. The Earle Marshall had in Ireland all the ample Patrimonies of his Grandfather the famous Strongbow. To make that member of his strengths improfitable, if not also per∣nicious, they devise certaine Letters directed to Mau∣rice Fitz-Gerald (Deputy Justice of Ireland) and other principall men, who held of the Earle.A practise to ru∣ine the Earle Mashall. In them they signifie; that Richard once marshall to the King of Eng∣Iand, was for manifest Treason,The Pestilent tenour of the Letters. by the judgement of the Kings Court, banished the Realme, his Lands, Townes, and Tenements consumed by fire; other his Hereditaments destroyed, and himselfe for ever disin∣herited: that if upon his comming thither they did take him, either alive or dead, the King did give them all the Earles Lands there, which now were forfeited by vertue of his attainture, and for assurance that the sayd gift should continue firme and good, they by whose advise the King and Kingdome were governed faithfully undertooke. To these letters (which the Monkes call bloody) they caused the King to set his Seale, as they themselves also did theirs. Vpon receipt of which lines, the parties signifie backe under the Seale of secresie, that if the contents of those letters were confirmed by the Kings Letters Patents, they would performe that which they desired. The Letters Patents be made accordingly, Rog. Wend. M. S. Matth. Pari. and having fraudulently got∣ten the great Seale from Hugh, Bishop of Chichester Lord Chancellor, who knew not thereof, they make them authenticke with the impression. The Kings minde therefore being still exulterated towards the Earle Marshall, he grievously charged Alexander Bi∣shop of Chester, that hee had too much familiarity with the Earle, affirming, that they sought to thrust him from his Throne; the Bishop to cleare himselfe from
so haynos a sandall,Alexander Bishop of Che∣ster cleareth himselfe from disloyalty. put on his Episcopall habit, and solemnely pronounceth all those accurst who did but imagine a wickednesse of so foule a nature, against the Majestie or person of the King; and thereupon by the intercession of other Prelates, he was received into grace: The King was then at Westminster, where Edmond the Archbishop of Canterbury elect,The Engish Bi∣shops dale with the King about redesse of the the common e∣vils. with o∣ther his Suffragan Bishops bewayling the estate of the Kingdome, present themselves before him, telling him as his loyall leigemen, that the counsell of Peter Bishop of VVinchester and his complices, which now he had and used, was not sound nor safe, but cruell and peril∣lous to himselfe and his Realme. First, for that they hated and despised the English,Objections a∣gainst the Bshop of Winton and the Poictouines. calling them Traytors, turning the Kings heart from the love of his people, and the hearts of the people from him; as in the Earle Marshall, whom being (one of the worthiest men of the Land) by sowing false tales they drave into dis∣contentment. 2. That by the councell of the same Peter, his father King Iohn first lost the hearts of, his people, then Normandy, then other lands, and finally wasted all his Treasures, and almost England it selfe, and never after had quiet. 3. That if the Subjects had now beene handled according to Justice and Law, and not by their ungodly councells, those pre∣sent troubles had not hapned, but the Kings lands had remained undestroyed, his treasures unexhausted. 4. That the Kings Councell is not the Councell of peace but of perturbation, because they who cannot rise by peace, will rayse themselves by the trouble and disinherison of others. 5. That they had the trea∣sure, Castles, Wardships, and strengths of the King∣dome in their hands, which they insolently abused, to the great hazard of the whole estate, for that they made no conscience of an Oath Law, Justice, or the Churches Censures. Therefore we, O King (said they) speake these things faithfully unto you, and in the presence
both of God and man, doe counsell, beseech, and admonish yo to remove such a Councell from about you; and as it is the usage in oter Realmes governe yours by the faithfull and sworne Children thereof. The King in briefe answered hereunto, that he could not sodainely put off his Councell, and therefore prayed a short respite, till their accomps were audited; Meane while the beha∣haviours of the Marshalline faction (having this back∣ing at Court) grew more and more intollerable,The outrages of he Mashalline faction. for while the King was at Huntingdon, the Lord Gilbert Basset and others, set fire upon Alckmundbury, a Towne belonging to Stephen de Segrave, the flames whereof were seene of the Owner, being then with the King at Huntingdon: they also tooke Prisoners upon the Welch Marches, and according to the Law of warre (which saith one, is lawlesse) did put them to their ransomes. Nothing had hitherto preserved the King more than that he could without great griefe forgoe any Favorites, if hee were meerely pressed;Note ths. the con∣trary quality whereof hath beene the cause of finall desolation to so many Princes; for albeit the choyce of Counsellours ought to be free, yet by common in∣tendment, they should be good, or howsoever they are, or are not, it is madnesse to hazard a Crowne, or lose the love of a whole Nation, rather than to relin∣quish or diminish a particular dependant; the rights of amity ought neverthelesse to remaine inviolable, but in such distance, that the publike be not perverted, or interverted for a private: The King therefore in this point not unfortunate, commanded Bishop Peter to betake himselfe to his residence at VVinton, without once medling in affaires of State: but against Rivalis his Treasurer, he was so vehement, that he sware, hee would plucke out his eyes, were it not for reverence of holy Orders, commanding also the Proictouines to de∣part the Realme, never to see his face. Then are the Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Bishops of Chester
and Rochester sent into VValls to pacifie things there: but the Earle Marshall had now crost the Seas into Ireland to take revenge for the spoyles and displeasures which his hired enemies had made in his Lands there, by whose plots, according to that secret agree∣ment, he was finally taken, and died of a wound gi∣ven him in the backe, as he with admirable manhood defended himselfe. The Edmond af∣terwards cano∣nized Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 160.161. Archbishop of Canterbury with the other Bishops repaired to the King at Glo∣cester, upon their returne from Leoline Prince of VVales, who pretended he could not conclude, till the King had received into grace such of the banished Nobility, with whom himselfe had beene confederate during the late displeasures. The King hereupon mo∣ved with pitty, sends forth his Proclamations, That all such as were out-lawed or proscribed should be at Glocester upon a certaine day, there to be received into the Kings favour againe, and to have restitution of their inheritances but least they might suspect any evill measure; it was ordered that they should be in the Churches protection, and come under the safe con∣duct of the Archbishop and the other Prelates Thither at the time and place limitted doth Hubert de Burgo Earle of Kent, and lately chiefe Justicier of England repaire, upon whom, by mediation of the Bishop, the compassionate King lookes graciously, receiving him in his armes with the kisse of peace. In like sort was the Lord Gilbert Basset, and all others of that fellow∣ship received into favour, their severall livings, and rights fully restored, and both Hubert and Basset ad∣mitted to be of his Councell. Vpon this reconcile∣ment, the practise by which the late great Marshall was destroyed, and his possessions dismembred, came to light; the coppy of the Letters which had beene sent into Ireland being by commandement of the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury openly read in the presence of the King, the Prelates, Earles, and Barons. It moved
teares in all of them; the King with an Oath, affir∣ming, that he knew not the Contents of the said Letters, though by the urging of the Bishop of Winchester. Rivallis, Segrave, Passeletu with other of his Councell, hee had caused his Seale to be put unto them. At the sound of Summons to make their severall appearances, the Ma∣lefactors take Sanctuary; the Bishop, and Peter de Rival∣lis in Winchester Church, Segrave in Leicester Abby, Passeleiu in the new Temple, and others otherwhere. And Antiqu. Eccl. Brit p. 171.163 some write that the King commanded Winchester utterly to depart the Court, and to repaire to his Bish∣opricke, and there to give himselfe intirely to the cure of soules. If such a precept were now given by his Ma∣jesty to all our Court Prelates it would be but just. In the end, upon the intercession of Edraond, Archbishop of Canterbury, who piously endeavoured to extinguish all occasions of further dissention in the Kingdome, and undertooke they should have a lawfull triall, the de∣linquents appeared at Westminster before the King, who sate Rog. de Wend. M.S. Matth. Maris. in person with his Justiciers upon the Bench, Peter de Rivallis was first called (for the Bishop came not;) whom the King shot through with an angry eye, saying, O thou Traytor, by thy wicked advise I was drawne to set my Seale to these treacherous Letters for the de∣struction of the Earle Marshall, the contents whereof were to me unknowne, and by thine, and such like councell I banished my naturall Subjects, and turned their rainds and hearts from me. By thy bad councell, and thy complices, I was moved to make warre upon them to my irreparable losse, and the disho∣nour of ray Realme: In which enterprize I wasted my treasure, and lost many worthy persons, together with much of my royall respect; therefore I exact of thee an account; as well of my treasure, as of the custodies of wards, together with ma∣ny other profits and escheats belonging to my Crowne. Peter denying none of the accusations, but falling to the ground thus besought him. My Soveraigne Lord and King, I have beene nourished by you, and made rich in world∣ly
substance, confound not you owne creature, but at least wise grant me a time of deliberation, that I may render a competent reason for such poynts as I am charged with. Thou shalt (said the King) be carried to the Tower of London, there to deliberate till I am satisfied; he was so. Stepen de Segrave, the Lord chiefe Justice (whom the King also called most wicked Traytor) had time till Michaelmas to make his accounts at the Archbishops and other Bishops humble intreaty; and for other matters, hee shifted them of from himselfe, by laying the blame upon such as were higher in place than he; into whose office of chiefe Justice Hugh de Pateshull is advanced: The like evasion Robert Passeleu had by leaving the fault upon Walter Bishop of Carleil, who was above him in the Exchequer; And thus were these civill enormities reformed, not without reducing store of coyne to the King: this Bishop of VVinchester, being the chiefe Au∣thor of all these warres and mischiefes, which thus mo∣lested King, State, and People at that time. Anno. Matth. West. An. 1238. p. 147. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 169. 1238. Otho the Popes Legate lodging at Osnie Abby, some of his servants abusing the Schollers of Oxford that came thither to see him, they thereupon falling together by the eares slew the Legates Cooke, and hurt other of his servants reviling the Legate, and stiling him a wicked wretch, a Robber of England, the gulfe of Roman avarice, &c. Hereupon the Legate fled up into the Towne for feare, and sent to the King to Abindon to rescue him; the next day he publikely excommunicated all who had assaulted him, depriving them both from their office and bene∣fice, and pronouncing them irregular, interdicted all the Churches in Oxford, and suspended the Schollers from studying there; the which Sentence was by this Bishop of VVinchester, solemnely denounced, and exe∣cuted before all the Clergy and people assembled to∣gether for that purpose at S. Frideswids in Oxford; and so all that Summer the Schollers were dissipated, & their
study at Oxford was suspended. At length the Abbot and Canons of Osnie, and regent Masters of Oxford comming bare foote to the Legate, with their heads uncovered, and their upper garments put off and rent, oft times humbly craved pardon of him and so at last going through the midst of the Citty of London to the Bishop of Durhams house, they with much adoe obtai∣ned pardon, whereupon the Schollers were restored to their Study at Oxford, and released from their said sentences. An. 1246. Antiqu. Eccle Brit. p. 181.182 Mat. Paris. An. 1246. p. 672. to 689. The Pope writ to William,WILLIAM de RALEY. Bishop of VVin∣chester, and the Bishop of Lincolne, that they should levy 6000. markes of the Cleargy to his use. They there∣upon began to execute this mandate of the Pope, but are prohibited by the King to proceede under paine of proscription. The Cleargy now interposed betweene the King & Pope, and terrified with both their threats were uncertaine what to doe: but perceiving the Kings inconstancy, and fearing least his courage fai∣ling he should at last (as he often had done before) yeeld to the Pope many of them paying their money secret∣ly, avoided both the Kings and Popes indignation. To prevent these exactions, messengers were sent to the Pope from the King, Peeres, Prelates, and Com∣mons of England; these the Pope reviles and repels as Schismaticks, saying; The King of England, who now turnes his heeles against me, and Frederizeth, hath his Coun∣cell, but I have mine. With which scornefull words the King was so moved, that he proclaimed through Eng∣land, That no man should pay any thing to the Pope. But the Pope growing more angry hereat, threatned the Prelates with all kinde of punishment, that they should pay the foresaid summe to his Nuncio in the new Temple very spedily. The King terrified with the threats of his brother Richard, and of the Bishops con∣spiring with him to draw the King hither and thither, to make him odious both to the Pope and people, a∣mong
whom the Bishop of Winchester was chiefe, (to whom power was given by the Pope to interdict the Kingdome;) yeelded at last to this taxe being overcome and debilitated with feare. The passages whereof are more largely related by Matthew Paris, together with the Popes intollerable exactions upon England. William Raley the 41. Bishop of Winchester,WILLIAM RALEY. im∣ployed in this former service for the Pope, Anno. 1243. being unduly elected by the Monkes of Win∣chester contrary to King Henry the third his command;Matth. Wesm. Anno. 143. p. 174175. An. 1244. p. 178.179. Matth. Paris p. 588.597.616.619. Godwin p. 227.228. Holinshed. p. 231.232. the King hereupon commanded, that no man should give him or his any victuall or lodging, charging the Major and Citizens of Winchester to forbid him entrance into that city; which they did; the Bishop thereupon excommunicated the Major, Monks, and whole city, and interdited the Cathe∣drall: for which he felt the burthen of the Kings dis∣pleasure so heavy upon him in England, as he thought good to fly the Realme, till at last by Boniface the Arch∣bishops intercession, and the Popes earnest Letters to the King and Queene, he was restored to the Kings favour, and obtained License to returne. The Bishop hereupon in thankefulnesse, bestowed upon the Pope 6000. markes for his fatherly care of him, which hee in good nature, because he would not be reputed dis∣dainfull, tooke every penny. It is recorded of this Bi∣shop, that a little before his death he had the Sacrament brought unto him, and perceiving the Priest to enter his Chamber with it, he cried out, Stay good friend, let the Lord come no nearer unto me, it is more fit that I be drawne to hira as a Traytor, that in many things have beene a Traytor unto him: His servants therefore by his com∣mandement drew him out of his bed, unto the place where the Priest was, and there with teares he received the Sacrament, and spent much time in prayer, and soone after died at Turon, the 20th. of September, 1249.
Matth. aris p. 774.775.780.788.789.794.824.830. to 834.847.890.900.994.995.946.959, Godwin. p. 176.177. Ethelarns halfe brother unto the King,ETHELMA∣RVS: a man (saith Matth. Paris) in respect of his orders, yeares, and lear∣ning, utterly unsufficient, was at the Kings speciall re∣quest, elected next Bishop of this See; he had at that time other spirituall livings equivalent in revenue to the Archbishopricke of Canterbury; which that hee might keepe, and yet receive all the profits likewise of the Bishopricke of Winchester, he determined not to be consecrated at all but to hold it by his electi∣on, and so did indeede for the space of nine yeares; In the meane time he and the rest of his countrymen (with whom the Realme was much pestered) were growne very odious, as well with the Nobility, as the Commons, not onely for their infinite wealth, and immoderate preferment, much envied but much more for their pride and insolency which a man can hardly beare in his owne friend, much lesse in an alien and tranger, whom men naturally dislike much sooner then their owne countrimen. Amongst the rest, this Ethelmarus bare himselfe so bold upon the King his brother, as he gave commandement to his servants to force a Clergy man out of the possession of a Benefice, whereunto he pretended some right; and if he with∣stood them, to draw him out of his possession in con∣tumelious manner; the poore man loath to loose his living, defended it so long, till by my Lord Elects men, he was slaine himselfe, and his people so soare beaten and wounded, as within few dayes one or two of them died. This fact and other like complained of by the Barons to the Pope and King brought all the Poictavins into such hatred, as the Realme was ready to rise against them and the rather upon this occasion. Anno. Dom. 1252. a certain Priest intruded him∣selfe by authority of this Prelate into the Hospitall in Southwerke within this Diocesse, founded by Thomas Becket. Eustathius de Len. Officiall to the Archbishop of Canterbury conceiving himselfe injured hereby, because
by reason of the patronage his consent ought to have intervened, which was omitted through contempt & thrice admonished the said Priest to depart, because his entranee was injurious and presumptuous: the Priest (stiled commonly the Prior of this Hospitall) refuseth to doe it, keeping possession: The fficiall hereupon excommunicates him for his contumacy; under which excommunication the Prior continued fortie dayes multiplying threats and revilings. The Officiall not brooking such pride, at last commanded this contumacious Prior to be apprehended: who hea∣ring of it enters into the Church in his Priestly Vest∣ments, were he fortifieth himselfe; the officers pur∣posely sent to apprehend him, spared him not because he had contemned the keyes of the Church. The Offi∣ciall therefore commanded him to be carried to Mayd∣stone a manner of the Archbishops, untill it were de∣termined what should be done hereupon, thinking to keepe him there, beause the Archbishop was said to be neare that place. But the Bishop of Winchester hea∣ring of it, was more angry than became him, as if he had sufferd a great injury with disgrace, presented a grievous complaint to his brethren: with whose ayde and councell being puffed up, he calling a band of Souldiers together, with no small company following them, sent them to seeke and apprehend the authors of this violence. They therefore with great orce and tumult as in a hostile war came to Suwerke, thinking to have found them there; where searching all places, and finding none of them they went hastily with a swift pace to Maydstone to free the Captive Prior there detained, with a powerfull hand, and breaking downe all that stood in the way, searching all secret corners, when they found not him they sought for, because hee was hid, they called for fire, that they might burne all to ashes. And after many injuries there committed when they found not him they sought for, certified by
some whisperers where the Officiall was they sought for to wit at Lambeth neare London, they all ran thither in a troope; where heaving up the doores from their hin∣ges and breaking them running in altogether in a con∣fused troope, sodainely before the houre of din∣ner, they tooke the Officiall (premeditating no such thing) in a hostile and unseemely manner, and haling him away, they set him on a horse like a vile slave, de∣prehended in the act of stealing, to be carried whether they pleased, he being not suffered so much as to touch the renes of the horses bridle that carried him. O rash presumption O unexcusable rreverence (saith Matth. Pa∣ris) which so ignominiously handled, and worried such an authenticall man, so excellent learned, so perspicuosly famous, and representing the Arch∣bishops person. Moreover they inhumanly handled the Chaplaine serving in his Chappell, and flying to the hornes of the Altar, rayling upon him. The Offici∣all, after they had done all things which anger, yea fury had perswaded, they drew by the Bridle to Frne∣hold, till they were certified of the Priors restitution, detaining him violently against his will. At last being parmited to depart he was basely and vily thrust a∣way who rejoycing for the present that he had esca∣ped their hands, ranne away as fast as he might upon his feete, though aged to Walerle, not daring to looke back let he should be turned into a pillar of Salt. The Archbishops Officiall having received so great an in∣jury, makes a most grievous complaint to the Arch∣bishop Boniface with sighes and teares, aggravating great things with greater, and grievous things with greater grievances. The Archbishop hereupon moved with unexpressible anger, taking with him the Bshops of Chester and Heriford, goeth to London, where he and those two Bishops clad in their Pontificall Robes, be∣fore an innumerable company of people (summo∣ned to appeare before them with the voyce of a Cryer
for this purpose, and granting thirtie dayes pardon to all commers) at S. Mary de arcubus, even horribly and solemnely excommunicated all the actors and fau∣ters of this rash action, excepting onely the King, Queene, and their children, and Count Richard, with his Countesse and children. Moreover he writ to all his suffgragan Bishops by vertue of the bond of obedience, whereby they stood obliged to the Church of Canter∣bury, to doe the like in their Churches on all Lords dayes and holy dayes, by his expresse command. The Bishop of Winchester, on the contrary, speedily com∣manded the Deane of Seuwarke, and other his subjects, that they contradicting the Archbishop should open∣ly denounce to his face, that this his sentence of ex∣communication was a meere nullity, yea, a vaine, frivilous and wily excuse to bolster him out in his sinnes. The Archbishops creatures for this injury, and the scandall arising thereupon appeale to the Pope. There were some who favouring neither side, affirmed the Archbishop had done Winchester wrong; because there was a composition formely made, that notwith∣standing the right of patronage; yet to prevent con∣troversies, this Hospitall should be subject to the dispo∣sall of the Bishop of Winchester, paying thereout three shillings by the yeare; and so both of them being de∣famed, incurred the brand of unjust violence, while the citizens mindfull of the peremptorinesse, which the Archbishop had shewed in his first violent com∣ming to London, of his infinite exactions of mony which he had procured, of the Kings violence in his creation, and of the enormious collation of his benefi∣ces, did now againe revive the same. On the other ide the royallists & Poictavins gained the note of imbred treason, with other reproaches, as the manner is of those that brawle. There were not a few citizens who hearing these things, wished that these parties had da∣shed out one anothers braines, and ripd up one ano∣thers
bowells; And as it was written, Woe unto them by whom scandall commeth, both parties were indangered with the great reproaches and scandalls arising here∣upon. Thus was the Kings party devided against the Queenes, the Poictovines against the Provincials, whose great possessions made them mad, playing rex one with the other (whiles the miserable English were a∣sleepe) as if they contested which of them having ba∣nished the Natives, should deserve more excellently to rule the Kingdone: but the ventilation of fame more condemned the Provinctalls, because Winchester, rising up against his Superiour, had so proudly exceeded mea∣sure, confiding on the King, his brother, who God knowes had created him. The Archbishop Boniface raking up the fire of his conceived anger under ashes, and worthily persisting in it, as Eustace stirred him up more or lesse to revenge this enormious transgression, goeth after this towards Oxford, that summoning a Convocation of the Scollers there assembled out of di∣vers parts of the world, he mightt publish to them in order this notorious fact, that so by their relations, so great an offence might be made knowne to forraigne Nations Comming therefore to Oxford the morrow after S. Nicholas day before all the Clearkes and Schol∣lers there assembled for this purpose, being an innu∣merable multitude, he openly declares before them the presumptuous temerity and temerarious presumpti∣on of the Bishop of Winchester, taking boldnesse from his confidence and dependance on the King, his bre∣thren, and complices; and expresly published the names of the trespassers, and their former sentences of excommunication, which the Bishop caused to be transcribed & sent to all his suffrgans. The Christmas following the King and Queene being at VVinchester, reconciled these Prelates, and tooke off these excom∣munications, & ended these contentions, which much troubled both Church and Kingdome. This Pre∣lates
by bribes given to the Pope, obtruded a Prior on the Monkes of Winchester, which caused great Schismes and distractions among them. Anno. Dom. 1260. Si∣mon Montfort Earle of Leicester, Richard de Clare, Earle of Gloster, with sundry other Nobles adhering to them, assembled at Oxford, sufficiently furnished with horses and armes, finally resolving in their mindes, either to die for the peace of their country, or to thrust out of the Realme the desturbers of the peace. Whereupon the Bishop of Winchester, William de Valentia, and other Poicouines assembled together at the foresaid place, guarded with a great troope of their souldiers and fol∣lowers, But because the Lords determined to bring them into question for their wicked deedes, and make them take a common oath with them, to observe the provisions made for the benefit of the Kingdome; they discerning their forces to be weaker than the Lords, and fearing to undergoe their judgement, fled in the night to the Castle of Vlnesey, whom the Barons pur∣suing, caused them to yeeld up the Castle, and com∣pelled them forthwith to depart the Kingdome. Ethel∣mar comming to the King to take his farewell of mhim used these words, I commend you to the Lord God; to whom the King replied, Et ego te Diabolo vivo; and I commend thee to the living devill, for deseting him in his necessities, and occasioning such uproares in the Realme. The Nobles fearing least the Bishop departing the Realme should resort to Rome, and for a summe of mony given should procure his promotion againe, and so be more powerfull to doe harmes, sent foure eloquent Knights, to exhibit a letter, ratified with all their seales, to the Pope and Cardinalls; wherein were contained the wickednesses of the said Bishop and his brethren, and those ho∣micides, rapines, injuries and various oppressions wherewith they had afflicted and undone the people of the King darae; and withall they commanded all the religious men, who far∣med any livings of the Romanes to detaine their rents, till
they should receive further order from them, and pay them to such receivers as they should appoint, under paine of having their houses burnt; by which meanes the Kingdome was free from Romane exactors for three yeares space. This Ethelmare foreseeing the danger that was like to befall him sent over his Treasure (whereof hee had great store) beyond the seas, before his departure; but much of it came short being intercepted at Dover, and taken away from those to whom it was committed, and di∣stributed to foure Knights, who were sent to Rome, by the King and his Barons, to complaine against the blanke Bulls found in the chests of Beard de Nympha (the Popes agent) after his death, and of the many machinations, of the Romanes to disquiet the Realme. Iohn GerseyGERNSEY. next Bishop of Wnchester Matth. West. and Matth. Pa∣ris An. 1265.1266 Holinshed p 271. Godwn, p. 177. See Mat. Paris p. 970.972. (consecrated at Rome, where e payd 6000. markes to the Pope, and so much more to his Chancellour for his consecrati∣on) was a great stickler in the Barons warres against King Henry the third, as appeares by the forecited pas∣sages of Matthew Westminister, and was excommuni∣cated by Octobon the Popes Legate, for taking part a∣gainst the King in the Barons warres, and forced to goe to Rome for his absolution, where he died. Henry WoodlockeHENRY WOODLOCK. Bishop of Winchester made re∣quest to King Edward the first for Robert Winchelsey, Antiqu. Eccles. Brit p. 218. Godwin p. 231. Archbishop of Canterbury, whom the King had bani∣shed for high Treason, in which request, he called the Archbishop (an arch-Traytor) his good Lord, which the King (as he had cause) tooke so hainously, that he confiscated all his goods, and renounced all protection of him. Adam Tarleton,ADAM TARLETON. or de Arleton, Bishop of Winchester a∣bout the yeere 1327. was arrested and accused of high Treason for aiding the Mortimers against King Edward the second, both with men and armour:Walsingham Hist. Angliae p. 98.99. Antiq. Eccles. Brit 227. Godwin p. 232.233. Speeds Histo. l. 9 c. 11.12. p. 679 680.686. Walsingh. Ypodigma Neu∣striae, Anno. 1326. 1327. Hist. Angl p. 10.104. Ho∣linshed p. 329.339.340.1245 p. 970.972. when he was brought to the barre to be arraigned for this Treason, the Archbishops of Canterbury, Yorke, and Dub∣lin
with their suffragans, came with their Crosses and rescued him by force, carrying him with them from the barre in such manner, as I have formerly related more at large, in the Acts of Waler Rainolds, pag. 55.56.) Notwithstanding, the indictment and accu∣sation being found true, his temporalities wereseized in∣to the Kings hands, untill such time as the King (much deale by his imagination and devise) was deposed of his Kingdome. If he which had beene a traytor unto his Prince before, after deserved punishment for the same, would soone be intreated to joyne with other in the like attempt, it is no marvell. No man so for∣ward as he in taking part with Isabell the Queene, a∣gainst her husband, King Edward the second. She wih her sonnes, and army being at Oxford, this good Bi∣shop steps up into the pulpit, and there taking for his Text these words (My head grieved me) he made a long Discourse, to prove, that an evill head, not otherwise to be cured, must be taken away, applying it to the King, that hee ought to be deposed. A Bishoplike application. Hereupon they having gotten the King into their power, the Bi∣shop fearing least if at any time recovering his liberty & crowne again, they might receive condigne punish∣ment, councelled the Queene to make him away, (good ghostly advice of a Prelate;) wherupon she being as ready and willing as he to have it done; they writ cer∣taine letters unto the keepers of the old King, signifiing in covert termes what they desired; they, either not perfectly understanding their meaning, or desirous of some good warrant to shew for their discharge, pray them to declare in expresse words, whether they would have them put the King to death or no. To which question, this subtile Fox framed this answer, Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonumest, without any point at all. If you set the point betweene nolite, and taere, it forbiddeth: if betweene nolite and bonum, it xhorteth them to the committinng of the fact. This
ambiguous sentence unpointed, they take for a suffici∣ent warrant and most pittifully murthered the inno∣cent King, by thrusting an hot spit into his funda∣ment; and who then so earnest a persecuter of those murtheres as this Bishop that set them a worke? who when diverse of his Letters were produced and shewed to him warranting this most trayterly inhumane Act, eluded and avoided them by Sophisticall interpretati∣ons and utterly denied, that he was any way consen∣ting to this hainous fact, of which in truth he was the chiefe occasion. How clearely he excused himselfe I now not. But sre I am, he (like many Arch-tray∣terly Prelates before him who were oftner rewarded than punished for their Treasons) was so farre, from receiving punishment, as within two moneths after, he was preferred unto Hereford, than to the Bishop∣pricke of Worceer, and sixe yeares after that translated to Winchester by the Pope at the request of the French King, whose secret friend he was: which King Edward the third taking in very ill part, because the French King and he were enemies, detained his temporalties from him, till that in Parliament, at the suite of the whole Cleargie, he was content to yeeld them unto him; after which he became blinde in body, as hee was before in minde, and so died, deserving to have lost his head for these his notorious Treasons, and conspiracies long before, he being the Archplotter of all the Treacheries against King Edward the second. Holinshed. p 452.453. See the Statut of 10 R. 2. c. 1. Anno. 10. Richard the third, 1366. thirteene Lords were appointed by Parliament to have the go∣vernment of the Realme under the King, in diminu∣tion of his Prerogative; among these Williara Edingdon Bishop of Winchester,WILLIAM EDINGDON. Iohn Gilbert Bishop of Hereford, Lord Treasurer of England, Thomas Arundle, Bishop of Ely, and Chancellour. Nicholas Abbat of Waltham, Lord Keeper of the privy Seale, VVilliam, Archbishop of Canterbury, Alexander Archbishop of
Yorke, and Thomas Bishop of Exeter were chiefe, and the principall contrivers of this new project, which fell out to be inconvenient and pernicious both to the King and Realme,Holinshed. p. 456. to 468. the very procurers of this Act (as some of the Jdges afterwards resolved) deserving death; which resolution afterward cost some of them their lives as the Stories of those times declare. It seemes this Bishop made great havocke of the goods of his Church, Godwins Cat. p. 182. for his successor Villiam VVicham sued his Executors for dilapidations, and re∣covered of them 1672. pound tenne shillings besides 1566. head of neate, 386. Weathers, 417. Ewes. 3521. Lambes and 127. Swine; all which stocke it seemeth belonged unto the Bishoppricke of VVin∣chester at that time. WILLIAM WICHAM.William Wicham his next successor was a great Godwins Cat p. 184.185. Antiquit, Eccles. Br. 286 p. 287. Holinshed p. 526.527. Plu∣ralist, the yearely revenues of his spirituall promoti∣ons according as they were then rated in the Kings bookes, beside his Bishoppricke, amounting to 876. pound thirteene shillings and foure pence; besides these Ecclesiasticall preferments, he held many tem∣porall offices, at the Secretariship, the Keepership of the Privy Seale, the Mastership of Wards, the Treasurer∣ship of the Kings revenues in France, and divers others. Being consecrated Bishop of VVinchester, in the yeare 1367. he was made soone after, first Treasurer then Chancellor of England. It seemes that he was a better Treasurer for himselfe than the King, who though hee received hugh summes of money by the ransome of two Kings, and spoile of divers large Countries a∣broad, and by unusuall subsedyes and taxations at home (much grudged at by the Commons,) was yet so bare, as for the payment of his debts, he was con∣strained to find new devices to raise mony: where∣upon a solemne complaint was framed against this Bishop for vainely wasting, or falsely imbezelling the Kings Treasure; for that otherwise it was im∣possible
the King should be fallen so farre behind hand: whereupon hee was charged with the receit of 1109600. pound (which amounted to more than a million of pounds) besides a hundred thousand frankes paid unto him by Galeace Duke of Millaine; for all which a sodaine account is demanded of him: divers other accusations and misdemeanours were likewise charged against him, and by meanes hereof, Iohn a Gaun Duke of Lancaster questioning him in the Kings Courts for these misdemeanours, William Skipwith, Lord chiefe Justice, condemned him as guilty of these accusations; procured his temporalties to be taken from him, and to be bestowed upon the young Price of Wales; and lastly commanded him in the Kings name not to come within twenty miles of the Court. This happened in the yeare 1376. The next yeare the Parliament being assembled, and Subsidies deman∣ded of the Cleargy, the Bishops utterly rufused to de∣bate of any matter whatsoever, till the Bishop of Win∣chester, a principall member of that assembly, might be present with him. By this meanes Licence was ob∣tained for his repaire thither: and thither hee came, glad he might be neere to the meanes of his retitution. But whether it were, that he wanted money to beare the charge, or to the intent to move commiseration, or that he thought it safest to passe obscurely; he that was wont to ride with the greatest traine of any Pre∣late in England came then very slenderly attended; travelling through by-wayes, as standing in doubt of snares his enemies might lay for him. After two yeares trouble, and the losse of ten thousand markes sustai∣nd by reason of the same; with much adoe he obtai∣n restitution of his temporalties, by the mediation of Ali Piers, a gentlewoman that in the last times of King Edrd altogether possessed him. Returning then unto Winchester, he was received into the city with solemne procsion, and many signes of great joy. Soone after
his returne King Edward died and the Duke hoping b reason of h oung Kings nonage to work some mshife unto this Bishop, whom of all mortall men he most hated (perhaps not without just reason) be∣gan to rub up some of the old accusations with addi∣ions of new complaints. But the King thought good to be a meanes of reconciling these two personages, and then was easily entreated under the broad Seale of England to pardon all those supposed offences, wherewith the Bishop had heretofore beene charged. This Bishop earnestly desiring to be made Bishop of VVinchester, the King himselfe expobrated to him the exilitie and smalenesse of his learning (hee being no Scholler at all but a surveyer of his buildings at first, though laden with multitudes of pluralities) to whom VVickham answered; That albeit he were unlearned, yet he was abut to bring forth a fuitfull issue which should procreate very great store of learned men; which was understood of those most ample Colledges he afterwards bult, both at Oxford and VVincheste for: which good works alone his name hath since beene famous, and himselfe extolled above his deserts in other things, which were but ill at best. This Prelate having obtained divers goodly promoti∣ons, which he acknowledged to have received, rather as reward of service, then in regard of any extraordi∣nary desert otherwise he caused to be engraven in VVinchester Tower at VVinsor these words, This made VVickham whereof when some complained to the King as a thing derogating from his honour, that an∣other should eeme to beare the charge of his buil∣dings; and the King in great displeasure reprehended him for it. He answered, that his meaning was not to ascribe the honour of that building to himselfe, but his owne honour of preferments unto that bul∣ding; not importing that VVicham made the Tower, but, that the Tower was the meanes of making VVickham, and rai∣sing him from base estate, unto those great places of honour he then enjoyed.
The Godwin. p. 188. Pope was now growne to that height of tyran∣ny, that he not onely placed, but displaced Bishops at his pleasure. And his meanes to do it, was by transla∣ting them to some other Bishoppricke, peradventure nothing worth at all Hee translated Henry BeaufordHENRY BEAVFORT from Lincolne to Winchester, Iune 23. 1426. and made him Cardinall of S. Eusebius. This Bishop was vali∣ant and very wise. Pope Martin the fift determining to make warre upon the Boemians, that had renounced all obedience unto the see of Rome, made this Cardi∣nall his Legate into that Country, and appointed such forces as he could make to be at his commandement. Toward the charges of this voyage, the Cleargie of England gave a tenth of all their promotions, and fur∣nished out foure thousand men and more: with this power, he passed by France (doing there some service for his Prince and Country) into Bohemia, the yeare, 1429. There he remained certaine moneths, behaving himselfe very valiantly, till by the Pope he was dis∣charged, In his youth he was wantonly given and be∣gate a base daughter named Iane upon Alice, the daugh∣ter of Richard, Earle of Arundell. Holinshed. p. 590 &c Hal 4. H. 6 f 94. to 100 Fox. vel. 3 p. 922 to 925. About the yeare of our Lord, 1425. there fell out a great devision in the Realme of England, which of a sparkle, was like to have growne to a great flame, by meanes of this Henry Beauford Bishop of Winchester, Son to Iohn Duke of Lancaster by his third wife; for whether this Bishop envied the authority of Humphry Duke of Gloster Pro∣tector of the Realme, or whether the Duke disdained at the riches and pompous estate of the said Bishop; sure it is, that the whole Realme was troubled with them, and their partakers; so that the citizens of London were faine to keepe dayly and nightly watches and to shut up their shops for feare of that which was doubted to have insued of their assembling of people about them. The Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Duke of Quimbre, called the Prince of Portingale, rode
eight times in one day betweene the two parties, and so the matter was staid for a time: but the Bishop of Winchester to cleare himselfe of blame so farre as hee might, and to charge his Nephew, the Lord Protector with all the fault, wrote a Letter to the Regent of France. The 25. day of March, a Parliament began at the Towne of Leicester, where the Duke of Bedford openly rebuked the Lords in generall, because that they in the time of warre, through their privy malice and inward grudges, had almost moved the people to warre and commotion, in which time all men ought or should be of one minde, heart and consent, requi∣ring them to defend, serve, and to dread their sove∣raigne Lord King Henry in performing his conquest in France, which was in manner brought to conclu∣sion. In this Parliament, the Duke of Glocester laid certaine Articles to the Bishop of Winchesters charge. First, Whereas hee being Protector and Defendor of this Land desired the Tower to be opened to him there∣in, Richard VVoodvile Esquire (having at that time the charge of the keeping of the Tower) refused his desire, and kept the same Tower against him unduly and a∣gainst reason, by the commandement of the said Lord of VVinchester; and afterward in approving of the said refusall he received the said VVoodvile, and cherished him against the State and worship of the King, and of the said Lord of Glocester. Secondly, The said Lord of Winchester, without the advise and assent of the said Lord of Glocester, or of the Kings Councell purposed and disposed him to set hand on the Kings person, and to have removed him from Eltham, the place that he was in, to Windsor, to the intent to put him in governance as he list. Thirdly, that where the said Lord of Glocester (to whom of all persons tha should be in the Land by the way of Nature and birth, it belongeth to see the
governance of the Kings person) informed of the said undue purpose of the said Lord of Winchester declared in the Article next above said and in setting thereof, determining to have gone to Eltham unto the King, to have provided as the cause required, and the said Lord of Winchester untruely and against the Kings peace, to the intent to trouble the said Lord of Glocester going to the King purposing his death in case that he had gone that way, set men of armes, and Archers at the end of London bridge next Southwrke, and in forbearing of the Kings high way, let draw the chaine of the stoopes there, and set up pipes and hurdles in manner and former of Bulworkes, and set mn in cellers and windowes, with Bowes and Arrowes and other weapons, to the intent to bring finall destruction to the said Lord of Glocesters person, as well as of those that then should come with him. Fourthly, The said Lord of Glocester saith and affir∣meth, that our soveraigne Lord his Brother, that was King Henry the fift, told him on a time when our So∣veraigne Lord being Prince, was lodged in the Pal∣lace of Westminster in the great Chamber, by the noyse of a Spaniell, there was on a night a man spied and ta∣ken behind a carpet of the said Chamber, the which man was delivered to the Earle of Arundell to be exa∣mined upon the cause of his being there at that time; the which so examined at that time, confessed, that he was there by the stirring and procuring of the said Lord of Winchester, ordained to have slaine the said Prince there in his bed: wherefore the said Earle of Arundell let sacke him forthwith and drownes him in the Thames. Fiftly, Our Soveraigne Lord, that was King Henry the fifth, said unto the said Lord of Glocester, that his Father, King Henry the fourth living and visited then greatly with sicknesse by the hand of God, the said Lord of Winchester, said unto the King (Henry the
fifth being then Prince) that the King his Father so visited with sicknesse was not personable, and there∣fore not disposed to come in conversation and go∣vernance of the people, and for so much councelled him to take the governance and Crowne of this Land upon him. Such a loyall Prelate was he. To these Articles the Archbishop gave in his See Holished p. 594 595.596.692 Hall 4. H. 6.5.96.97 98.99. answer in wri∣ting too tedious to recite; whereupon the Lords in Parliament tooke an Oath to be indifferent umpiers betweene the Bishop and Duke, and at last with much adoe, made a finall accord and decree betweene them, recorded at large by Hall and Holinshed, wherby they both were reconciled for a season. But in the yeare 1427. the Bishop passing the sea into France, re∣ceived the habit, hat and dignity of a Cardinall, with all ceremonies to it appertaining; which promotion the late King right deepely piercing into the unre∣strainable ambitions mind of the man, which even from his youth was ever wont to checke for the highest) and also right well ascertained with what intollerable pride his head should soone be swolln under such a hat, did therefore all his life long kepe this Prelate backe from that presumptuous estate. But now the King being young, and the Regent his friend, hee ob∣tained his purpose, to the impoverishig of the spiritu∣alitie of this Realme. For by a Bull Legantine, which he purchased from Rome, he gathered so much treasure, that no man in manner had money but he, so that hee was called, the rich Cardinall of Wincester. Afterwards An. 1429. the Pope unleagated him, and set another in his place to his great discontent Holinshed. p. 620. to 629. Hall, An. 10. H. 6. f. 143. to 250. Fox. vol 1. p. 922. to 925. Anno. 1441. the flames of contention brake out afresh betweene the said Duke and the Cardinall; for after his former reconciliation to the Duke, he and the Archbishop of Yorke (Iohn Kerap) ceased not to doe many things without the con∣sent of the King or Duke, being (during the minority of the King) Governour and Protector of the Realme,
whereat the Duke (as good cause he had) was greatly offended: and there upon declared to King Henry the ixth in writing, wherein the Cardinall and the Arch∣bishop had offended both his Majesty, and the Lawes of the Realme. This complaint of the Duke was con∣tained in twentie foure Articles, which chiefely rested, in that the Cardinall had from time to time, through his ambitious desire to surmount all other, in high de∣gree of honor, sought to enrich himself, to the great and notorious hinderance of the King, as in defrauding him, not onely of his treasure, but also in doing & practising things prejudiciall to his affaires in France, and name∣ly by setting at liberty the King of Scots, upon so easie conditions as the Kings Majesty greatly lost therehy, as in particulars thus followeth and out of the Dukes owne coppie, regestred by An. 19. H. 6. f. 143. to 146. Hall and Holinshed. 1. These be in part the points and Articles which I Humphrey Duke of Gloster, for my truth and acquitall said late, I would give in writing (my right doub∣ted Lord) unto your Highnes, advertising your Ex∣cellence, of such things as in part have bin done in your tender age in derogation of your noble estate, and hurt of both your Realmes, and yet be done and used dayly. 2. First, the Cardinall then being Bishop of Win∣chester, him took upon the state of Cardinall, which was naied and denaied him by the King of most noble me∣mory, my Lord your Father, saying, that he had as lefe set his Crowne beside him, as to see him weare a Cardinalls Hat, he being a Cardinall; for he knew full well the pride and ambition that was in his per∣son, then being but a Bishop, should have so greatly extolled him into more intollerable pride, when that he were a Cardinall; and also he though it against his freedome of the chiefe Church of this Realme, which that he worshipped as duly as ever did Prince, that blessed be his soule. And howbeit that my said
Lord your Father would have had certaine Clarkes of this Land Cardinalls, and to have no Bishopricks in England, yet his intent was never to doe so great drogation to the Church of Canterbury, as to make them that were his suffragans to sit above their Ordinary and Metropolitan. But the cause was, that in generall and in all matters which might concerne the weale of him and of his Realme he should have Proctors of his Nation, as other Christian Kings had in the Court of Rome, and not to abide in this Land, nor to be in any part of his Coun∣sells as beene all the spirituall and temporall at Parlia∣ment, and other great Councells, when you list to call them: And therefore though it please you to doe him that worship, to set him in your privy Councell, after your pleasure, yet in every Parliament, where every Lord, both spirituall and temporall hath his place, he ought to occupie but his place as a Bishop. 3. Item. The said Bishop now being Cardinall, was assoyled of his Bishoppricke of Winchester, where∣upon he sued unto our holy Father to have a Bull de∣clarative, notwithstanding he was assumpt to the state of Cardinall, that the See was not voyd, where indeed it stood voyd for a certaine time, yet the said Bull were granted and so he was exempt from his ordinary by the taking on him the state of Cardinall, and the Church Bishopricke of Winchester, so standing voyd, hee tooke againe of the Pope (you not learned thereof, nor knowing, whereby hee was fallen into the case of provision) so that all his goods was lawfully and cleerely forfeited to you my right doubted Lord, with more, as the Statute declareth plainely for your ad∣vantage. Iem. It is not unknowne to you (doubted Lord) how through your lands it is noysed, that the said Car∣dinall and the Archbishop of Yorke, had, and have the governance of you, and all you land, the which none
of your true leige men ought to usurpe to take upon them, and have also estranged me your sole uncle, my cosin of Yorke, my consin of Huntington, and many other Lords of your Kin to have any knowledge of a∣ny great mater that might touch your high estate, or either of your Realmes: and of Lords spirituall of right, the Archbishop of Canterbury should be your cheefe Counsellour, the which is also estranged and set aside, and so be many other right sadd Lords, and well advised, as well spirituall as temporall, to the great hurt of you my right doubted Lord, and of your Realmes, like as the experience and workes shewne, cleerely and evidently more harme it is. 5. Item. In the tender age of you my right doubted Lord, for the necessity of a Army, the said Cardinall lent you 4000 pound upon certaine Jewels, prised at two & twenty 1000-markes with a letter of sale that if they were not quited at a certaine day you should leese them. The said Cardinall seeing your money ready to have quitted your Jewells, caused your Treasurer of England, at that day being, to pay the same money in part of another army, in defrauding you my right doubted Lord of your said Jewells, keeping them yet alway to his owne use, to your right great losse, and his singular profit and availe. 6. Item, the said Cardinall then being Bishop of Winchester, & Chancellor of England, delued the King of Scots upon certaine appointments (as may be shewed) presumptuously, and of his owne authority, contrary to the Act of Parliament. I have heard no∣table men of Law say, that they never heard the like thing done among them which was too great a defa∣mation to your highnesse, and also towed his Neece to the said King, whom that my Lord of notable memory your Father would never have so delued; and there as he should have paid for his coss forty thousand pounds, the said Cardinall Chcellor of England,
caused you to pardon him thereof ten thousand marks, whereof the greater somme hee paid you right a little, what, I report me to your highnesse. 7. It, where the said Cardinall lent you (my redoubted Lord) great and notable Sommes, he hath had, and his assignes the rule & profit of the port of Hampton, where the Customers bin his servants, where (by likelihood and as it is to be supposed) he standing the chiefe Merchant of the wools of your land that you be great∣ly defrauded, and under that rule, what woolls and other Merchantdizes have been shipped, and may be from time to time, hard is to esteeme, to the great hurt and prejudice of you my right doubted Lord, and of all your people. 8. Item, Howbeit that the said Cardinall hath di∣vers times lent you great sommes of money, sith the time of your raigne, yet this loane hath beene so defer∣red and delayed, that for the most part the convena∣ble season of the imploying of the good lent was pas∣sed, so that little fruit or none came thereof as by ex∣perience both your Realmes have sufficiently in knowledge. 9. Item, Where there was Jewells and Plate, prised at eleven thousand pound in weight of the said Cardinall forfeited to you, my right redoubted Lord, hee gate him a restorement thereof for a loane of a little percell of the same and so defrauded you wholly of them, to your great hurt and his avayle; the which good might greatly have eased your highnesse in sparing as much of the poore Commons. 10. Item, The Cardinall being feoft of my said Lord your Father against his intent, gave Elizabeth Beau∣champe three hundred markes of livelihood, where that his will was, that and she were wedded, within a yeare, then to have , or else not, where indeede it was two or three yeares after, to your great hurt, and dimini∣shing of your inheritance.
11. Item, Notwithstanding that the said Cardinall hath no manner of authority, nor interest into the Crowne, nor none may have by any possibility, yet he presumeth and taketh upon him in party your estate royall, in calling before him into great abusion of all your land, and derogation of your highnes, which hath not been seen, nor vsed in no dayes heretofore, in greater estate then he is, without your expresse ordenance and commandment. 12. Item, the said Cardinall nothing considering the ne∣cesity of you my right redoubted Lord, hath sued a pardon of dismes, that he should pay for the Church of Winchester, for terme of his life, giving thereby occasi∣on to all other Lords spirituall, to draw their good will for any necessity, to grant any disme, and so to lay all the charge upon the temporalty, and the poore people. 13. Item, by the governance and labour of the said Cardinall and Archbishop of Yorke, there hath beene lost and dispended much notable and great good by divers embassadors sent out of this Realme. First to Arras for a feigned colourable peace, whereas by like∣linesse it was thought & supposed, that it should never turne to the effectuall availe of you, my right doubted Lord, nor to your said Realmes, but under colour thereof, was made the peace of your adversary, and the Duke of Burgoyn; for else your partie adverse, and the said Duke might not well have found meanes nor wayes to have communed together, nor to have concluded with other their confederations, and con∣spirations made and wrought there then, at that time against your highnesse, whereby you might have (right doubted Lord) the greater partie of your obisance, as well in your Realme of France, as in your Dut∣chie of Normandy, and much other thing gone greatly, as through the said colourable treatie, and otherwise, since the death of my brother of Bedford.
14. Ite. Now of late was sent another Embassador to Cale by the labour and councell of the said Cardinall and Archbishop of Yorke; the cause why of the begin∣ning, is to me your sole Vncle, and other Lords of your kin and Councell unknowne, to your great charge, and against the publike good of your Realme, as it openly appeareth; the which good if it be im∣ployed for the defence of your Lands, the marchandi∣zes of the same might, have had other course and your said lands not to have stood in so great mischiefe as they doe. 15. Item, after that, to your great charge and hurt of both your Realmes, the said Cardinall and Arch∣bishop of Yorke went to your said towne of Calis, and divers Lords of your kin, and of your Councell in their fellowship, and there, as there was naturall warre betweene the Duke of Orliance, and the Duke of Burgonie, for murther of their Fathers, a capitall enmi∣tie, like to have endured for ever; the said Cardinall and Archbishop of Yorke licened and suffered the said Duke of Orleance to intreate and commune apart, with Councell of your said adversaries, as well as with the Douchies of Burgonde, by which meanes the peace and alliance was made betweene the two Dukes, to the greatest foreing of your said capitall adversaries that could be thought; and consequently (my deare re∣doubted Lord) to your greatest charge, and hurt to both your Realmes; under colour of which treatie, your said adversaries in meane time wonne your city of Meaux, and the country thereabout, and many di∣vers roades made into your Duchie of Normandy, to the great noysance and destruction of your people, as it sheweth openly. 16. Item, The said Archbishop of Yorke, sent with o∣thers into this your Realme from the said Cardinall, had with your advers partie at your said Towne of Calis, made at his comming into your notable presence
at Winsor, all the swasions and colour, all motions in the most apprent wise that he could, to induee your Highnesse to your agreement to the desires of your capitall Adversaries, as I saw there in your no∣ble presence of his writing, at which time (as I under∣stood) it was his singular opinion, that is to say; that you should leave your right, your title, and your ho∣nour of your crowne, and your nomination of King of France, during certaine yeares, and that you should utterly abstaine, and be content onely in writing, with Rex ngliae, &c. to the greatest note of infamie that ever fell to you, or any of your noble Progenitors since the taking of them first, the said title and right of your Realme, and Crowne of France, to which mat∣ter in your presence, there, after that it had like your said Hignesse to aske mine advise thereupon, with o∣ther of your bloud and Counsell; I answered and said, that I would never agree thereto, to die therefore; and of the same disposition I am yet, and will be while I live in conservation of your honour, and of your oath made unto your said Crowne in time of your corona∣tion there. 17. Item, The said Cardinall, and Archbishop of Yorke have so laboured unto your Highnesse, that you should intend to a new day of convention in March or Aprill next comming, where it is noised to be more a∣gainst your worship, then with it; and where it was evident to all the world, that the rupture and breaking of the said peace should have fallen heretofore, of your adverse partie, because of the great untruths; now by that meanes it is like peradventure to be aid unto ve∣ry great slander of you my doubted Lord, like to come to none other purpose nor effect than other conventi∣ons have done aforetime, and so by subtilties and counsell of your said enemies your land (they in hope and trust of the said treatie not mightily nor puissant∣ly purveyed for) shall be like under the cullor of the
same treatie to be burnt up and destroyed, lost, and ut∣terly turned from your obeysance. 18. Itera, It is said, that the deliverance of the Duke of Orleance is utterly appointed by the mediation, coun∣sell and stirring of the said Cardinall and Arch∣bishor of Yorke; and for that cause divers persons been come from your adversaries into this your Realme; and the said Duke also brought to your city of London, whereas my Lord your Father poysing so greatly the inconveniences and harme that might fall onely by his deliverance concluded, ordained, and determined in his last Will utterly in his wisdome, his conquest in his Realme of France: And yet then it is to be done by as great deliberation solemnity and suretie, as may be devised or thought: and seeing now the disposition of your Realme of France, the puissance and might of your enemies, and what ayde they have gotten against you there, as well under the colour of the said treatie, as otherwise, what might or ought to be thought or said for that labouring the said Duke (all things considered) by such particular parsons, the Lords of your blood not called thereunto; I report mee unro your noble grace and excellency, and unto the said wie true men of this your Realme. 19. Item, Where that every true counsellor, speci∣ally unto any King or Prince, ought of truth and of dutie to counsell, promote, inrease, perferre and ad∣vance the weale and prosperity of his Lord; The said Cardinall being of your counsell (my right doubted Lord) hath late purchased of your Highnesse certaine great Lands, and livelihood; as the Castle and Lord∣ship of Chirke in Wales, and other lands in this your Realme: unto which I was called suddenly, and so in eschewing the breaking and losse of your armies, then againe, seeing none other remedy, gave thereunto mine assent, thinking that who that ever laboured, moved or stirred, the matter first unto your Lordship,
counselled you neiher for your worship nor profit. 20. More the said Cardinall hath you bound apart, to make him a sure estate of all the said Lands, by Easter next comming, as could be devised by any lear∣ned counsell, or else that suretie not made, the said Cardinall to have and enjoy to him and his heires, for∣ever the lands of the Dutchie of Lancaster in Norfolke, to the value of seven or eight hundred markes by the yeare; which thing seemeth right strange, and unseene and unheard wayes of any leige man, to seeke upon his soveraigne Lord, both in his inheritance, and in his Jewels and goods; for it is thought, but that right and extreme necessity caused it, there should, nor ought no such things to be done from which ne∣cessity (God for his mercy) ever preserve your noble person. Wherefore (my redoubted Lord) seeing that you should be so counselled, or stirred to leave your Crowne and inheritance in England, and also by fraud and subtill meanes, as is before rehearsed, so to loose your Jewels, in my truth and in mine acquitall (as it seemes to me) I may not, nor ought not counsell so great an hurt to you, and to all your Land. 21. Item, It is not unknowne to you (my right doubted Lord) how oftentimes I have offered my ser∣vice, to and for the defence of your Realme of France, and Dutchy o Normandy, where I have beene put there from by the labour of the Lord Cardinall, in preferring others after his singular affection, which hath caused a great part of the said Dutchy of Nor∣mandy, as well as of the Realme of France to be lost, as it is well knowne; and what good (my right doub∣ted Lord) was lost on that army that was last sent thi∣ther which the Earle of Mortaigne, your Counsell of France hath well and clearly declared to your High∣nesse here before. 22. Item, My right doubted Lord, it is not un∣knowne, that it had not beene possible to the said Car∣dinall
to have come to his great riches but by such meanes, for of his Church it might not rise, and inhe∣ritance he had none. Wherefore, my right doubted Lord, sith there is great good behoofe at this time for the weale and safegard of your Realmes, the poverty, necessity, and indigence of your leige people, in highnesse understand, like it unto your noble grace to consider the said lucre of the said Cardinall, and the great deceipts that you be deceived in by the labour of him, and of the Arch∣bishop, as well in this your Realme, as in the Realme of France, and Dutchy of Normandy, where neither office, livelihood, nor Captaine may be had withou too great good given unto him, whereby a great part of all the losse that is lost, they have beene the causers of, for who that would give most, his was the prise, not considering the merrits, service nor sufficiency of persons. Furthermore, it is greatly to be considered, how when the said Cardinall had forfeited all his goods, because of provision, as the Statute thereupon more plainely declareth, by having the rule of you my right doubted Lord purchased himselfe in great de∣fraudation of your Highnesse, a Charter of pardon, the which good, and it had beene well governed might many yeares have sustained your warres with∣out any tlage of your poore people. 23. Iem, my redoubted Lord, whereas I wrote ma∣ny things for the weale of you, and of your Realmes peradventure some wil say, and understand that I would or have written by way of accusement of all your Counsell, which God knoweth I doe not; for your Highnesse may well see, that I name them, that be causrs of the sid inordinate rule. Wherefore con∣sidering that the said Cardinall and Archbishop of Yorke are they that pretend the governance of you and of your Realmes and Lordships please i unto your Highnsse, of your right wisenesse to estrnge them of
your Counsell, to that intent that men may be at their freedome, to say what they thinke of truth. 24. For truth, I dare speake of my truth, the poore dare not doe so. And if the Cardinall and the Arch∣bishop of Yorke, may afterward declare themselves of that is and shall be said of them, (you my most doubted Lord) may then restore them againe to your Counsell at your noble pleasure. When the King had heard the accusations thus laid by the Duke of Glocester against the Cardinall, he com∣mitted the examination thereof to his Counsell, whereof the more part were spirituall persons; so that what for feare, and what for favour, the matter was winked at, and nothing said to it; onely faire counte∣nance was made to the Duke, as though no malice had beene conceived against him; but venome will breake out, and inward grudge will soone appeare, which was this yeare to all men apparant; for divers secret attempts were advanced forward this season a∣gainst this Noble man, Humfry Duke of Glocester a farre off; which in conclusion came so neare, that they bereft him both of life and land. For this proud covetous PrelateSee Holinshed p. 622. to 628. setting the Queene against this good Duke, at a Parliament at Berry caused him there to be arrested, and murthered: by meanes of whose death all France was shortly after lost, & the Kingdome involved in a bloody civill warre. I shall close up the History of this proud Prelate with old Father Latimers words concerning him, in a Sermon before King Edward the sixth. The second Sermon bifore King Edward. f. 36. There was a Bishop of Winchester in King Henry the sixth dayes, which King was but a child, but yet were there many good Acts made in his child∣hood: and I doe not reade that they were broken. This Bishop was a great man borne, and did beare such a stroake, that he was able to shoulder the Lord Protector. Well, it chanced that the Lord Protector and he fell out, and the Bishop would beare nothing
at all with him, but played the Sacrapha; so the Re∣gent of France was faine to be sent for from beyond the seas, to set them at one; and goe betweene them, for the Bishop was as able and ready to buckle with the Lord Protector, as hee was with him. Was not this a good Prelate? he should have beene at home Preaching at his Diocesse with a wannion. This Protector was so noble and godly a man that he was called of every man, the good Duke Humfry; he kept such a house as was never since kept in England, without any inhaunsing, of rents (I warrant you) or any such matter. And the Bishop for standing so stiffely by the matter, and bearing up the order of our Mother the holy Church was made a Cardinall at Calis, and thither the Bishop of Rome sent him a Car∣dinals Hat: he should have had a Tiburne Tippit, a halfe penny halter, and all such proud Prelates. These Romish Hats never brought good into England. Vpon this the Bishop goeth to the Queene Katherine, the Kings wife, a proud woman and a stout, and perswa∣ded her, that if the Duke were in such authority still, and lived, the people would honour him more than the King, and the King should not be set by; and so betweene them, I cannot tell how, it came to passe, but at S. Edmundsberry in a Parliament, the good Duke Humfry was smothered. STEPHEN GARDINER.To leave this Cardinall, Ste. Gardiner, both Chancellor of England,Hall 31. H. 8. f. 234. Fox Acts Monuments, vol. 2. Edit ult. p. 380. 384.426.585.646.647.441.442.443.531. Antiqu. Eccles Brit. p. 386. & B. of Winchester was the chiefe author of ma∣king & reviving the bloody Act, intitled the 6. Articles by which many of our godly Martyrs suffered; the chiefe plotter and contriver of the noble Lord Cromwells death. Who could not abide the pride of the Prelates, and was attainted by Parliament, and never came to his answer: He was a great opposer of the reformation of Religion, and abuses of the Clergy, both in King Henry the eights, and King Edwards dayes, and stirred up under hand divers Priests, Abbots, and Monkes to oppose the Kings Supremacie, and to rayse up open re∣bellion
in Lincolneshire, in the North, Cornewall, and o∣ther places, in maintenance of Popery; for which Trea∣sons and Rebellions Hall H. 8. f. 226.228.229.230231.232233.234. Holinshd. p. 1001.1002.1006.939.941. to 945 946.947.950.951952.961. Exmew, Middlemore and Nudigate, three Monkes of the Charterhouse, a Priest neare Winsor; the Abbots of Ierney, and Rivers Freer, Forrest, Crofts, and Collines Priests, Thomas Epsara Monke; five Priests of Yorkeshire, and Robert Bockham, John Tomson, Roger Bar∣ret, John Wolcocke, William Alse, James Morton, John Barrow; Richard Brune Priests, chiefe stirrers in the Devonshire rebellions and principall doers there∣in; and one Welch a Priest. Vicar of St. Thomas neare Exbridge (hanged on the Tower there in his Priests apparell, with a holy-water bucket and sacring Bell, a paire of Bedes, and such other Popish Trinkets about him, for his rebellion,) were all executed Fox Acts and Monuments, the old Edition p. 816.82.823.824.815.863. and vol. 2. Edit. vlt. p. 646.647. This Bishop imploed by King Henry the eight, with Sir Henry Knevet, as his Embassador, at the Dit at Ratis∣bond, he held private intelligence, and received and sent letters under hand to the Pope, whose authority the King had utterly abolished, and had then mortall enmity with: for which false and trayerly practise of which the King had certaine intelligence, he caused in all Pardons afterwards, all Treasons committed be∣yond the seas to be excepted, which was most meant for the Bishops cause; whom he exempted out of his Testament as being willfull and contentious, and one that would trouble them all; and exempted also out of his said Testament the Bishop of Westminser, for that he was Schooled in Winchesters Schoole,Fox Acts and Monuments Edt. ult vol. 2. p. 71 to 740. vol. 3. p 16.40.123.527. old dit p. 903.1389.1695. a. 173. b. whom this King before his death was certainely beleeved to abhorre more than any English man in his Realme. He was found to be the secret worker that three yeares before the Kings death divers of the Privy Chamber were indited of heresie, for the which the said King was much offended. Anno. 1548. he was committed Prisoner to the Fleet, and after to the Tower, for a Sermon preached
before King Edward, and disobeying the Kings Injun∣ctions; when he had there continued two yeares and an halfe, he was by authority deprived of his Bishop∣pricke, and sent to prison againe, where he continued, till Queene Maries time; when hee was not onely restored unto his Bishoppricke, but likewise made Lord Chancellor of England. For the extreame malice he bare to our Religion, he not onely cruelly burnt many poore men, but likewise wrought all the meanes his cunning head could devise to make away our late famous Quueene Elizabeth, saying often, it was in vaine to strike off a few leaves or branches, when the roote remained: he not onely caused this innocent Princesse to be imprisoned, and barbarously handled, both in the Tower, and after, at Woodstocke, be∣ing the Queenes owne Sister, and heire apparent to to the Crowne, procuring to her so great vexation by his rigorous usage, that she wished her selfe borne a Milkemaide; but proceeded so farre in his treacherous plots against her, that in all probabilities, his cursed policy must have prevailed, had not God moved the heart of Queene Mary her Sister, with a very kinde and naturall affection towards her, and in mercy ta∣ken him the more speedily out of the way by death, till which time she had no securitie, release, or hope of life. The whole Story of his treachery and Gods mercy towards this blessed Queene, is at large related by Master Foxe. He was a bitter opposite and enemy to Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, refusing to eate his dinner, that day, the two last of them were burnt at Oxford be∣fore hee heard from thence of their death. He was the bane of Fox Acts and Monuments, old Edition, p. 603. &. 1031. Queene Anne, (the Lady Anne of Cleave,) the Lord Cromwell, Dr. Barnes, and others. And though in King Henries dayes, he proved Queene Mary a Ba∣stard and the Bishop of Rome to be an usurper; yet afterwards when Queene Mary came to the Crowne, he was her chiefest instrument, the forwardest man to
advance the Popes Supremacy, and the sorest Perse∣cutor. Holinshed p. 1121. Anno. 1554. On the Cunduit in Gracious streete, King Henry the eight, was painted in harnesse, having in one hand a sword, and in the other hand a Booke whereon was written Verbum Dei, delivering the same as it were to King Edward his Sonne, who was pain∣ted in a corner by him; hereupon was no small mat∣ter made; for Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester sent for the Painter, and not onely called him Knave, for painting a Booke in King Henres hand, and specially for writing thereon Verbum Dei, but also Traytor and villaine, commanding him to wipe out the Booke, and Verbum Dei too. Whereupon the Painter fearing that he should leave some part of the Booke, or of Ver∣bum Dei, in King Henries hand, wiped away a peece of his finger withall. Holinshed. p. 1130.1157. England had great cause to blesse God for his death, which happened so opportunity; not so much for the great hurt he had done in times past in perverting his Princesse, bringing in ixe Ar∣ticles, in murthering Gods Saints, in defacing Christs sincere Religion, as especially for that hee had thought to have brought to passe in murthering also Queene Elizbeth: for whatsoever danger of death, it was shee was in, it did no doubt proceede from this Bloody Bishop, who was the cause thereof; and if it be certaine, which we heard, that her Highnesse being in the Tower, a writ came downe from certaine of the Counsell for her execution, it is out of controver∣ie, that wily Winchester was the onely Dedalus and fra∣mer of that Engin. Holinshed. p. 1154.1154.1157.1158.1160. He was an enemy to this Queene, and with divers of the Lords strictly examined her at the Tower. And when shee recovered from her dan∣gerous sicknesse, he and other Bishops repined, looked blacked in the mouth, and told this Queene they mar∣velled, that she submitted not her selfe to her Majesties mercy, considering that she had offended her highnesse:
Winchester, after talking with her, perswaded her to submit her selfe; which she refusing, he replied, that she must tell another tale, ere that she should he set at liberty, least she should have advantage against him for her long, and wrong imprisonment: more Eng∣lish blood by his meanes was spilled in Queene Maries time, by hanging, heading, burning, and prisoning, than ever was in any Kings raigne before her. This treacherous Prelate, who called King Edward his So∣veraigne, usurper Fox Acts and Monuments Edi. ult vol. 3. p. 524 527. being hated of God, and all good men, had a miserable death sutable to his life: for the old Duke of Norfolke comming so visite him, the same day that Ridly & Latimer were burnt at Oxford, the Bishop would not sit downe to dinner, till one of his servants about foure of the clocke comming post from Oxford, brought most certaine intelligence that fire was set to these Martyrs; whereupon comming out rejoy∣cing to the Duke, Now (saith he) let us goe to Dinner. They being set down, meate immediatly was brought, and the Bishop began merrily to eate; but what fol∣lowed? The bloody Tyrant had not eaten a few bits, but the sudden stroke of Gods terrible hand fell upon him in such sort, as immediatly hee was taken from the Table, and so brought to his bed, where he conti∣nued the space of fifteene dayes in such intollerable an∣guish & torments within (rotting even above ground) that all that while during these fifteene dayes, he could not avoid by order of vrine or otherwise, any thing that he received, whereby his body being miserably infla∣med within (who had inflamed so many good Mar∣tyrs before) was brought to a wretched end. And thereof no doubt, as most like it is, came the thrusting out of his tongue from his mouth so swolne and blacke with the inflammation of his body. A Spectacle wor∣thy to be noted and beholden of such bloody burning Persecutors. When Doctor Day Bishop of Chichester came to him, and began to comfort him with words
of Gods Promise, and with the free justification in the blood of Christ our Saviour, repeating the Scriptures to him: Winchester hearing that, What my Lord (quoth he) will you open that gappe now? Than farewell all together. To me, and such other in my case you may speake it, but open this window to the people, than farewell all together. And thus this wretch died, blaspheming. He that list may read more of him in Iohn Bales Scriptorum. Brit. cent. 8. sect. 88. p. 486. &c. Iohn White his successor in that See, was little better, and would have defaced Queene Elizabeth gladly, if hee durst, in his Funerall Sermon of Queene Mary, whom he immoderately extolled. He to obtaine this Bishoppricke, promised to Iohn white give the Pope 1600. l. per annum, for it during his life: which grosse Symony the Pope disliking, and threatning to punish him for it, he was forced to pay much dearer, ere he could ob∣taine it. William Har∣rison Description of England. l. 2. c 1. p. 138. Martins Hi. p. 452.453.454 This Bishop, and others, being appointed to conferre with the Protestant Ministers in the first yeare of Queene Elizabeth, insteed of disputing, he, and Thomas Watson Bishop of Lincolne, two malepate Pre∣lates, threatning to excommunicate the Queene, were committed to prison, and there detained, and after that for refusing to take the oath of allegeance to the Queen; he, with thirteene Bishops more, who denied to take the Oath of Supremacy, which the greatest number of them had sworne unto formerly during the raigne of King Henry the eight, were deprived of their Bishop∣prickes, and others placed in their roome. Iohn Bale in his Cent. 9. Scrip. Brit. sect. 97. p. 736.737. Centuries gives this description of this Pre∣late: Iohannes Whitus, Wintoniensis schlae olim Praeses, nunc EIVS PESTILENTISSIMAE SEDIS Episcopus, & Antichristi Romani terrificus minister, rostris & unguibus in Angliae regno restituere conatur, omnes ejus ty∣ranides, idolomanias, faeditates, & omni dogmata universa. Principum illusor, & animarum carnifex, duplex & perjurus hypocrita ambitiosus que haereticus, deum suum Mauzim, mu∣tum,
mortuum & aridum idolum, omnium perniciosissimum, adversus Denm verum, viuum & sanctum erexit. And Iohn Parkhust for his sake, wrote this Disticke to England, to take heede of all Prelates, and not to trust them. Anglia furcatis nimium ne fidito mitris: Dic rogo, num serus sum tibi praemonitor? With this other Disticke upon the Bishop him∣selfe. Candidus es certè, nec candidus es, Rogitas cur? Nomine candidus es, moribus at niger es. I finde little recorded of any of the Bishops of this See since this dayes; and what the Prelates of that See, in our memories have beene (as Bilson, Mountague, An∣drewes, Neale, and Curle now living,) is sufficiently knowne: For Bilson, Andrewes, and Neale, we know, they were great sticklers for See Bilson of Church Govene∣ment Andrwes; for Ex Officio Oathes, &c. Episcopacy, Lord∣ly Prelacy, the High Commission Inquisition, and Ex Officio Oathes; great enemies to Prohibitions and the Common Law; and no good friends to Parlia∣ments: for Mountague and Neale, they were the origi∣nall Authors and publishers of the Booke for Sports on the Lords Day published in King Iames his name and dayes, which occasioned must disorder then, and more since; and for the present Bishop, Curle, hee was the most violent enforcer of this Booke on the Cleargie of all other Bishops (Peirce and Wren onely excepted,) and the first that ever suspended any Ministers for re∣fusing parsonally to read it in their Churches; he suspending no lesse than five eminent Ministers at St. Mary Overies in one day, for refusing to publish it, though not injoyned nor authorized by the King to do it; whereupon other Bishops following his example, and proceedings in this kinde, both in their Consistories, high Commissions, and Visitations,
(wherein they made it one Article of Inquiry upon oath for Churchwardens to present on, whether their Minister had read to them the Declaration for Sports? a suparlative and shamelesse prophanes, not paraleld in any age since Adam till now) Silenced, Suspended, perse∣cuted; excommunicated, and drave out of the Realme, many of our best and painfullest preaching Ministers, and put both our Church and State into a misera∣ble combustion, and most sad perplexed condition, making such breaches in both, which will not be, repaired again in many yeares. O that men who professe themselves Fathers of the Church, Pillers of Religion, and Pastors of mens soules, should be such Step-fathers to their owne Diocesse and Country, such patrons of prophanesse, and licenciousnesse, and such desperate murtherers of poore peoples soules, to vex persecute, and stop their godly Ministers mouthes, because they durst not out of consciens open them, to seduce and spur them on to hell & prophanes with a full currere. I shall onely checke the impudency, and shame the prophanenesse of these our monstrou Prelates, with words of Cardinall Bellarmine (no Puritan,Cincio. 6.3.19.20.21. I am certaine) touching the unlawfulnesse of Dancing and Pastimes upon Lords dayes, in sundry Sermons. I cannot verily, good hearers (saith he) explicate by words, with how great griefe of minde, I behold, in what a perverse and Diabolicall manner Holi-dayes are celebrated in this our age. How farre pevish men have obscured and defiled their pious institution, with their most corrupt manners, may be understood by this, that to strangers, and those who are ignorant what manner of feasts, these are, from those things, which they see every where to be done, they may seeme to be, not the feasts of God, but the Festivals of the Devill, and so the very Bacchanalia themselves. Yea verily, when I pray you, are there more sinnes committed then on Holidayes? When are there more sumptuous feasts
kept? When more lascivious songs heard? When are bowling-allies & Tavernes more frequented? when are there more execrable kinds of Playes Fooleries, and scurrilities? When are there more Dances in most places to the sound of the Harpe and Lute, then on these dayes? But peradventure it is no evill. or a small evill, for men to dance with women. Yea verily nothing is more pernicious. If strawes can come to the fire, and not be burnt, than a young man may dance with wo∣men. Alas, what will dances and Galliards profit thee at the last? when thou shalt have danced long, what shalt thou gaine at length but wearinesse of body and sicknesse of minde? knowest thou not the danger of Dances? How many thinkest thou, have entred Vir∣gins into dances, and returned Harlots? Knowest thou not what hapned to the daughter of Herodias, who with her dances was the cause that the light of the world, who had baptized the Lord, was quite extinguished? even she her selfe afterwards, as Ecclsiasticae. Histor. l 1. c. 19.20 Where this Historian nota∣bly inveigheth against Dancing. Nicephorus records, when she once passed over a river congealed with Ice, the Ice breaking, fell into the water up to the necke; and little after her head was congealed with frost and cold, and afterwards cut off, not with a sword, but with Ice, and then made a deadly dance upon the Ice. Knowest thou not what St. De virginius l. 3. Tom. 4. O∣perum p. 236.227. Ambrose, saith for her sake, One (saith he) may dance, but the daughter of an a∣dulteresse: but shee who is chast, let her learne her daughters Prayers not Dances. Of Dances, I will onely speake one word, and for this cause principally, that I understand how dancing seemes not a true evill to some, and I know that at Lovan, there are publike Schooles, where the Art of dancing is taught. But I verily, if adultery and fornication be evill, cannot see how it is not evill for men to dance with women, since it most of all provokes thereunto.Nota. Heare holy Iob Iob 31. I have made (saith he) a covenant with mine eyes, that I would not so much as thinke of a mayde; and shalt thou goe and dance with a maide, and provoke thy selfe to lust by
dancing, and yet no danger hang over thy head? To what end then doth the Wise man give this admoni∣tion Ecclesiasticus. 9.4. Keepe not company with a woman that is a dancer, least happily thou perish in her allurements; but because if chaffe can come to the fire and not be burnt, than a young man may dance with women and not burne What? holy men, St. Anthony, St. Hilaron, dwelt in the wildernesse, they perpetually gave them∣selves to fastings and prayers, and yet Hironimus E∣pist. 2 c. 3. scarce def∣ded themselves from the spirit of fornicatio and from evill deires and thoughts: and wilt thou dde o the heat of youth the heat of drinking, and then goe and laugh and sing, and dance with beautifull maydens, and shall I suspect no harme? Who of all you shall dwell with everlasting burning?Esay 33.14. If you cannot now abstaine from drunkennesse, from dancing, from toyes how shall ye be able to endure those living flames and most bitter gnashing of teeth? But concerning the madnesse of dancing; heare yee what the ancients as well prophane as sacred, have left written:Oratio pro Mu∣raena. Marcus Tullis did so detest the filthinesse of Dances, that in the defence of Muraena, he said, No so∣ber man almost danceth, unlesse perchance he be be∣sides himselfe, and extreme dancing is the Companion of many delights. And Oratio pro Cn. Plaucio & Post rditum in Se∣natum. in another place he objecteth dancing to Antonius, as a most dishonest crime. Blush therefore, O Christian, blush, thou art overcome by an Ethnicke, and without doubt thou shalt be condem∣ned in judgement by an Ethneike. He by the light of Nature onely without the light of faith, could teach, that dancing was not the practice of any, but either of drunkards or mad men: and thou the Sonne of Cod, illuminated with a celestiall light, with whom such vanities ought not so much as to be Ephs. 5 3. named, art most mad, in the very most famous and most sacred solemnities. Let us relinquish prophane Authors, and come to Christians. Tell thou us, O most blessed Am∣brose,
thou most reverend old man, the light of the Christian Church, what thinkest thou of dances and morrisses De viginibus l. 3. Tom 4. p. 226.227. Worthily, saith he, from thence we proceed to the injury of the Diuinity; for what modestie can be there where they dance, shreeke, and make a noyse together? Tell thou us also, O blessed Hierom, what thou deemest of dancing: Moreover (saith he) in his Booke against See. Eist 10 4 Heluidius, where the Tymbrils sound, the Pipes make a noise, the Harpe chatters, the Cym∣balls strike together, what feare of God can there be? Let us passe over into the East, and let us also advise with two of the Greeke Fathers. Tell thou us, O great Chrysostome the ornament of Greece, tell thou us I pray thee thy opinion of banquets and dances;See Hom. 56. Gen. 8.74. in Matth. Heare (saith he) in the 49 Homily upon Matthew, heare these things, O men who follow magnificent feasts, full of drunken∣nesse, heare I say, and tremble at the gulfe of the devill: where wanton dancing is there the devill is certainely present. For God hath not given us our legges to dance, but that we should walke modestly, not that we should impudently skippe like Camels. But if the body be polluted, by dancing impudently, how much more may the soule be thought to be defiled? The de∣vill danceth in these dances: with these, men are de∣ceived by the ministers of the Devill. Last of all, heare with what words, De Ebrietate & Luxu Sermo. Tam. 1. p. 332.336. St. Basil the great, a most holy man, and most learned, deplores this madnesse, in his Ora∣tion against drunkards: Men (saith he) and women together entring into Common dances, having deli∣vered their soules to the drunken devill, wound one another with the prickes of unchast affections: profuse laughter, is practised and filthy songs, meretritious habits inviting unto petulancie are there used: Laugh∣est, and delighest thou thy selfe with an arrogant de∣light, when as thou oughtest to power out teares, and sighes for what is past? Singest thou whorish Songs, casting away the Psalmes, & Hyranes thou hast learned?
Dost thou stirre thy feete and caper furiously, and dance unhappily, when as thou oughtest to bend thy knees to prayer. Thus great Basil. Now if the holy Fa∣thers have spoken these things of dances in ge∣narall, Nota. how I pray had they exclaimed, if they had knowne them to have beene used in the very Festivals of Christs Nativitie? But let us leave men, and heare what the Lord himselfe, who cannot erre, what the holy Ghost, and the Spirit of Truth, saith by the Pro∣phet Esay 5.11.12.13. Esay: the Harpe, saith hee, and the Violl, the Taber and pipe, and wine are in your Feasts, but ye regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the o∣peration of his hands. Ah wretched & miserable persons, the Lord hath done an admirable worke in these dayes: The Lord hath created Ier. 31.22. a new thing upon the earth: A mayd hath brought forth a Sonne: God hath come unto men, a new starre hath appeared, the heavens are made mellifluous Matth. 2.2.10. the Angels have left those blessed mansions that they might behold the little one who is given to us, and ye onely for whom these things are done, busied in wickednesse, buried in sleepe and wine, regard not the worke of the Lord,Luke 2.9.13. and consider not the operations of his hands. What therefore shall be done unto you?1413.14.15. Heare the sentence of your Judge, Therefore saith he, Hell hath inlarged its oule, and hath opened its mouth without all bounds Nota. See vin∣centii speculum. Morale l. 3. par 9 Distinct. Perad∣adventure ye are ignorant how great a sacriledge it is to prophane dayes consecrated to God. Why, I beseech you, doe we not every where use Churches, Chalices, and Priestly vestments? what are these walls more than others? What are Priests Garments more than others? As to their matter nothing at all. But therefore it is a wickednesse, therefore a sacriledge therefore a most horrible villany to convert them to prophane uses because they are consecrated and dedicated to God, But who knoweth not that Holidayes are after the
same manner consecrated and dedicated unto God, and to be spent in no other but in holy workes? which of you if he should see any one enter into the Church with encredible audacity, and use the consecrated vestments, in steed of prophane garments, Temples for a Taverne, the Altar for a Table, the Corporals, or Alterclothes for Mappes, eating in sacred Patens drinking in the Holy Chalices? which of us would not tremble, who would not exclaime? And now we behold the most solemne, the most famous, the most sacred Holy-dayes, dedicated to God, that they might be spent in Prayers, Meditations, reading of holy things, Hymnes and Psalms, and spirituall Songs, to be prophaned with sacrilegious Dances, Morrisses, Caperings, Feasts, Drinking-matches, uncleannesses, scurrilities, and yet no man trembles, no man is mo∣ved, no man wonders; O immortall God! 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16. What part hath righteousnesse with unrighteousnesse? what fellowship hath light with darkenesse? what agree∣ment hath Christ with Belial? what hath the merri∣ment of the flesh to doe with the gladnesse of the spirit? what the solemnities of God, with the feasts of Bacchus and his crue? What now? those dayes wherein wee ought to please God most, shall we in them more pro∣voke him unto anger with our wickednesse? on those dayes, in which the spirit is to be fed and recreated; in them shall we more overwhelme him with wine and uncleannesses? &c. What a madnesse is this? what infirnall furies scare us out of our wits? Thus, and much more, this Romish Cardinall Bellarmin, to the eternall infamy of our pro∣phane English Prelates; to whom this Cardinall in point of Dancing and Pastimes, especially on sacred Dayes, is not onely a Puritan, but a Saint. And thus much for the Prelates of Winchester: I shall next survey the Bishops of Durham, and see whether they have been better qualified than these their Brethren.
Durham. Mat. Wst. An 750. p. 273. Hoveden. Annal. pars prior. An. 750. p. 402. Kenulph the tenth Bishop of Durham,KENVL∣PHVS. Anno. 750. was ta∣ken by Edbert King of the Northumbrians (belike or some great Treason or misdemeanour, for the Monkes conceale the reason) and committed prisoner to the Castle of Bebba, which King com∣manded the Church of Saint Peter in Lindisfarne to be besieged; which shewes that the Bishop and his Church stood out then in rebellion against their Soveraigne. Malmesb. d gst. Pont. Angl. l. 3. p. 277. God∣win, p. 636. Mat. Paris p. 5. An. 1069. Godwin. p. 632. Egelricke the 16. Bishop of Durham,GELRIC. was charged with Treason, and conspiracy against William the Conqueror, and that hee had disturbed the Kings peace, and practised pyracie on the Seas: whereupon hee was committed perpetuall prisoner to Westminster, where, by continuall fasting and abundance of teares washing away the guilt of his former misdeeds, he wan unto imself such a reputation of holinesse, as the place of his buriall was much frequented after his death. Matth. Par Hist. Major. An. 1070.1071. p. .6. Mat. Westm, & Flrentius Wi∣gorinsis, Ann. 1070, 1071. H∣veden. An. 1069.1070. p. 451, 452.454. God∣win, p. 636.637. Egelwyn,EGELWYN. his next successor in this See, much opposed himselfe against William the Conqueror, to whom afterward hee was in shew reconciled for a time; at last the ancient hatred hee bore unto the King, boyling in his stomacke, hee joyned winh certaine Noble men in a flat rebellion against the Conquerour: he and they alleaging at first, that they feared imprisonment, and hard measure, but indeed proposing to apprehend and depose the King, to set up an English man in his roome, and commit him to perpetuall imprisonment. When things succeeded not according to expectation, William the Conquerour getting the victory, Egelwyn lyes into Scotland; the King having banished him the Realme before, where out of his zeale, hee communicates the King, and all his followers, as invaders and robbers of the Church. The yeare following he comes into England where hee and the Nobles combining with him, with many thou∣sands of the Laity and Clergy were faine to hide themselves in woods and secret places, being unable to encounter with the Kings forces; when they had done many harmes and mischiefes in divers places to the wrong of the King, they came at last o the Isle of Ely, which they fortified and seized on as the place of their residence and refuge: and ot times issuing out thence, much wasted and spoyled the bordering countries, building a wooden Castle in the Iland wherupon the Conqueror comes with
all his forces, both by sea and land, and besiegeth the Iland, m∣king wayes and passages over bogges and fennes, formerly un∣passable, building a strong Castle at Wibitch. Egelwyn percei∣ving the danger tooke ship and departed into voluntary exile, committing some pyracies by the way he set his course for Colen, but was forced by contrary winds to land in Scotland, thence re∣turning againe to Ely, hee was at last there taken prisoner by the Conquerour, and committed close prisoner to Abingdon, where An. 1071. refusing to take any sustenance, for meere griefe and anger he died. Walcher. Malmesbur. l. 3. Hist. Angl. p. 110. Hvden. Annal. pars prior. An. 1071.1078.1080. p. 454.455.457. Mat. Paris, An. 1075. p. 9. Godwin pag. 637, 638, 639, 640. Before his death the Conquerour having deprived him of his Bishopricke, caused one Walcher to be consecrated in his place: hee attending more worldly affaires than the charge of his flocke (as many of our Prelates do now) gave himselfe altogeher to temporall businesse; wherein hee wholly occupied himselfe, contra dignitatem Pontificalem: writes Matthew Paris. He bought of the King the Earledome of Northumberland, being by this meanes both a Spiritual and a Temporall Lod, and ingrossing both jurisdictions into his hands, and then making himselfe a se∣cular Judge, tooke upon him to sit in the Court, and to deter∣mine all causes at his pleasure, dealing with all very corruptly, and taking that course as might be most for his owne gaine: hereupon he geatly enriched his coffers, but purchased to him∣selfe extreme hatred among the Common people whom hee much impoverished with his extortions, which was his destru∣ction in the end. There was a Gentleman of great account called Leulfus, who had married the Earle of Northumberlands daugh∣er, that for very devotion, to the end hee might live neere the Church in his latter time, came to Durham to dwell; he keeping company very much with the Bishop, who loved him much for his wisedome, equity, and vertues: Leofwin the Bishops Chaplain, whom he trusted with all his houshold matters, and Gilbert the Bishops kinsman that dealt in his Temporall affaires, very corrupt men, envying the credit that Leulfus had gotten with the Bishop, every where opposed and traduced him and his actions, both in words and deed, and at last conspired to murther him, which they did in a barbarous manner, assaul∣tig him in his house with armed men, and murthering not one∣ly the innocent Gentleman himselfe, but also his servants and whoe houshold: the newes of this horrible outragious cruelty
comming to the eares of the Bishop amazed him; so as turning about to Leofwin hee said to him: Thou hast already slaine mee with thy tongue: and doubting the danger got him into his Castle, and dispatched messengers to the friends and kindred of Leulfus, protesting, that the fact was committed without his knowledge, and that hee was heartily sory for it, and if any su∣spect him, hee could be reddy to submit himselfe to any or∣der of Law, whereby hee might cleere himselfe: herewith they seemed to be satisfied, and appointed to meete and conferre of the matter at a place called Goats-head. The Bishop for his better safety betooke himselfe to the Church with his company: at which time all the people of the province came to demand justice from the Bishop, for some wrongs done them. The Bishop answered them over roughly, that he would doe them justice for no injury or complaint, unlesse they would first give him 400l. of good mony. Whereupon one of them in the name of all the rest, desired leave of the Bishops that hee might conferre with the rest about this exaction, that so they might give him an advised answer; which granted, the people consulted toge∣ther without the Church concerning this businesse: in meane time divers messages passed betweene the friends of Leulfus and the Bishop about this murther, but the more the matter was de∣bated (being very odious in it selfe) the more his friends, and the people too, were incensed: at last it was told them that the Bishop had harboured Leofwyn and Gilbert too in his house, and afforded them countenance since this murther, which being once heard and ound true, they all cryed out, it was ma∣nifest, that the Bishop was the Author of this fact: While the com∣pany stood in a mummering doubting what to doe, both con∣cerning this money and murther too, one of some speciall re∣gard among them, stepped up and used these words: Short read, good read, slay the Bishop. Hereupon without more adoe they an∣all unto the Church, killed as many of the Bishops retinue as they found without doores, and with horrible noyse and out∣cryes bid him and his company come out unto them. The Bi∣shop to make the best of a bad match, and to rid himselfe from danger, perswaded his kinsman Gilber there present to goe out unto them, if happily his death (which he well deserved) might satisfie their fury, and purchase their safety. Gilbert was content, and issuing our with divers of the Bishops company, were all
slaine, except two Englishmen servants to the Bishop, the rest being Normans. They not yet pacified, the Bishop besought Leofwyn (whose lie hee knew was principally sought) to goe out likewise, but he utterly reused: The Bishop therefore go∣ing to the Church dore himselfe, intreaed them not to take his life from him, protesting himselfe altogethe innocent of Leul∣fus his blood, shewing them at large how inconvenient it would be to themselves, and the whole Country to shed his blood, an unarmed Priest, and sacred consecrate Bishop, their Ruler, Governour, Magistrate. Lastly, hoping that his very countenance, gravity, age, white comely head and beard, and the Majesy of his person might something move them to com∣passion, hee went out among them, carrying a green branch in his hands to testifie his desire of peace: when hee saw all this availed not, the people running furiously upon him, hee cast his gowne over his owne head, and committing him selfe to their fury, with innumerable wounds was pittifully massacred, toge∣ther with all his retinue to the number of one hundred per∣sons, only Leofwyn yet rmained in the Curch, and being often called would not come forth. So they set the Church on fire; hee not enduring the fire leapt out at a window, and was immedi∣ately hewne in a thousand pieces. This barbarous slaughter was committed May the 4. 1080. as some Historians, or 1075. as others record. The King hearing of this tumult, sent his brother Odo Bishop of Bayon, with many of his Nobles; and a great army to take punishment of this murther, which while they sought to revenge, they brought the whole Country to de∣solation; those that were guilty prevented the danger by light, so as few of them were appreheded; of the rest that stayd at hme, some wee unjustly executed, and the rest com∣pelled to ransome themselves to their utter impoverishing, and undoing. This was the life and death of the first Lord Bishop of this See; who joyned both the temporall and spirituall Juis∣diction and honour together in his owne person, being both a Bishop, and an Earle. M. Paris, Hist. Major An. 1074. p. 8. Anno 1074. during this Bishops domination, Plues Epi∣scopi & Abbates, many Bishops and Abbots, with 3. Earles, and many Souldiers conspired togeher at Nowich, to thrust the Conquerour ou of his Kingdome, sending messages o he King of Denmarke for aide, and confederating themselves with the
Welchmen: whereupon hey burnt and spoyled many townes and villages belonging to the Conquerour; but at last they were defeated by him, some of them being banished the Realme, others hanged, others deprived of their eyes. Who these Bi∣shops were in particular that joyned in this conspiracy and re∣bellion, is not expressed; but they were many in number; whether this Bishop might not be one of the company I know not. Malmes. de gest. Reg. Angl. l. 4. p. 120, 121 de gest. Pont. Ang. l. 3. p. 77. Mat. Paris, An. 1088. p. 13, 14. Wigr. Matth. Wem, Hoved. An. 1087, 1088. Walsingh ypodigma Nustri An. 1088. p. 33. Holinshed. p. 17, 18. William Kairlipho,WILLIAM KAIRLIPHO. Abbo of Saint Vincent, his next suc∣cessour, who got so farre into the favour of King William Rufus, that he made him his houshold Chaplaine, and one of his Privie Councell, and did what hee list under him, in the yeare of our Lord 1088. joyned himselfe with Odo Bishop of Bayon, and Eale of Kent, Geffry Bishop of Constantia, and other great men in a rebellious conspiracy against King William, who much favou∣red and trusted him, to deprive him of his Crowne, as an effemi∣nae peron, both in mind and countenance, and of a fearefull heart, who would do all things rashly, both against right and justice; which revolt and treachery of his the King tooke very grievous∣ly. Whereupon they take up armes against the King, wasting the Country in sundry parts, intending to set up his Brother Ro∣bert in his place as King, giving out divers words, and sending abroad many Letters to incite men to take armes for this pur∣pose. The bishop of Durham held out Durham, by strong hand against the King, who comming thither in person with his army besieged it, so as the Bishop was at length forced to surrender the City, and yeeld himselfe whereupo hee was exiled the Land, with divers of his complices; and for his former pre∣nded friendship to the King, was suffered to goe Scotfree (though worthy a thousand quarterings) upon hi he pre∣sently passed over Sea into Normandy, there he continued neere three yeares in a voluntary exile, untill Septmber 11. 1190. at what time the King comming to Durham, received him into his ull favour, and restored him to his former dignities. After which hee sided with the Kin against Anselme to thrust him out of his Bishopricke, that himselfe might succeed him: bt hee fai∣led in that projec. Falling againe into the Kings displeasure, he was summoned to appeare before him at Glocester, by a cer∣taine day, before which tim hee fell sicke (of griefe as was hought:) when he appeared not, and it was told the King he
was sicke, he swore by S. Lukes face (which was his usuall Oath) he lied and did but counterfeit; and hee would ave him fetcht with a vengeance. But it appeares his excuse was true enough, for hee died soone after. Holinshed saith, hee died or sorrow, because he could not cleere himsele of his offence in the said rebellion, albeit that he laboured most earnestly so to do, that hee might thereby have obtained the King favour againe. Matt. Paris p. 51.54. Malmes. de gest. Pontif. Angl. l. 3. p. 277, 278. Godwin. p. 645, 646, 647. Ranulph Flambard his very next successor,Ranulph Flam∣bard. a very wicked man, nothing scrupulous, but ready to do any thing for prefer∣ment, was by King William Rufus (who ound him a fit man for his purpose to bring great summes of money into his coffers, by any unlawull meanes) made chiefe Governour of all his Realme under him, so as hee had all tha authority which now the Lord Treasurer, Chancellour, and divers other offices have divided amongt them this auhority he abused very impudent∣ly, not caring whom he offended, so as he might enrich either the King or himselfe. Many times when the King gave com∣mandement for the levying of a certaine summe of moneyes a∣mongst his Subjects, hee would require of the Commons twice as much, whereat the King being very well content, would laugh, and say, that Ranulph was the onely man for his turne, who cared not whom hee displeased, so hee might please his Master. It was impossible but hee should be very odious, both unto the Common people and Nobility also; and no marvell if many complaints were made unto the King of him, against all which hee shut his eares obstinaely. When therefore that way succee∣ded not, some of his discontented adversaries determined to wrecke their malice on him by killing him; They faine a mes∣sage from the Bishop of London his old Master, that hee was very sicke and ready to depart the world, that hee was wonderfull desirous to speake with him, and to the end hee might make the better speed, had sent him a Barge to convey him to his house, being then by the water-side; Hee suspecting no fraud, went with them in great haste, attended onely by his Secretary, and some one or two other. They having him thus in their clutches, carried him not to the appoited Staires, but unto  Ship provided for him, ready to set saile. As soone as hee perceived how hee was entrapped, hee cast away his Ring, or manuell Seale, and after his great Sale into the river lest they might give opportunity of forging false grants, and
conveyances. Then hee falls to intreating and perswading, but all to no purpose, for they were determined he should die. They had appointed two Marinrs to dispatch him either by knocking out his braines, or heaving him alive over-board, for doing whereof they were promised to have his cloathes. These executioners could not agree upon the division of the reward, or his gowne was better worth than all the rest of his apparell: while they were reasoning upon that point, it pleased God to raise a terrible tempest, so as they looked every minute to die thmselves, and therefore had no very good leasure of thinking to put another man to death. Ranulph then omitting no oppor∣tunity of his deliverance, like another Orion, by the musicke of his eloquence, seekes to disswade them from the bloody exe∣cution of their determination laying before them the danger that was like to ensue them upon the execuion of so cruell a murther, which could not be hid; and lastly, wishing them to consider, how God by raising this tempest had threatned to re∣venge his death, and had as it were set the Image of vengeance before their eyes: promising them mountaines of gold if they saved his life; By which hee so farre prevailed, that one of them offered to defend him, and Girald the author of this conspi∣racie, was content to set him aland, and to conduct him to his owne house. But so soone as hee had done, not trusting a re∣conciled foe, hee got him out of the Land: Ater this notable voyage hee was consecrated Bishop of Durham: Hee was scarce warme in his See, but King William Rufus was slaine, and his brother Henry succeeded him. This Prince not able to with∣stand the importunity of his Nobles, and the innumerable com∣plaints made against this Bishop, by the vote of the whole Parlia∣ment, clapt him up in the Towre. But hee so enchaunted his kee∣pers, as they were content to let him goe, and runne away with themselves. William of Malmesbury saith, that he procured a waterbeaer in his Tankrd to bring him a rope, by whih hee slid downe from the wall to the ground, and so (although hee hurt his arme, and galled his legge to the bone) away he esca∣ped, getting himselfe into Normandy, where hee arried in the beginning of February, Ann. 1101. There hee never left buz∣zing into the eares of Robert, Duke of Normandy, that the King∣dome of England was his by right, till hee procured him to a∣tempt the invasion of the Realme, to his owne great losse, the
effusion of much Christian blood, and the great disturbance and dammage of the whole Realme: How long hee continued in his exile is not recorded by our Historians, who brand him for a notable extortioner, oppressor, rebell, and desperate wicked wretch, & ad omne scelus paratum, (as too many of his coate since him have beene) who set the whole Realme into an uproare and com∣bustion. Holinshed. Hist. of Scotl. pag. 181. About the yeare 1100. King Edgar gave to the Monkes of Durham the lands of Coldingham. And to this Bi∣shop of Durham he gave the towne of Barwicke, but for that the said Bishop afterward wrought treason against him, hee lost that gift, and the King resumed that Towne into his hands againe. HVGH PVSAR.Hugh Pusar his successor, the 33. Bishop of that See, nephew to King Stephen, a man very wise in ordering temporall matters, not spirtuall,Nurigens. Hist. l. 1. c. 26. l. 4. c. 4. Godwin. p. 648, 649, 650. Holins. p. 119.121. exceeding covetous, and as cunning in getting money, as covetous in desiring it, was refused to be consecrated Bishop by Murdack Archbishop of Yorke, for want of yeaes, and lightnesse in behaviour, whereupon he obtained his con∣secration at Rome. King Richard the first or a great masse of money hee had prepared for his voyage into the holy Land, di∣spensed with his vowe of pilgrimage thither, and likewise made him Earle of Northumberland. The King having created him an Earle, turned him about unto the company, and laugh∣ing said, I have performed a wonderfull exploit, for (quoth hee) of an old Bishop I have made a young Earle. Hee likewise gave the King one thousand Markes to make him chiefe Justice of Eng∣land:Nubrigensis. l. 4. c. 4. l. 5. c. 8. qui nimirum consultius proprio contentus officio divini juris multo decentius quam humani minister extitisset, cum nemo possit utrique, prout dignum est deservire, atque illud dominium ad Apo∣stolos, maxime Successores Apostolorum respiciat. Non potestis Deo servire & mammonae. Si enim velit Episcopus ut coelesti pariter & terreno Regi placeat, ad utrumque se officium dividere: certe. Rex coelestis, qui sibi vult ex toto corde, tota anima, tota virtute serviri, ministerium dimidium non approbat, non diligit, non acceptat. Quid si Episcopus nec saltem dimidius, quae Dei sunt, & decent Episcopum, exequatur, sed vices suas indignis et remissis executoribus commit∣tat ut terreno vel foro, vel palatio totus serviat? nam nec terreni Principis ratiocinia quisquam dimidius sufficienter administrat. Quamobrem memoratus Pontifex cum jam esset grandaevus, officio seculari suscepto in Australibus Angliae partibus ad publica totus ne∣gota recidebat, mundo non crucifixus, sed infixus, writes Nubrigensis of him.Holinsh p. 105. Roger de Hveden. Annal. pars pos∣ius. p. 615. Roger Archbishop of Yorke deceasing A. 1181. delivered
great summes of money to certaine Bishops to be distributed a∣mong poore people. King Henry the second after his death cal∣led for the mony and seised it to his use, alleadging a sentence given by the same Archbishop in his lietime, that no Ecclesiasti∣call person might give any thing by will except hee devised the the same whilst hee was in perfect health. Yet this Bishop of Durham would not depart with 400 Markes, which hee had received to distribute among the poore, alleaging, that hee dealt the same away before the Archbishops death, and therefore hee that would have it againe, must goe gather it up of them to whom hee had distributed it, which himselfe would in no wise doe. But the King tooke no small displeasure with this indiscreet answer, in so much that hee seised the Castle of Durham into his hands; and sought meanes to disquiet the said Bishop by divers manner of wayesHoveden Anl. prs posterior. pag. 663.665, 666. King Richard going into the holy Land, made this Bishop chiefe Justice from Trent Northwards, and the Bi∣shop of Ely Lord Chancellor and chiefe Justice of England, betweene whom strife and discord immediately arse, which of them should be the greater, for that which pleased the one displeased the other; for all power is impatient of a consort. The Bishop of Ely soone after imprisoned him till hee had surrendred Winsor Castle, and others to him, and put in pledges to be faithfull to the King and Kingdome, of which more in Ely. At the returne of King Richard from Ierusalem, hee found him not so fa∣vourable as hee expected, and thinking that he grudged him his Earledome, resigned the same into his hands. For the re∣demption of which he afterward offered the King great summes of money; whereupon the King knowing how to use him in his kind, writ letters to him full of reverend and gracious spee∣ches, wishing him to bring up his money to London, and there to receive the Government of the whole Realme, which hee would commit to him, and the Archbishop of Canterbury. Being very joyfull of this avour, he comes about Shrovetide towards London, and surfeiting of flesh by the way died. This Prelate (who much troubled and oppressed the Commons, and whole Realme) had no lesse than three bastard sonnes,Hvdn. Anal. pars posterior pag. 725, 736, 665, 666, 685, 738. whom hee en∣deavoured to advance, but they all dyed before him. Hee was oft in armes in the field, and besieged the Castle of Thifehill be∣longing to Earle Iohn: he tooke up the Crossado and went beyond Sea with King Richard the first to the warres in the holy Land; but considering the danger, got a dispensation
and returned speeding better than Baldwin Archbishop of Canter∣bury, and ten Archbishops and Bishops more, who did at the siege before Acon; and like warlike Prelates stirred up King Richard with sundry other Christian Princes to that bloody, chargeable, and unortunate warre, wherein many thousands of Christians spent both their lives, and estates, and whereby Christians lost the verity of Christian Religion, and Christ himselfe in a great measure, whiles thus they warre to secure the place of his sepulcher, which proved a sepulcher both to their bodies and soules. * William K. of Scotland comming to visit King Richard the first afte his release; this Prelate, and Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, went to Brackley, where the Bishop had an Inne. The King of Scots servants comming thither, would have ta∣ken up the Bishops Inne for their King: but the Bishops ser∣vants withstood them; whereupon they bought provision for the King and dressed it in another house in that same Court: When the Bishop came thither, and his servants had informed him what had passed, he would not retire, but went on boldly unto his Inne, and commanded his meat to be set on the table; whiles he was at dinner, the Archbishop of Canterbury comes to him, and offers him his lodging, and counsels him to remove and leave the Inne. The King of Scots comming late from hun∣ting, when hee was told what had happened, tooke it very grie∣vously, and would not goe thither, but commanded all his pro∣vision to be given to the poore, and goes forthwith to the King to Selnestone, & complains to him of the injury the Bishop of Durham had offered to him; for which the King sharpely rebuked him. Richard de Ma∣risco.Richard de Marisco, Lord Chancellor of England, and Arch∣deacon of Notthumberland, an old Courtier, was thrust into this See by Gualo the Popes Legate,Godwin Cat. p. 515 and consecrated by the Archbishop of Yorke in the yeare 1217. during the time of the va∣cancy. This Richard was a very prodigall man, and spent so liberally the goods of his Church, as the Monkes doubting hee would undoe them, and himselfe also, went about by course of Law to stay him, and force him to a moderation of expence. But it fell out quite contrary to their expectation, for hee being wilfully set, continued Law with them, appealing to Rome, &c. and continued his old course even untill his death. The yeare 1226. in the beginning of Easter terme, hee rid up to London
with a troope of Lawyers attendng on him. At Peterborough he was entertained in the Abey very onorably, and going to bed there in very good health, was found in the morning by his Chamberlaine starke dead. Hee deceased May the first, lea∣ving his Church 40000. markes indebed, though his conten∣tion, and prdigall factious humour. Anthony Beake the 41. Bishop of this See,Anthony Bak. Godwin. p. 521.522. a very wealthy man, contented not himselfe with ordinary Titles. Therefore he pro∣cured the Pope to make him Patriarc of erusalem, & obtained of the King the Principality of he Isle of Man, during his life. Anno 1294. being Ambassador to the Emperor Iohn Roan the Arch∣bishop of Yorke excommunicated him, which cost him 000. Markes fine to the King, and his life to boote, hee dying for griefe. There was grea stirre betweene him and the Prior and Covent of Durham. Hee informed the Pope that the Prior was a very simple and insufficient man to rule that house, and there∣upon procured the government thereof both spirituall and tem∣porall to be committed to him. The Monkes appealed both the Pope and King, who required the hearing of these contro∣versies betweene the Prior and Bishop. This notwithstanding the Bishops officers, made no more adoe, but excommunica∣ted the Prior, Monkes and all for not obeying their authority immediately. Herewith he King greatly offended, caused those Officers to be fined, and summoned the Bishop himselfe to ap∣peare before him at a day appointed, before which day hee got to Rome, never acquainting the King with his determination. The King thereupon seised into his hands the Bishops liberties, & appointed a new Chancellour, new Justices, and other offi∣cers of Durham, Hee writ also to the Pope in favour of the Prior, who delivering the Kings Letters himselfe, the Pope adjudged him a sober and discreet man, what ever the Bishop had repor∣ted of him, and restored him to his place; during the Bishops disgrace for this contempt, the King tooke hree Mannors with the Church of Symondbury from the Bishopricke, with divers Castles and Lands forfeited to him by Iohn Bayliol King of Scots, and others. The Bishop at last submitted himselfe, and bought his peace. Holins. p. 305. Anno Dom. 1298. in the battell of Foukirke, betweene the English and Scots, this Bishop of Durham (An∣thony Beake) led the second battell of the Englishmen conisting of 39. standards: who hasting forth to be the first that should
give the on et, when his men approached neere the enemies the Bishop commanded them to stay till the third battell which the King (Edward the first) led, might approach. But that va∣liant Knight the Lord Ralph Basset of Draiton said to him; My Lord, you may goe and say Masse, which better becommeth you, than to teach us what wee have to doe; for wee will doe that which be∣longeth to the order and custome of warre. LEWS BEAVMONT.About the yeare 1318. at the importunate suite of the Kings of England and France, the Pope gave the Bishopricke of Duham unto one Lewes Beaumont, a Frenchman borne, and of the blood Royall there; hee was lame of both his legges, and so unlearned,Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 262, 263. Godwin, p. 522, 523. that hee could not read the Bulls and other instru∣ments of his consecration. When hee should have pronoun∣ced this word (Metropoliticae) not knowing what to make of it (though hee had studied upon it and laboured his Lesson long before) after a little pause, Soyt pur dit (saith he) let it goe for read, and so passed it over. In like sort he stumbled at (In aenig∣mate) when hee had fumbled about it a while, Par Saint Lewis (quoth hee) il n'est pas curtois qui ceste parolle ici escrit, that is, by Saint Lewes he is to blame that writ this word here. Not with∣out great cause therefore the Pope was somewhat strait laced in admitting him. He obtained conecration so hardly, as in foure∣teene yeares hee could scarce creepe ot of debt. Riding to Durham to be install'd there, hee was robbed (together with two Cardinals, that were then in his company) upon Wiglesden More neere Derlington. The Captaines of this rour were na∣med Gilbert Middleton, and Walter Selby. Not content to take all the treasure of the Cardinals, the Bishop, and their traine; they carried the Bishop prisoner to Morpeth, where they con∣strained him to pay a great ransome. Gilbert Middleton was soone after taken at his owne Castle of Nitford, carried to Lon∣don, and there drawne and hanged in the presence of the Car∣dinalls. After this, one Sir Iosceline Deinvill, and his brother Robert, came with a great company to divers of this B. of Durhams houses in the habits of Friers, & spoyled them, leaving nothing, but bare walls, and did many other notable robberies for which they & divers of their company were soone after hanged at York. This B. stood very stoutly in defence of the Liberties of his See, recovered divers lands taken away from Anthony Beake his prede∣essor, and procured this sentence to be given in the behalfe of
his Church; quod Episcpus Dunelmensi debet habere forisfactu∣ras guerrarum intra libertates, sicut Rex extra: that the Bishop of Durham is to have the forfeitures of warre in as ample sort within his owne Liberties as the King without. Imediately after this Bishops death in great hast (but withRICHARDDE BVRY. no great good speed) the Covent of Duram proceeded unto the Election of a new Bishop (the old being yet scarcely buried)Godwin. p. 524. and they made choise of one of their owne company a Monke of Durham. This election the Arch-Bishop of Yorke confirmed, yea the matter grew so forward, as the same Arch-bishop was con∣tent to give him consecration also. All this while the Kings good will was not sought, no nor (which was a greater oversight as the world then went) the Popes neither. The King therefore not onely refused to deliver possession of the Temporalties un∣to this elect, but also laboured the Pope, ex plenitudine potestatis, to conferre the Bishopricke upon a Chaplaine of his named Ri∣chard de Bury, the Deane of Wells. Partly to pleasure the one that requested, partly to displeasure the other for not requesting, he did so, and commanded the Bishop of Win∣chester to consecrate him; which being performed at Chertsey soone after Christmasse, the King presently invested him in the temporalties belonging to that See. Now was the Monke a Bishop without a Bishopricke; having no other home, he was faine to returne to his Cloyster, and there for very griefe (as it is supposed) within a few dayes after dyed. This Richard dé Bury, at what time Edward of Windsor Prince of Wales fled into France with his Mother, was principall receiver of the Kings Revenewes in Gascoigne. Their mony failing, he ayded them secretly with a great summe of that he had received for the King. It had almost cost him his life, he was so narrowly pursued by some of the Kings friends that got understanding of it, as hee was glad to hide himselfe in a steeple in Paris the space of se∣ven dayes. The Queene we know was then contriving an open rebellion and plotting a mischeivous treason against her hus∣band King Edward the second, whom she shortly after seised upon in an hostile manner, and afterwards caused to be deprived and murthered, so that this Prelates furnishing of her thus with the Kings owne monies to further this her designe, was high Treason at the least. Not to mention how the Pope upon King Edward the third his request consecrated Godwin. p. 526. Thomas Hatfield his Secretary Bishop of
this See without any regard or examination of his worthinesse being a man altogether illiterate, and that when some of the Cardinalls tooke exceptions against him, saying, that he was not onely a meere lay man, but a fellw of light behaviour, and no way fit for that place, how the Pope answered, that if the King of Eng∣land had requested him for an Asse at that time he would not have denyed him, and thereupon made this Ase a Bishop. IOHN FOR∣HAM.Iohn Fordham Bishop of Durham, Anno 1388. was by Parli∣ament banished the Court,Walsingham Hist. Angl. An. 1388. p. 365. Speedes History p. 748. Godwin. p. 664. as a pernicious instrument and cor∣rupter of King Richard the second, a Traytor, a flatterer, a whisperer, a slanderer and wicked person. IOHN SHER∣WOOD.Iohn Sherwood the 52 Bishop of Durham Solliciter of all King Edward the fourths causes in the Court of Rome, fell off from his Masters Sonne King Edward the fifth, to that bloody usurper Richard the third, at whose Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 262. Godwin p. 526. Coronation this Bishop of Durham went on the one side of him,Holinshed, p. 733.734. and the Bishop of Bath on the other, the Arch-bishop of Canterbury with the rest of the Bishops and Abbots mitred and in rich Copes, every one of them carrying Censers in their hands, going in great solemnity before him, and afterwards crowning both him and his Queene, according to the custome of the Realme: so officious were they to this usurper. CVTBERT TONSTALL.Cutbert Tonstall the 58. Bishop of Durham, December 20. 1551. was committed to the Tower for his disobedience to King Edward the sixth, where he continued all his Reigne. The King was so farre offended with him that 7. Edward. 6. the Bishopricke of Durham was dissolved by Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 1180. Godwin p. 670. Act of Parliament and all the Lands and hereditaments thereof given to the King:Rastall Abridg. Stat. f. 149. Dur∣ham, Cambdens Brit. p. 736.741. Godwin. p. 533. Martin hist. p. 452.453.454. Holinshed p. 1184. but he dying this Bishopricke was againe revived and erected. 1. Mar. Parliament. 2. cap. 3. and this Bishop thereunto restored. Who in the first yeare of Queene Elizabeth for his contumacy and disobedience in maintaining the Popes Supremacie which he oppugned formerly, and for refusing the oath of Supremacy which he had sworne unto in the raigne of King Henry the eight, he was justly deprived and committed prisoner to Lambeth House, where he dyed. I finde this Tonstall highly applauded by some who lived since his dayes, but Practise of Po∣pish Prelates. p. 374. M. Tyndall who knew him farre better than they, writes thus of him. And as for the Bi∣shopricke of Durham, to say the very truth, he (to wit Cardinall Wolsie) could not but of good cougruity reward his old Chaplaine,
and one of the chiefe of all his Secretaries withall, still Saturne, that so seldome speaketh, but walketh up and downe all day mu∣sing and imagining mischiefe, a doubling hypocrite made to dissem∣ble. Which for what service done in Christs Gospell came he to the Bishopricke of Londn? Or what such service did he therein? hee burnt the New Testament, calling it,Tunstall Bishop of Durham burnt the New Testa∣ment. Doctrinam peregrinam, strange learning: (The story of whose buying and burning of M. Tyndals New Testaments, who with the money set forth a new and better Edition, is related And out of him by M. Fex Acts and Monuments Edit. ult vol. 2. p. 284. by M. Hall, at large, in his Chronicle 21. H. 8. f. 186.) Yea Verily, looke how strange his living in whose blood that Testament was made, was from the living of the Pope; even so strange is that Doctrine from the Popes Law, in which onely, and in the Practise thereof is Tunstall learned. Which also for what cause left he the Bishopricke of London? Even for the same cause he tooke it after that he had long served for it, covetous∣nesse and ambition. Neither is it possible naturally (pray marke this passage) that there should be any good Bishop, so long as the Bisho∣prickes be nothing save worldly Pompe, and honour,A Bishopricke is superfluous ho∣nour, and a lewd liberty. superfluous a∣bundance of all manner of riches, and liberty to doe what a man left unpunished; things which onely the evill desire, and good men abhorre. For the late Bishops of this See of Durham, Neale, & Howson, their dispositions and actions against goodnesse and good men, and their turbulencie both in Church and State, are so well knowne to most, that I neede not mention it. And as for the present Bishop Dr Morton, whom I honour for his learning and workes against the Papists, how farre hee hath degenerated of late yeares from his Pristine zeale and hatred of Romish Super∣stitions and Innovations,See a late Pam∣hlet wherein this is expressed. and how farre he hath ingaged him∣self in the late Wars and differences between England and Scot∣land, I leave to others to determine. Onely this I cannot pre∣ermit in silence; that as the first Popish Innovations and super∣stitions, which lately over-spread our whole Church, had their Originall from Bishop Neale and his Chaplaine Dr. Cosens at Durham; so God hath made that City and Bishopricke of Dur∣ham (the onely County of England stiled by the name of a Bi∣shoprick) the seate of our late wars wherein the Scottish Armie now resides; to manifest to all the world, that these unhappie civill warres sprung from the Bishops, since the seate of them is no where but in this Bishoprick, the Scottish Generall for the
most part hath kept his residence in the Bishop of Durhams own Palaces, who for feare hath left them vacant, and fled that Country which he hath much oppressed. From Durham I pro∣ceede to Salisbury. Salisbury. ALSTANE or ADELSTANE.Alstane or Adelstane, Bishop of Sherburne (which See was not long after translated to Salisbury) Mat. West. An. 854. pag. 307.308. Holins. Hist. of England, l. 6. c. 9. p. 138. c. 10. p. 140. c. 11. p. 143. Malms. de Gestis Regum Angl. l. 1. c. 2. p. 40. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 36. Speed. Hist. l. 7. c. 32. Sect. 7. p. 377. Godw. p. 333. turned warrior, and led an Army into Kent against Ethelwolfe King o that County, and chased away both the King, and all other that would not sub∣mit themselves to Egbert, over the Thames out of their Country. He fought oft against the Danes, provided money, and furnished out men to withstand them, and tooke upon him to order all matters of the State under King Ethelwolfe. When King Ethel∣wolfe returned from Rome, Adelstane who bare no small rule in the Kingdome of the West-Saxons, would not suffer him to be admitted King, because he had done in certaine points contra∣ry to the Lawes and Ordinances of the Kingdome, as he con∣ceived; whereupon by this Bishops meanes Ethelbald this Kings sonne was established King in his Fathers steed, and so conti∣nued, till at last by agreement the Kingdome was devided be∣twixt them. This Bishop was fervently set on covetousnesse, and greatly enriched his See of Sherburne, where he continued Bishop 50. yeares. ROGER.Roger, the great rich Bishop of Salisbury, advanced and spe∣cially trusted by King Henry the first, for all the benefits that he and his friends received from him, proved not so thankfull or faithfull to his Majestie as was to be expected. Neubrigensis Hist. l. 1. c. 6. Mat. Paris, Ho∣veden, Higden, Fabian Coxton, Speed, Stow, Graf∣ton, Martin in the life of King Ste∣phn. Godwin. p. 319.320 321.322. Fox Acts and Monuments p. 181. Holinshed p. 50.51 Wil. Mal. Hist. Novel. l. 2 p. 181.182.183. to 190. For King Henry the first having lost his onely sonne and Heire apparent Prince William, by mis-fortune upon the Sea, and having no issue lawfully begotten to inherit the Kingdome, but onely Mawd the Empresse, thought good to take an Oath of all the Nobility; wherein they promised, to yeeld obedience to her as their Soveraigne, and to none other. This Oath Roger not onely tooke himselfe, but likewise administred to all the other, being then Chancellour of England: yet notwithstanding for∣getting all duties of Religion towards God, of thankfulnesse to∣wards his patron, and Loyalty towards his Prince, he was the first man who upon the death of the King fell to plotting for the advancement of Stephen unto the Kingdome (who likewise
had taken the former Oath and swore homage and fealty unto Mawde) which by his perswasion he first attempted, and much deale by his ungracious counsell at last obtained. At the time of King Henry his death, it hapned that Mawde was in Nor∣mandy with her Father, wherefore Stephen Earle of Bologne ta∣king this advantage, wrought so with this Bishop, and the Bi∣shop of Winchester, and they with him, as they were content to set the Crowne upon his head, who otherwise than by a kinde of election which they procured, had no colour of right unto the same. For if they regarded nearenesse of blood, not onely Mawde and her sonne were nearer, but Theobald also Earle of Bloyes, Stephens elder brother. Howbeit these Clergie men that bare all the sway in those times, desirous to continue their owne greatnesse, would needes make choyse of him, thinking by this meanes they should so farre obleige Stephen to them, as in all likelihood it must be a meanes not onely to continue, but likewise much to encrease their swaying power, greatnesse and authority. As for the Oath they had taken, this Bishop devised an excuse; that King Henry after the time they had sworne to his daughter, marrying her out of the Realme without her con∣sent, had therein discharged them of that Oath. However, this allegation might bleare the eyes of men, it could not deceive God, that out of his justice turned this device to the destruction of many, and the infinite trouble of all them that had any finger in the same, especially of this Bishop. King Stephen in the be∣ginning of his raigne, to secure himselfe the better against forraine invasions, as he thought, granted license unto all that would to build Castles in any part of the Realme; by ver∣tue of which grant in a short time after, there were erected no lesse than 1117. new Castles. This Bishop hereupon (cujus opera nunquam Episcopali a fuere, writes Neubrigensis) built a Ca∣stle, at the Devises (the goodliest, stateliest building in all Eu∣rope) with the Castles of Shirborne and Malmesbury, and new walled and repaired the Castle of Salisbury: Et quoniam hujus∣modi extructio Episcopalem honestatem minus decere videbatur, ad tollendam illius structionis invidiam & quasi expiandam maculam, totidem monasteria construens, collegis religiosis implevit, saith the same Neubrigensis. These antidotes were of so small force, as there wanted not many to buzze dayly into the Kings eares, that these Castles no doubt were intended to entertaine the
party of the Empresse his adversary, and that it much behooved him to take them from the Bishop, in whose hands to leave them was neither safe nor seemely. Wherefore partly out of feare and jealousie of the Bishops fidelity, and partly out of a desire of the Bishops wealth, as some conjecture, he summons a councell at Oxford, whither all the Bishops, and specially Roger of Salisbury are summoned. Roger would faine excuse himsele by his age and indisposition of body; whereunto the King an∣swered that he could by no meanes spare him, nor want his advice, whereon he meant principally to relye. Whereupon the Bishop presuming on the Kings avour (who had made one of his Nephewes Chancellour, another Treasurer of England, be∣stowed on himselfe the Burrough of Malmesbury, saying some∣times, Let this man beg while he will, for a while, I will grant him halfe the Kingdome rather than say him nay, and sooner shall he be weary of craving than I of granting) repaired to Oxford, where there grew a fray betweene some of the Kings Officers and the Bishops men about lodgings, wherein two of his men were slaine and divers wounded. Hereupon his men and he fled, as also his son & Nephews, but they were all persued and taken, ex∣cept the Bishop of Ely, who fled to the Castle of the Devises, which was very well manned and provided, determining to hold it out against the King, who presently repaired thither with all speed, carrying his Prisoners along with him, whom he caused to be very hardly used, shutting up the one Bishop in an Oxestall, the other in a filthy black roome, more loathsome than the other. At his first comming he summoned the Castle, enten∣ding to prove all meanes to get in rather than let this occasion slip. Trying therefore many practises, when no other would take successe, he caused a paire of gallowes to be set up, and swore he would hang Roger the Bishop, if the Castle were not presently yeelded up to him. The Bishop of Ely continuing obstinate in his deniall, though his Uncle of Salisbury had en∣treated him earnestly to yeeld, the halter was now about the young mans necke, and he ready to be executed, when his Fa∣ther humbly besought the king to accept his best endeavour for the effecting of his desire, and to save his Sonnes life, was con∣tent, to sweare he would neither eate nor drinke before the Castle were delivered to the King. Hereupon the execution of the Son was stayed, but it cost the Father his Life. For the Bishop of
Ely his Nephew, notwithstanding what entreaty would be made, suffered his Uncle to ast three whole dayes before he would give over by meanes whereof the Old Bishop, partly for griefe, partly by so long abstinence ell sicke of a quartaine Ague, whereof he languished and at last dyed, raving and taking on like a man distract of his wits certaine dayes before his depar∣ture, which death and usage of his is by our Historians reputed a just judgement of God upon him for his perjury and Treason against Mawde in dis-inheriting her of the Crowne contrary to his Oath. There was found in this Castle of his 4000. Markes of silver ready coyned, besides gold, plate, jewels and household stuffe of inestimable price, all which the King layd hands on; The Bishops sonne was kept in Prison, and dealt earnestly with∣all to renounce the Empresse against whom he had formerly si∣ded, and devote himselfe to the Kings party; which he constant∣ly refused, and with long suite obtained at last, that hee might be banished the Realme. Wil. Malmsb. Hist. Novella. l. 2. p. 182.183. This Act of the King in seising the Bishops Castles, was variously spoken of many. Some sayd, the Bishops were law∣fully deprived of them, because they had built them without any warrant from the Canons, that they ought to be Evange∣lists of peace, not Architects of Castles, which might prove a refuge to Malefactors. Hugh Arch-Bishop of Rhoan, alleadged these things with more ample reasons and speeches, being the Kings greatest advocate, and maintaining his side with all his eloquence. Others held the contrary, with whom Henry Bi∣shop of Winchester sided, being the Popes Legate, and the Kings owne Brother; whom neither his brotherly alliance, nor feare of danger compelled to exorbitate from the truth, who al∣ledged, that if the Bishops had transgressed the rule of Justice in any thing, that the judgement hereof belonged not to the King, but to the Canons, and that they ought not to be depri∣ved of any possession without a publik Ecclesiasticall Councell; That the King had done this, not out of a zeale of rectitude, but for his owne profit, who rendred not the Castles to the Chur∣ches, by whose cost, and on whose lands they were built, but contrarily gave them to lay men, and that to such who had little Religion in them: speaking these things privately, and also pub∣likely before the King, and calling upon him to free and restore the Bishops, he lost his labour, no man listning to him. Wherfore
determining to try the vigour of the Canons, he commanded the king his brother immediately to appeare before him at the Councell which he was about to celebrate at Winchester, where most of the Bishops of England assembling, the Cardinalls Com∣mission for his power Legatine from Pope Innocent being first read, he made a speech in Latine, wherein he complained of the unworthy apprehending of the Bishops of Salisbury and Lincolne, both detained Prisoners, affirming that it was a mise∣rable wickednesse that the king was so farre seduced by incen∣diaries, that he should command hands to be layd on his owne people, especially on his Bishops in the peace of his Court. That a Celestiall injury was hereby added to the kings disho∣nour, that under pretence of the defaults of the Bishops, Chur∣ches should be spoyled of their possessions. That the kings excesse against the Law of God did so farre grieve him, that he would rather suffer much losse both in his body and, estate than the Episcopall celsitude should be cast downe with so great in∣dignity; that he of admonished the king to amend this same, who even then refused not the calling of the Councell; that therefore the Arch-bishop and the rest should consult together what was needfull to be done, and hee would not be wanting to the execution of their advise, neither for love of the king who was his brother, nor for the losse of his posses∣sions, no nor yet for the perill of his head. The King not distru∣sting his cause, sent some Earles unto the Councell, demaunding why he was summoned thither? The Legate answered them in briefe; that he who remembred that he had subjected himselfe to the faith of Christ, ought not to be angry if he were called by Christs Ministers to make satisfaction, being conscious of so great guilt as these ages had never seene. For it was the act of secular Gen∣tiles to imprison Bishops and strip them of their possessions. Therefore they should tell his Brother, that if he would give a willing assent to his Councell, he would by Gods direction give him uch as neither the Church of Rome, nor the Court of the king of France, nor Count Theobald, brother to them both, should contradict, but ought favourably to embrace; that the king for the present should doe advisedly, if either he would give an account of his fact, or undergoe the judgement of the Canons: for he ought of duty to favour the Church, by re∣ception into whose bosome, and not by a and of Souldiers he
was promoted to the kingdome. Whereupon the Earles departing, returned not long afer wth Albin Deer, an experienced Lawyer: Who pleaded, that Roger the Bishop had many wayes inured king Stephen; that he came very seldome to his Court; tha his men presuming on his power had raised seditions, that as often in other places, so of late at Oxford they had made assaults on men, and that upon Earle Alans owne Nephew, and upon the Servants of Henry de Lyons, a man of so great Nobility, & so haughty a brow, that he would never upon king Henries re∣quest condescend to come into England; That this injury re∣dounded to king Stephen, for whose loves sake he came, that so great violence was offered to him: that the Bishop of Lin∣colne out of his inveterate hatred against Alan had by his Servants beene the Author of Sedition: that the Bishop of Salisbury secretly favoured the kings enemies dissembling his double dealing in the interim till a fi occasion: that the king had undoubtedly discovered this by many things, and by this especially, that he would not suffer Roger Mortimer with the kings Souldiers, which he led in great eare of the Bristow men, so much as to stay one night at Malmesbury; that it was in every mans mouth, that as soone as ever the Empresse should arrive, that he with his Nphewes and Castles, would revolt to her: that Roger was thus taken, not as a Bishop but as the Kings Servant, who both administred his affaires, and received his wages: that the King had not taken away the Castles from them by violence, but that both the Bishops thankefully ren∣dered them, that they might excuse the calumny of the tumult which they had raised in the Court; that the King found some money in the Castles, which were lawully his owne, because the Bishop had collected it out of the Rents of the Royall Ex∣chequer in the time of King Henry his Uncle and antecessor; that the Bishop for feare of his offences against the King, willing∣ly parted from them, as he did from his Castles, of which he King wanted not witnesses; that therefore he desired the agreements betweene him and the Bishops should remaine firme. Roger on the other side alleaged, that he was never a Servant to the King nor received his wages; moreover some threatnings were utte∣red by this generous Prelate (who scorned to be dejected with mis-fortunes) that if he found not justice in that Councell for the things taken from him, that he would complaine thereof in
the audience of a greater Court. The Legate answered mildly That they ought first to inquire as of other things, so of all things which are spoken against Bishops in an Ecclesiasticall Councell, by way of accusation, whether they be true or not? rather then to pro∣nounce sentence, against men uncondemned contrary to the decrees of the Canons: let the King therefore doe that is lawfull to be done in secular judgements, revest the Bishop of the things taken away by the Law of the Nations, disseised men shall not plead. Many things be∣ing spoken on both sides after this manner, the cause at the Kings request was deferred 3. dayes longer, till the Archbishop of Rhoan came; Who sayd, he granted that Bishops might have Castles if they could prove by the Canons, that by law they ought to have them; Which because they could not, that it was extreame dis∣honesty to contend against the Canons; And grant (saith he) that they may enjoy them, yet verily because it is a suspitious time, all the great men according to the custome of other Nations ought to deliver up the Keyes of their Fortresses to the Kings pleasure, who ought to wage warre for the peace of all men. Thus all the contro∣versie of the Bishops was weakned: For either according to the De∣crees of the Canons it is unjust they should have Castles; or if this be tolerated by the Kings indulgence, they ought to yeeld up the keyes t the necessity of the time. To this Albric the Kings Lawyer added, that the King was informed, that the Bishops threatned among them∣selves, and provided to send some of them to Rome against him. And this (saith he) the King commendeth to you, that none of you presume to doe it, for if any one against his will, and the dignity of the King∣dome of England, shall goe any where from England, peradventure his returne shal be difficult. Moreover he, because he seeth himselfe grie∣ved, of his own accord appeales you to Rome. After the King, part∣ly by commending, partly by way of threatning had comman∣ded these things, it was understood whither it tended Where∣fore they so departed, that neither he would suffer the censure of the Canons (nor be judged by them) neither did the Bishops thinke fit to exercise it, and that for a double reason: Either because it would be temerarious to excommunicate the King without the Popes privity; Or else because they heard, and some also saw, that there were swords drawne round about them, for words were no jests, but there was a contention almost about life and blood. Yet the Legate and Archbishop gave not over, but prosecuted the tenor of their office: for casting themselves
humbly downe at the Kings feete in his Bedchamber, they besee∣ched him to compassionate the Church, to compassionate his owne sule and fame, that he would not suffer a dissention to be made be∣tweene the Kingdome and Priesthood: He rising up courteously, although he removed the envie of the things done rom him∣selfe, yet he made no effectuall performance of his good pro∣mises. And so this great suite (wherein the Prelates presumed to convent the king himselfe before them to try his title to Ca∣stles, being temporall possessions) ceased, and the pretended execution of their owne Canons, (never pressed before that I read of) vanished into nothing. These bickerings betweene the Bishop his Nephewes, and the king (to whom he owed even the Crowne he wore) caused all the Bishops to fall off from him againe, and joyne with Maude. This their treachery to King Ste∣phen is most fully recorded by William Malmesbury, who relates, Hist. Novellae l. 2. p. 187.188.189. that the Bishop of Winchester, brother to king Stephen, and the Popes Legate, taking some offence against the king, came to a Parley with Maude in the fields neere Winchester, where Maude the Empresse swore and vowed to him, that all the grea∣test businesses in England and especially the Donations of Bi∣shoprickes and Abbies should be at his disposall, if he with the holy Church would receive her for their Soveraigne, and be con∣tinually loyall to her; some of the greatest Nobles of her party making the same oath: Whereupon the Bishop made no scru∣ple to receive the Empresse as Lady of England, and to sweare to her by himselfe and some others, that as long as she brake not this agreement, that he would be faithfull to her: which done, the next day she was received by the Bishop in the Cathedrall Church of Winchester with an honourable Procession, the Bishop of Winchester going on her right hand, and Barnard Bishop of Saint Davids on her left: there were other Bishops present beside these, as, Alexander Bishop of Lincolne, Robert of Hereford, Ni∣gellus of Ely, Robert of Bath, with sundry Abbots a few dayes after Theobald Arch-bishop of Canterbury came to the Empresse at Winchester being invited by the Legate, but deerred to sweare fealty to the Empresse without the kings privity, being (as hee thought) a dishonour to his fame and person; but after some conference had with the king by the Cardinall, and most of the Prelates who intreated leave of him to yeeld to the necessity of the time, they condescended to the Legates motion and fell off to the Empresse. Whereupon about a fortnight after Easter,
Theobald Arch-bishop of Canterbury held a Councell of all the Bishops of England, and of many Abbots in great state at Win∣chester, wherein the Bishop of Winchester made this speech; That by vertue of his Legatine power which he derived from the Pope, he had summoned the Clergie of England to this Councell, that they might consult in Common of the peace of the Country, which was in great danger of Shipwrack; that in the time of King Henry his Uncle, England was a singular houshold of peace, &c. Which King some yeares before his death caused all the Bishops and Barons to sweare to the Em∣presse his Daughter and onely Childe, that the whole king∣dome of England, with the Dutchy of Normandy, should descend to her if he had no issue male by the Duke of Loraines daughter. That dismall fortune envied his most excellent Uncle, so as he dyed in Normandy without issue male. Therefore because it see∣med long to expect the Lady who resided in Normandy and de∣layd to come into England to provide for the peace of the Country, my Brother was permitted to raigne. And although I became a surety betweene God and him, that hee should ho∣nour and exalt the holy Church, maintaine good Lawes and abrogate evill, yet it grieves me to remember, it shames me to relate what a one he hath shewed himselfe in his kingdome, how no justice hath beene exercised upon the presumptuous, how all peace was presently abolished almost the same yeare, the Bishops apprehended and compelled to a reddition of their possessions, Abbies sold, the Churches rob'd of their treasures: the Counsells of wicked men heard, of good men either sus∣pended, or altogether contemned. You know how often I have convented him both by my selfe, and by the Bishops, espe∣cially in the Councell the last yeare summoned to that purpose, and that I got nothing but hatred thereby. Neither can it be unknowne to any who will rightly consider it, that I ought to love my mortall brother, but ought much more to esteeme the cause of my immortall Father. Therefore because God hath ex∣ercised his judgement touching my brother, that he might per∣mit him without my knowledge to fall into the power of the Mighty, left the kingdome should ottet if it wanted a king, I have invited you all by the right of my Legation to assemble together at this place. Yesterday the cause was secretly ventilated before the greater part of the Clergie of England, to whose right especially it belongs both to elect and
ordaine a king. Therefore having first invocated as it is meete Gods assistance, we have lected the Daughter of a peace-ma∣king king, a glorios king, a rich king, a good king, and in our time incomparable, to be Queene of England and Normandy, and we promise fidelity and maintenance to her. When the Bishop of Winchester had thus spoken all the Bishops and Clergie pre∣sent, (as William of Malmsbury (then present at the Councell relates) did either modestly give their acclamation to the sen∣tence (of Mauds election and Stephens rejection) or keeping si∣lence, did not contradict it. In this Councell many who tooke king Stephens part, were excommunicated, and by name Willi∣am Martell, who had intercepted some of the Legates goods: ater this Councell the City of London formerly addicted to king Stephen, and the greatest part of England willingly sub∣mitted to the dominion of Maude, who was principally coun∣selled by Robert her brother, and by the Legate of Winchester, who pretended that hee sought her welfare; but within few dayes after there fell out a difference betweene the Legate and Maude, which occasioned a great alteration, and was the cause of many new mischiefes in Englnd. Whereupon the Bishop Le∣gate departed from the Court, absolved all those whom he or∣merly excommunicated in the Councell without the consent of the Bishops, raised up a complaint against the Empresse that she intended to apprehend him, and made no account of any thing she had sworne to: Which report was spred over all England. Whereupon he stirred up the Londoners and Barons against the Empresse, whom he beseiged and restored Sephen not onely to his liberty, but to the Crowne. In the meane time his Roger Bishop of Salisbury dyes of a Quaraine Fever, which he fell into out of griefe of minde. Will. Malms. Hist. Nvlla. l. . p. 184.185.This Prelate was so high in king Henries favour that he denyed little or nothing to him that he demanded: he gave him Lands, Churches, Prebends of Clarkes, whole Abbies of Monkes, and committed the king∣dome to his trust, making him Chancellor of England. Roger therefore pleaded causes, he moderated expences, he kept the kings treasure, and that without a companion and witnesse, both while the king was present in England, and absent in Nor∣mandy: and not onely by the king, but likewise by the Nobles: and even by those who secretly envied his felicity; and especi∣ally by the kings Servants and debtos, all things almost that he could thinke of were conferred on him: if any thing was conti∣guous to his possessions which might conduce to his utility,
that he either begged or bought, if not, he extorted it by violence, he alone was in greatest honour, abounding in wealth, pompe, riends, authority, stately houses and Castles, and see∣med the onely happy man on earth. Yet at last in a moment, fortune cruelly stung him with her Scorpions tayle, so as he saw many of his friends wounded, and his most familiar Souldiers beheaded before his face, himselfe captivated, two of his Ne∣phewes most potent Prelates, to be put to flight, and taken pri∣soners; and a third a young man whom he most loved to bee bound in chaines, his Castles to be rendred up, his treasures spoyled, himself afterwards in a Councell torne with most foule reproaches, the residue of his money and plate which he had layd upon the Altar to finish a Church to be carried away a∣gainst his will, and which is the extremity of calamity, Cum multis miser videretur paucissimis miserabilis erat. So much envy & hatred had he contracted out of his over great power, and that undeservedly with some whom he had advanced to honours. So Malmesbury writes of him, of whom you have heard sufficient. ROBERT BINGHAMAnno Dom. 1223. Huber de Burgo Earle of Kent being taken and proclaimed a traytor,Matthew Pari p. 374.375. Holin∣shed. p. 217. escaped out of the Castle of Ve or Devises, and tooke sanctuary in the next Church; those who kept the Castle hearing of it, sent and tooke him (with those that helped him to make his escape) out of the Church and imprisoned him againe in the Castle. Robert Bingham the Bishop of Salisbury hereupon came to the Castle and threatned to curse them, if they would not deliver the Earle & restore him to sanctu∣ry againe. They made answer they had rather the Earle should hang for them than they for him: and so because they would not deliver him the Bishop excommunicated them; and after riding to the Cour, and taking with him the Bishop of London, and other Bishops, prevailed so much by complaint to the King, that the Earle (though a traytor) was restored to the Church againe, but so as the Sheriffe of the Shire had commandement to compasse the Church about with men, to watch that no reliefe came unto him, whereby he might bee constrained through fa∣mishment to submit himselfe, but hee shortly armed, was there rescued by a power of armed men, who conveyed him armed, and o horsebacke into Wales, where he joyned with other of King Henry the thirds enemies. And all through the pride, and practise of this Prelate, to whose pretended jurisdiction even in case of Treason, the King himselfe must submit. Wlliam of YorkWilliam of Yorke the ninth Bishop of Salisbury about the year 1247. was a Courtier from his childhood,Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 892.893 Godwin. Car. p. 277.278. and better seene the in
Lawes of the Realme (which hee chiefly studied) than in the Law of God a great deale. Matthew Paris reporteth that he fir brought in the custome that tenants should be suiters unto the Courts of their Landlords. This Matthew Paris stiles a very bad custome, in magnum subditorum damnum & detrimentum & superio∣rum parvum vel nullum emolumentum, unde qui nunquam hoc fece∣rant mirabantur se ad hoc fuisse coactos. And speaking of this Bi∣shops death he saith, This Bishop passed from these worldly cares and imployments to the dangers which secular men and Courtiers are beleeved to undergoe; for their workes follow them. Anno 1392. King Richard the second,JOHN WAL∣THAM. picked a quarrell against the Major and Sheriffes of London upon this occasion.Holinshd. p. 478.479. Fox Act ad Monumen, dit. ult. vol. 1. p 669.670. Walsin Hist. Angl. A 1392. pag. 34.385, 386. Ypdig. Neur. 146. Walter Romay one of Iohn Walthams servants then Bishop of Salisbury and high Treasurer of England, tooke a horseloafe from a Ba∣kers man as hee passed by in Fleetstreet, and would not deliver it againe, but broke the bakers mans head, when he was earnest to recover his loafe, the cohabitants of the streete hereupon rose and would have had the Bishops man to prison for breaking the Kings peace, but hee was rescued by his fellowes, and escaped to the Bishops house in an Allie close by; The people set in a rage for this rescue, gathered in great multitudes about the Bishops Palace gate, and would have fetched out the offender by force, assaulting the house to breake it open; but the Major and She∣riffes comming thither, after some perswasions used, appeased the people, who retired quietly to their houses. The Bishop being then at Windsor, where the Court lay, being informed of this riot, tooke such indignation therewith, that taking with him Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Yorke, then Lord Chancellor of England, he went to the King, and made an hainous complaint against the Citizens for their misdemeanour: whereupon the Major, Sheriffes, and great sort more of the Citizens were sent for to the Court, and charged with divers misdemeanors; & not∣withstanding their excuses they were all arrested, and imprison∣ed; the Major in the Castle of Windsor, the rest in other places to be safely kept, till the King by the advice of his Counsell should further determine, what should be done with them; Moreover the liberties of the City were seised into the Kings hands, the authority of the Major utterly ceased, and the King appointed Sir Edward Darlingrug to governe the City by the name of Lord Warding, and to see that every man had justice ministred as the case required; who because hee was thought to be overfavourable to the Citizens, was removed, and Sir
Baldwin Radington put in his roome. At length the King through suit, and instant labour of certaine Noblemen, especially of the Duke of Glocester, began somewhat to relent and pacifie his rigorous displeasures against the Londoners: and releasing them out of prison, and confirming some of their priviledges, and abrogating others, hee was at last reconciled to them after they had purchased his pardon with many rich presents to him and his Queene whom they royally intertained, and the payment of ten thousand pounds, which they were compelled to give the King, & to collect of the Commons of the City, not without great offence and grudging in their minds. And al this came through the pride and malice of this Prelate of Salisbuy, whose servant had occasioned this riot, and yet went Scotfree, when the in∣nocent Major and Citizens were thus rigorously dealt withall. M. Fox observes truly,olinsh. p. 485: that this unjust oppression of the Londoners, was a great preparative to King Richards deposing, and lost him the hearts of his true subjects. This proud Prelate when hee died, by King Richards appointment had the honour to have his body interred among the Kings at Westminster. RICHARD MILFORD.Richard Milford B. of this Diocesse, about the yeare 1388. was by an order of the Barons made in Parliament imprisoned a long time in the Castle of Bristoll,Godwin. p. 281. Walsingham, Hist. Angl. p. 365. &c. & Ypodigma Naustr. A. 1388. p. 142. as a pernicious whisperer, flat∣terer, evill counseller, and Traytor to King Richard the second, and the State: yet afterwards being inlarged, he was advanced by this King, & continued one of his evill counsellors and instruments. WILLIAM AYSCOTH.William Ayscoth, Bishop of Salisbury Confessor to King Henry the 6. by his oppressions and ill dealings so farre discontented his Tenants nd the people,Fabian. par. 7, An. 1450. pag. 453. Caxton. pars 6. An. 1450. Graft. An. 1450, p. 614. Godwin. p. 351. Holinsh. p. 636: that in the yeare 1450. Iune 29. when that notable Rebell Iack Cade was set up against his So∣veraigne, some tenants of the Bishops and others came to Eden∣don, where hee was then saying Masse, drew him from the Altar in his Albe with his stole about his necke, to the top of an hill not farre off, and there as hee kneeled on his knees praying, they cleft his head, spoyled him to the skinne, and renting his bloody shirt into a number of peeces, tooke every man a ragge to keepe it for a monument of their worthy exploit. A barba∣rous murther, yet occasioned by his owne ill carriage, violence, oppressions, and for consenting to the giving up of the Dut∣chy of Anjou, and Mayne into the hands of the French King, as some report: since this mans murther, I find little or nothing recorded of any Bishops of this See: Wherefore I shall now steare my course towards Lincolne Diocesse.
Lincolne. ANNO 573. AldredALDRED. Bishop of Leicester (afterwards tran∣slated to Lincolne) was deprived of his Bishopricke, for his seditious misdemeanors;Matth. West. An. 873. Godw. p. 229. it is very like hee sided with the cruell Pagan Danes, though his crimes be not expressed in particular. Eadnoth Bishop of this See,EADNOTH turned Math. West. An. 1016. p. 499. Godwin. p. 229. warriour, and was slaine by the Danes in battle, in the yeare 1016 Vlfe a man Matth. West. An. 1052. p. 420. Godwin. p. 230. very learned,ULFE. in the yeare 1052. together with Robert Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and William Bishop of London, who had given King Edward the Confessor wicked counsell against the English, were banished into Normandy, their native Country, for this offence, vix evadentes, hardly escaping with their lives; they having beene instruments to cause the King to infringe his good Lawes, and not to administer right iustice, which he promised to re∣forme upon these Prelates dimission; who miscounselled him. This Bishop among the rest, going to the Councell of Vercels, to complaine to the Pope of his wrongfull banishment, so farre forth bewrayed his owne weakenesse and insufficiency, as the Pope was determined to have displaced him from his Bishop∣ricke, untill with gifts and golden eloquence, he perswaded him to winke at his imperfections. Alexander Bishop of Lincolne,ALEXAN¦DER Anno 1070. Matth. Paris. Hist. Angl. An. 1070. p. 6. Ho∣linshed. p. 18. Matth. Westm. An. 1070 p. 4. opposed William the Conquerour, who appointed how many souldiers every Bi∣shopricke and Abby that held of him by Barony should finde in time of warre, from which they were formerly freed: hereupon he and Stigand Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, fled into Scotland, where they kept themselves close for a time (being banished by the Conqueror) and at last ioyned with the Scots against him: Egelwin Bishop of Durham being an exile at the same time, ha∣ving onely the zeale of God, excommunicated all the invaders of the Church, and ravishers of Ecclesiasticall things. This Alexan∣der is omitted by Godwin in his Catalogue of the Bishops of this see; and it seemes hee was deprived among other Bishops in the Councel of Winchester, Anno 1070. for opposing the Con∣querour.
REMIGI∣VS.Remigius (who translated his see from Dorchester to Lincolne, and built the Cathedrall there, to whose consecration by the Kings command,Hen. Huntin. hist. l. 6. p. 371. l. 7. p. 373. Matth. West. An. 1085.1091. Godwin. p. 230.231.232. Will. Malms de Gestis Pontif. l. 4 p. 290.291. all the Bishops of England were summoned, himselfe dying two dayes before the time appointed for its con∣secration) was impeached of high treason against King William Rufus, but his servant purging his master by the iudgement of an hot iron (or Ordalium) then in use, restored him to the Kings favour, and wiped off this blot to his pontificall honour, as Huntindon writes. He was preferred first to this Bishopricke by William the Conquerour, for divers good services done unto him, for which he long before promised him a Bishopricke in England. The consi∣deration of this gift comming to the Popes eare, he would needs adiudge it Simony, and as a symonist actually deprived him of his Bishopricke: but at the request of Lanfranke Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury, hee restored him to his Ring and Crosier againe. The Arch-bishop of Yorke labored to hinder the translation of his See to Lincoln, laying challenge to the iurisdiction of that County, as antiently belonging to his Archbishoprick, wherupon the Bishop was forced to crave in aid of the King to make good the Title, and his successor Robert Bloet, was glad to give William Rufus 5000 pound to cleare the Title, that the Arch-bishop of Yorke layd un∣to the iurisdiction of this See and County; which was reputed Symony in the King, but iustice in the Bishop. ALEXAN∣DER.Alexander, nephew to Roger the great rich Bishop of Salisbury, consecrated Bishop of Lincolne Iuly 22. An. 1123. placed his chiefe delight in building of Castles, wherein hee imitated his unkle Roger, hereupon hee built a stately Castle at Banbury, another at Newarke, a third at Sleford, which saith Nubrigensis hist. l. 1. c. 6. Hun∣tindon. hist. l. 8. p. 389.390. Hove∣den. Annal. pars. prior. p. 484. to 495 Matth. Par. p. 74. to 76. Matth. Westm. An. 1139. to 1146. Holinshed. p. 50. Fox Acts and Monuments. p. 181. Speed. p. 488.492.494. &c. Godwin. p. 233. Nubrigensis, did ill beseem a Bishops honesty, much lesse his function. These Castles were such eye-sores to King Stephen, as they provoked him to picke a quarrell with the Bishop, to clap him up in prison (together with his uncle Roger of Salisbury, and to bereave them at once, both of their munition and treasure, of which they had heaped up great store. For King Stephen fearing that this great rich Prelate and his uncle of Salisbury (who had built two strong Castles, the one at Salisbury the other at the Devises) would side with Maud the Empresse, against him, sends for both these Bishops, and demands those Castles of them, which they refusing to deliver up to his possession; the King thereupon claps them up in prison, besieg∣eth their Castles, which their Creatures held out and kept by
force against him, til at the last with much a do he possessed him∣selfe of them, in such manner as is before more largely related in the story of Roger of Salisbury. The King not long after relea∣sing this Bishop, he and some others secretly conspired against him, procured Maud the Empresse to come over with an army, with whom he joyned. And by this and the other confederates assistance Stephen was afterwards taken prisoner, deprived of his Crowne in a Synod at Winchster; Maud received and acknow∣ledged as Queene by the Prelates and Kingdome, till Stephen being againe released by the Bishops practises, and putting Maud to the worst, after many battels and great effusion of English Christian Blood, (occasioned onely by the Prelates practises,) Stephen and Maud came to a mutuall agreement. Of which you may read more largely in Roger of Salisbury. The See of Lincolne continuing voyd almost seven yeeres after the death of Robert de Chisney, Geoffry Plantagenet Archdeacon of Lincolne,GEOFFRY PLANTA∣GENET. Hoveden. Annal. part. posterior. p. 611. Godwin, p. 235. base sonne to King Henry the second was elected Bishop thereto; who contenting himselfe with the large revenues of the Bishopricke, never sought consecration; well knowing that he might so fleece the sheepe though he listed not to take the charge of feeding the sheepe. Seven yeeres he reaped the fruits of that See by colour of his election, and then by the Popes comman∣dement to Richard Archbishop of Canterbury to compell Geoffry either to resigne his ishopricke, or immediately to enter into orders, and to take the office of a Bishop on him, he resigned all his interest in the same, the copy of which resignation you may read in Roger Hoveden Annal. pars poster. p. 611.. After which he turned Couttier for eight yeeres space, and at last returning to the Church againe, became Archbishop of Yorke How he carried himselfe in that See I have before in part expressed (page 185, 186.) and now shall give you some further account (tough somewhat out of course) out ofAnnlium pars posterior, p. 655 656, 659, to 666, 681, 689, 712, 713, 714, 718, 725, 730, to 740, 743, 747, 749, 751, 752, 754, 755, 756, 759, to 768. Matth. Paris: Hist. Angl. p. 186.195. Roger Hoveden and others. He was no sooner setled in Yorke, but there fell out a great contestation betweene him and Henry deane of Yorke, and Buchard the Treasurer, whom he excommunicated for refusing to give over singing, and to begin their Service afresh upon his entering into th Church; whereby the Church that day ceased from Divine Service. This difference being composed Buchard and Geoffry soone after fell ou againe; whereupon Geffry excommunicating him the se∣cond time, he goes to the Pope for absolution, and so farre pre∣vailed
with the Pope, that he would neither confirme Geoffries election nor suffer him to be consecrated. And withall the Pope exempted Hugh Bishop of Durham from making any profession of subjection to Geoffry elect of Yorke during his life, though he were consecrated, because he hd formerly once made his profession to the Church of Yorke, and to S. William the Arch∣bishop of Yorke, and to his successors. Queene Elenor, K. Richards mother, hereupon passeth from Messana through Rome to intreat and humbly beseech the Pope in the Kings behalfe, to confirme his brothers election to Yorke, and either to consecrate him Archbishop thereof by himselfe or some other: which the Pope doing, Geoffry shortly after cites Hugh Bishop of Durham pe∣remptorly to appeare before him at a Synod in the Cathedrall Church at Yorke, thereto professe his obedience to him, which he endeavoured to substract, and to exempt himselfe by all meanes from his jurisdiction. Hugh refuseth to come thither, or to make his profession or obedience to him (being, as he said, not bound by Law to doe it: and thereupon appeales the first, second, and third time to the Pope, and submits his cause to him. The Archbishop hearing of it, in great fury excommunicates him notwithstanding this appeale, threatning to compell him to make profession and obedience by Ecclesiasticall censures notwithstanding this appeale. The Bishop of Durham on the other side would not obey the , but in contempt thereof, boldly celebrated, and caused to be celebrated Divine offices as before. The Archbishop hereupon overturnes all the Altars where the Bishop of Durham had celebrated,Note his fury. and breakes the Chalices within his Diocesse wherein any other had cele∣brted in the Bishops presence; and held his brother Iohn Earle of Morton for an excommunicate person, because he had eaen with the Bishop of Duham after that sentence, and would not communicate with him untill he gave him satisfaction and came to be absolved. When the Bishop of Durham saw that many refused to speake, eate or drinke with him, he sent messengers to the Pope, who relating to him first in secret, then before all the Cardinals, how indiscreetly and Archbishop had excommunica∣ted him, slighting his appeale; the Pope and all the Cardinals adjudged that sentence a meere nullity, and that it ought not to be observed; and thereupon the Pope writ a letter to the Bishops of Lincolne, Rochester, and others to declare this sentence of ex∣communication
voyd, in their Churches, by vertue of the Popes Apostolicall authority, and to command the people to commu∣nicate with the Bishop of Durham notwithstanding it, as they did before; and to declare, that the Bishop for the injuries done unto him by the Archbishop in overturning the Altars, and breaking the Chalices, should be exempted from all subjection to him during life. Whereupon these Bishops and delegates met at Northampton, and after much debate, departed without any final agreement. In Lent following this Archbishop being sum∣moned to appeare at London by the Kings Justices, came to Westminster with his Crosse carried before him; whereupon the Bishop of London and the other Prelates prohibited him to pre∣sume to carry his Crosse within the Province of Canturbury: who contemptuously answered them, that he would not let it down for them; yet by the advice of his followers he hid it from the face of the people, left a tumult should arise among the Clergy. The Bishop of London accounting him ex∣communicate for this transgression, suspended the new Temple, where the Archbishop lodged, both from Divine Service, and the tolling and ringing of Bels, so as he was forced to goe out of the City. After this the Archbishop levied a great Army, fortified Don∣castre, and would have besieged Thifehill Castle belonging to Earle Morton, which Hugh Bardalfe and William Stville refu∣sing to doe, he departed with his men in a  from them, cal∣ling them traitors to the King and Kingdome. Soone after the Deanery of Yorke being voyd, the Archbishop first gave the Dea∣nery to Simon Apull, and after that to one Philip, whom the King recommended. The Canons of Yorke pretending the right of e∣lecting the Deane to appertaine to them, elected Apul against the Bishops will. The Archbishop hereupon appeales to Rome, the Canons notwithstanding proceed in their election of Apul; the Archbishops messengers and Apul meeting with the King in Germany in their passage towards Rome, he inhibited all their appeales to Rome; saying, that if any attempted the contrary, he should not returne into the Realme againe. In the meane time, the Canons of Yorke suspended the Cathedrall Church from all their accustomed Divine service, and their Bels likewise from their usuall office of ringing, for which the whole City was in an uproare: they likewise uncloathed their Altars, locked up the Archbishops stall in the Quire, barred up the doore by which
he used to enter into the Church out of his Pallace and Chap∣pell, and did many other things in contempt of him; which the Archbishop hearing of, being ready to take ship to passe the seas, returned to the Church, admonishing and commanding the Ministers of this Church to minister therein after the ancient manner; who contemning his admonition and precept, left the Church voyd, and destitute of Divine service. Here∣upon shortly after the Archbishop by the advice of his wisest friends, puts new Ministers and Officers into the Cathedrall Church which he found voyd, to officiate there; which they did till the Canons and Chaplaines were restored againe thereto by lay power and violence: he likewise excommunicates foure of the chiefe officers of the Church for suspending it; who there∣upon complaine to the King, and appeale to Rome; where the Pope hearing both parties, setled the Deanery upon Simon Apul for that time, saving the rights of the Archbishop and Chapter, thereto for the future, which he left undecided. As soone as ever the Deane was thus setled and invested by a golden ring, he and the Chapter defame and accuse the Archbishop, allea∣ging; that he was a violent spoyler of his owne and other mens Clerkes; a wicked extortioner, that he brake open Church doores by violence and force of armes, symoniacally divided and reteyned Ecclesiasticall bene∣fices, gave no respect to appeales, that vilipending all his Episcopall office, he was  to hauking, hunting and other military cares! for which things they intended to depose him, especially those whō he himselfe had advanced to great honours, and enriched with great wealth and revences in the Church of Yorke, beyond that he ought. Of such the Lord saith, I have nourished and exalted chil∣dren, but they have rebelled against me. Let them therefore beware lest with Iudas the traytor they be condemned in Hell. Here∣upon the Pope writ to Hugh Bishop of Lincolne, and his cojudges, that if any would accuse the Archbishop of these things, they should diligently heare what both sides propounded, and certifie him the truth in writing under their Seales: And if no accuser appeared, and there were a publique fame of them, that then the Archbishop should be enjoyned to make his purgation with three Bishops and three Abbots. The Archbishop had appealed before the citation of the Judges, and had taken his journey to prosecute his appeale; but being hindred by the Kings prohibi∣tion and the distemper of the ayre, he appeared not at Rome on
the day prefixed, nor yet at a further day given him: whereupon he was suspended from all his Episcopall administration. Soone after this Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury comes to Nottingham to King Richard the first, causing his Crosse to be carried before him: Geoffry of Yorke carried not his Crosse, but complained to the King of Canturbury, for carrying his Crosse up in the Province of Yorke; which when the Archbishop had heard, and seen that Gefry carried no crosse before him at all; he answered; I carry my Crosse throughout all England, & ought to beare it, as Primate of all England; but thou bearest not thy Crosse, and perchance thou ought∣est not to carry it. And therefore things standing thu, I appeale to my Lord the Pope. After this, Geffrey bought the Sherivalty of York∣shire of the King for 3000. markes, and an 100. markes annuall rent; and within few moneths after the King calling a Coun∣sell, all the Laymen and Clergy that would, had the liberty to complaine against this Archbishop, who made many complaints of his rapines and unjust exactions, to which he gave no answer. Not long after King Richard being to be crowned a new at Win∣chester, commanded this Archbishop of Yorke not to come to his Coronation the next day with his Crosse borne up before him, lest per∣adventure some tumult might arise between him and the Archbishop of Canterbury: Whereupon being thus prohibited to beare his crosse, he refused to be present at the Kings Coronation. Some three weekes after, the King being at Waltham, Geoffry come to him with his crosse carried before him; of which Canterbury com∣plained very much to the King, who answered, that this contro∣versie belonged not to him, but to the Pope to decide; and the next day the King made a finall accord betweene William Long∣champ Bishop of Ely, and Geoffry, touching all controversies about his apprehension and injuries susteined at Dover upon his arivall; Ely with an hundred Priests more swearing, that hee neither commanded nor willed, that Geoffry should be appre∣hended in such sort. Not long after the King being in France, the Canons of Yorke complained to Hubert of Canterbury against Geoffry their Archbishop; who thereupon sends commissioners to Yorke to heare and determine their complaints; these impri∣son the Archbishops men, accused of robery, so that the Arch∣bishop could not byle them, restore the Canons to the Church, and induct them into their stals out of which th were expel∣led; and because the Archbishop appeared not befor them
upon summons, seised on all his lands except the mannor of Ripun where he resided, and sequestred his Shrievalty of Yorke∣shire into the hands of others. About the same time the Ca∣nons of Yorke excommunicated formerly by the Bishop, procure an absolution from the Pope, which was published openly in the Church, and they therupon were restored. The Archbishop appeales hereupon, and going over to Normandy to the King, for 2000. markes procures a restitution of all his Lands and goods formerly sequestred and seised; and a precept to put the Deane and Canons out of their new gaind possession. Not long after the Pope sends Commissioners to York to enquire of the Bishops excesses whereof the Canons accused him, mentioned at large in Pope Caelestines letter and commission recorded by Hoveden. The Deane comming to Yorke from Rome while the commissioners were there, some of the Archbishops creatures meeting him, per∣swaded him not to goe to the mother Church, which hee not yeelding to, they laid violent hands on him, for which the com∣missioners excommunicated them; whereupon he went to the Church where the canons joyfully received him. The Bishop notwithstanding expulseth him and the Canons againe, who thereupon procure a letter from Pope Coelestine to the Deane of Lincolne and others, to inquire of their dammages, and to cause the Bishop to satisfie them to the full without any appeale: whereupon they proved their dammages before them to amount to one thousand markes. Soone after the Bishop of Whiterne the Archbishops Suffragan, and Officiall, comes to Yorke against the time of receiving the Lords Supper, to consecrate chrisme, and oyle, as he had accustomed. The Deane and chapter of Yorke would not receive him; whereupon he went to Suelle and there consecrated chrisme and oyle, and delivered them to the Arch∣bishops Officials, to distribute them throughout the Churches of the Archbishopicke. Geoffry de Muschamp Archdeacon of Cliveland received the chrisme and oyle, but presently cast them into a dunghill, and the other Canons of S. Peters would receive none of him, but sent to Hugh Bishop of Lincolne to receive oyle and chrisme from him: whereupon Peter Archdeacon of Lin∣colne, the Archbishops brother prohibited the Bishop to give them any oyle or chrisme from him: upon which he appealed to Rome thereabout. The Archbishop the same time, who had offended the King his brother, was reconciled to him, and re∣ceived
into his favour with a kisse of peace, whereupon he grew so excessively proud, that he exasperated the King himselfe with his reproachfull speeches, so as he commanded him to be dis∣seised of his Archbishopricke, and Visountship of Yorke. In the meane time Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury procured him∣selfe to be the Popes Legate, with a speciall clause in his Buls, & a mandate to the Archbishop of Yorke, and all other, to submit to his jurisdiction, as Legate to the Apostolicke Se; whereupon he summoned the Deane and Chapter of Yorke to appeare before him, and yeeld subjection to him in their owne Cathedrall, as Popes Legate; who thereupon received and submitted to him, not as he was Archbishop of Canterbury, but Legate onely: which done, hee summons and holds a councell in the Cathedrall Church of Yorke, wherein he made divers canons for the go∣vernment of the Church and Clergy; and heard the controver∣sie betweene th Archbishop and the Deane and chapter of Yorke touching the Archdeaconry of Westring, which they con∣tended for; but they appealed to Rome about it, Anno 1195. The Canons of Yorke solicited  Bishop of Lincolne by virtue of the Popes Commission directed to him, to ponounce sentence of interdict and suspention against Geoffry their Bishop: who answered, That he would rather be suspended himselfe, then suspend him; whereupon the canons sent messengers to Rome to complaine to Pope Caelestine of the Bishop of Lincolne, and the other Judges Delegates, that they proceeded not accor∣ding to the Popes injunction. Who thereupon sends three letters into England; one, to Simon the Deane, wherein he suspends the Archbishop from his Episcopall function, as a man every way unworthy of it, and gives Simon power to execute the same during this suspension. Another to all the Abbots, Clergy, and people of the Diocesse of Yorke, to notifie this suspention to them, and to command them, not to obey the Archbishop or answer before him in any case, but onely before the Deane Simon, to whom he had delegated his Arch-Episcopall authority. A third to the Bshop of Lincolne and others, expressing all the complaints against the Archbishop and his excesses, and com∣manding them to publish this his suspension from his Bishop∣ricke, and to absolve those of his Diocesse from any subje∣ction or obedience to him as Archbishop. And in all these letters, this is one great cause which they alledge for this his
suspension. Quod pastoralis officii debito praetermisso, secularibus nego∣tiis implicari, & non divinis obsquiis, sed venatione, aucupio, & aliis militaribus curis animi sui studium applicare, & exercere alia, quae commisso sibi Officio Pontificali, & honori non modicum derogant, &c. Hereupon the Archbishop goes to Rome, where after a long delay the Pope acquits him from all the Deanes and Canons accusati∣ons, takes off his suspensions, and restores him to his Archiepis∣copall authority; the rather because the King being angry with him, had long before spoyled him of his temporalies and sought to deprive him. The Archbishop hereupon by reason of this Kings indignation goes into France not daring to come into England, and seeing he could not finde grace in the Kings eyes, to obtaine either his temporalties or his spiritualties, he returnes backe againe towards Rome. In the meane time the Deane and Chapter of Yorke conferre the Archdeaconry of West∣rising upon Peter Imant during life, by the Kings consent; which the Archbishop hearing of, excommunicated and suspended him for intruding thereunto without right, and declared his insti∣tution thereunto a nullity: which excommunication he sends over into England. Soone after Ralph Wigstof Clerke, the Arch∣bishops agent at Rome, falling desperately icke there, consessed before the Pope and all his Cardinals, that he had gotten many false letters in the Court of Rome touching the Archbishops affaires; whereupon the Pope writ to Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury to intercept these letters, which were found hid in the hands of Roger Ripunt clerke, together with poysoned rings, girdles, and other poysons which the Archbishop sent to destroy the Deane and Canons of Yorke, all which were publikely burnt at Totehill before a great multitude of men and women; the bringer of them was imprisoned, and the Archbishop had the blame of all imputed to him. After this the King sent for the Deane and Canons of Yorke, and Geoffry the Archbishop to meete him in Normandy, to reconcile them; Geoffry comming before them was reconciled to the King his brother, who re∣stored him to his temporalties and spiritualties; which done he departed to Rome: but the Deane and Canons coming three daies after, hindered his restitution till the Archbishop and they were accorded, of which they much vaunted. Not long after there arose many new contestations and schismes between this Archbishop and the Deane and Canons of Yorke about
Roger and Honorius Archdeacons of Richmond; which Annal. par poster. p. 780.781, 785, 793, 74, 796, 805, 811, 817, 818, 819, 823, 824, 825, 826, 827. Hoden relates at large: of which (God willing) I shall give a larger account in my History of the Schismes of English Prelates betweene themselves; which how many, great and violent they have beene, you may in part conjecture by this one Prelates story. After this the Pope writ earnestly to King Richard, to desire him to be re∣conciled to this Archbishop his brother, and to embrace him with peac, least he should be forced in his behalfe to punish him and his Kingdome by an Ecclesiasticall censure: here∣upon the King sent the Bishops of Durham, Ely, Winchester, Wor∣cester and Bath to the Archbishop, desiring him in the spirit of humility to confirme all the Kings grants, upon which the King would intirely restore him to his Archbishopricke. This he profered to doe, if these Bishops by a writing under their hands and seales would warrant this counsell before the Pope. Which they refusing, telling him he was of age to answer for himselfe, departed without any accord: whereupon the Arch∣bishop went to Rome, whither the King sent messengers against him, who writ to the King from Rome, that the Pope earnestly desired him to restore the Archbishop intirely into his Bishop∣ricke, so as he satisfie him the money he owed: which if he refused, he would first by an interdict of the whole Province of Yorke, after that by an interdict of the whole Kingdome, without any appeale enforce him to it, and compell his Clerks to resigne their rents which they have received, and the Deane and Canons of Yorke to make an agreement with the Bishop, unlesse some new cause should arise. King Richard dying, and King Iohn succeeding, while Geoffry of Yorke was beyond sea; when Iohn was to be crowned, Philip Bishop of Durham was so presumptuous, as to appeale against the Kings owne Coronation, that it should not be accomplished in the absence of Geoffry Archbishop of Yorke and Primate of England. After this the King commanded the Lands of the Archbishop which had beene sequestred al∣most two yeeres into the hands of Stephen Turnham, to be deli∣vered to three others for this Archbishops use; yet afterwards he retained them in his owne hands, promising to restore them when as the Archbishop and hee met; who meeting together soone after in Normandy, the King and he were reconciled, & he received him honourably. Not long after, King Iohn displeased with this Archbishop seised all his temporalties into his hands by Iames de Petorne Sheriffe of Yorkeshire, who violently entred
into his manners, and wasted his goods. This Archbishop hereupon excommunicates the Sheriffe, and all authours and counsellers of this violence, with candles lighted, and Bels rung: he likewise excommunicated all who had stirred up his brother Iohn to anger against him without his default: he also excomu∣nicated the Burgesses of Beverly, and suspended the Towne it selfe, from the celebration of Divine service, and the sound of Bels, for breaking his Parke, and troubling and diminishing the goods which his Predecessor and he had for a time peace∣ably enjoyed. King Iohn by the advice of his counsell restored him afterwards to his Bishopricke, but gave him a day in Court to answer his contempt in not going beyond the Seas with him when summoned to doe it; in not suffering the Kings Officers to leavy money of his plowlands, as they did in all other parts of the Kingdome; in beating the Sheriffe of Yorkes servants, and in not paying him 3000. markes due to King Richard: soone after, the King comming to Beverly, was neither received with proession nor sound of Bels by reason of the Archbishops in∣terdict, whose servant Henry Chappell denied to let the King have any of the Archbishops wine; for which affront the King com∣manded him and all the Archbishops servants to be imprisoned, whereever they should be found: whereupon the King com∣ming to Yorke, the Archbishop for a round summe of money (through the Queenes mediation) bought his peace of the King; but yet instantly fell out with the Deane and Chapter about the election of a singing man; the Archbishop made choyce of one, the Deane and chapter of another as belonging to their election: the like contention fell betweene them about the Archdeaconry of Cleveland: the Archbishop elected Ralph Kyme, the Deane and canons, Hugh Murdac for Archdeacon, against the Archbishops will, and hinder the instalment of Raph; whereupon the Archbishop excommunicated Murdac; And at the same time Honorius Archdeacon of Richmond complained against the Archbishop to the Pope for taking away the institu∣tions to Churches and Synodals belonging to him: the Pope hereupon writ divers letters in his favour. Geoffry thus perplex∣ed, and in the Kings disfavour, purchaseth his grace and a con∣firmation of the rights of his Bishopricke from the King for a thousand markes sterling to be payd within one yeere, for pay∣ment whereof he pawned his Barony to the King: After which he falling into the Kings displeaure againe, was forced to fly the
Kingdome and Math. Westm. An. 1213. p. 92. died in exile, as you may read before, p. 186. St. Hugh the ninth Bishop of Lincolne,S. HVG Anno 1108. when King Richard the first by Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, his chiefe Justice, required an ayd of 300.Matth Paris. hist. Angl. p. 193, 195, 196. Roger Hoveden, Annal. pars posterior, p. 776, 777. Holinshed, p 173 Knights to remaine with him in his service for one whole yeere, or so much money as might serve to maintaine that number, after the rate of three shillings a day English money for every Knight; whereas all others were contented to be contributers herein, onely this S. Hugh Bishop of Lincoln refused, and spake sore against Hubert that moved the ma∣ter, wishing him to doe nothing whereof he might be ashamed; Vnde pudor frontem signet, mentemque reatus Torqueat, aut famae titulos infamia laedat. He was noted to be of a perfect life, because, Potestatis secularis in rebus Ecclesiae saevientis impetus, adeò constanter elidere consuevit, ut rerum & corporis sui periculum contemnere vidretur: in quo & adeò profecit quod & jura revocavit amissa, & Ecclesiam suam à servitute gravissim liberavit, as Matthew Paris writes: and because hee would not ticke to reprove men of their faults plainely and fankly, not regarding the favour or dis-favour of any man; in so much that he would not feare to pronounce them accursed, which being the King Officers would take upon them the pu∣nishment of any person within Orders of the Church, for hun∣ting and killing the Kings game within his Parkes, Forrests, and Chases:A presumptu∣ous part in a Bishop. yea (and that which is more) he would deny pay∣ment of such Subsidies and taxes as he was assessed to pay to the uses of King Richard and King Iohn, towards the maintenance of their warres, and did oftentimes accue by Ecclesiasticall au∣thoity such Sheriffes, collectors, and officers, as did distreine upon his lands and goods to satisfie those Kings of their de∣mands; alledging openly, that he would not pay any money to∣wards the maintenance of warres with one chistian Prince, upon private displeasure and grudge made against another Prince of the same religion. This was his reason. And when he came before the King to answer to his disobedience shewed herein, he would so handle the matter, partly with gentle admonishments, partly with sharpe reproofes, and sometimes mixing merry and pleasant speech among his serious arguments, that of∣tentimes he would so qualifie the Kings mind, that being diver∣ted from anger, he could not but laugh and smile at the Bishops pleasant talke and merry conceits. This manner he used not onely with King Iohn alone, but with King Henry the second,
and Richard the first in whose time he governed the See of Lin∣colne. And for theseSee Willets Sy∣nop. Papis. contr. 5. qu. 3. p. 280. vertues principally was he canonized for a Romane Saint by Pope Honorius the third. Peter Suter and leurs des vies des Saincts part 2. p. 428, 429. Ribadeneira, in his life record, that this Bishop had many con∣tests with King Richard the first, that he resisted the King to his face when he demanded ayde and subsidies of his Subjects, so that by his meanes onely and another Bishops who joyned with him, the King could obtaine nothing at all; whereupon in great rage and fury he banished both the Bishops, and confis∣cated all their goods; the other Bishops goods were seised, who thereupon afterward submitted and craved pardon of the King: but the Kings Offiers proceeding against S. Hugh, he presently excommunicated them, so as none of them for feare of this thunderbolt of his durst touch one thred of his garment, our Lord having horribly punished divers whom he had excommu∣nicated, some of them being never seene nor heard of after∣wards. One thing this Hugh did which is memorable: going to visit the religious houses within his Diocesse, he came to Godstow a house of Nunnes neere Oxford; Roger Hove∣den. Annal. pars posterior. p. 712. Godwin, p. 237, 238. seeing a hearse in the middle of the Quire covered with silke, and tapers burning, round about it, he demanded who was buried there; and being informed, that it was faire Rosamonds Tomb, concubine to King Henry the second, who at her intreaty had done much for that house, and in regard of those favours was afforded that honour: he commanded her body to be digged up immediately, and buried in the Churchyard, least Christian religion should wax vile: saying, it was a place a great deale too good for an harlot, & it should be an example to other women to terrifie them from such a wicked and filthy kinde of life Godwin ibid. Matth. Paris hist. Ang. p. 197. Hoveden. Anna. pars posterior, p. 812, 813.. This Prelate dying, when he was brought to Lincolne to be interred, Iohn King of England, and William King of Scots were met there with an in∣finite company of Nobility of both Realmes. The two Kings for the great reverence they bare to his holinesse (who yet gave no everence at all to Kings, as you have formerly heard) would needs set their shoulders to the beare, and helped to carry his course from the gates of the City, untill it came to the Church doore, where the Prelates themselves received and carried it into the Quire and buyed him in the body of the East end of the Church ABOVE THE HIGH ALTAR: (which therefore stood not close to the East wall in those times, but
some good distance from it) neere the Altar of Saint Iohn. Hugh Walis,HVGH WALLIS. or de Wils, his next successour in this See but one, Anno 1209. notwithstanding King Iohn refused to receive Ste∣phen Langhton, that arch-traytor, for Archbishop of Canterbury,Matthew Paris Hist. Angl. p. 220, 288. Fox Acts and Monuments, vo. 1. p. 335. c. 1. Willets Synopsis Papism. contr. 5. quaest. 3 p. 280. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 149. and commanded this Bishop to repaire to the Archbishop of Rhoan for consecration from him, and not to receive it from Langhton, in contempt of this his Soveraignes command got him to Langhton and received consecration from him: whereupon the King seised on all his temporalties, and kept him fasting from them foure yeeres, and then restored them. After this he joyned both with the Barons, and Lewis the French King (who came to conquer the Realme) against his naturall Soveraigne: For which treasons he was onely excommunicated by the Pope, and not absolved till he had paid the Pope one thousand marks, and a hundred markes to his Legate. Divers other of our Pre∣lates were fined for the same cause, and that so deepely, as they were compelled to sell all they had to purchase the Kings favour. Anno Dom. 1252. Holinshed, p. 246, 255. King Henry the third in a Parliament held at London,GROST∣HEAD. getting a grant from the Pope of the tenths due to the Church to be received of him for three yeeres, towards the charges of his journey into the holy Land to rescue it from the Saracens, demanded these tenths of the spiritualtie: But the Bishops, and especially Robert Groshead Bishop of Linolne utter∣ly refused to be contributary to this grant; They alledged sun∣dry reasons for their excuse, as the poverty of the English Church being already made bare with continuall exactions and oppressions; but chiefly they excused themselves by the absence of the Archbishops of Canterbury and Yorke, of whom, the one was beyond the Sea; and the other at home in the North parts: All the other Bishops were there except Hereord and Chester, who was sicke: and therefore without the consent of those that were absent, and namely their Primate of Canterbury, they could not conclude any generall poynt touching the Kings demand. And although the King fretted and stormed against them, yet could he not bring them to his purpose, so as the Parliament was for that time dissolved: Yet before their departure from London, the King communed with them apart, to see if he could get some money towards his charges, but they had tuned their strings all after one not, discording all from his Tenor, so that
not a penny could be got of them: wherefore he tooke high dis∣pleasure against them, reviling them in most reproachfull man∣ne; and amongst other he reviled his halfe brother the elect of Winchester, taxing him of great unthankfulnesse, who also among the residue stood against him. Anno 1257. they denyed the King a Subsidie againe, there being (saith Holinshed) a great unto∣ward disposition in the Subjects of that time for the helping of their King, with a necessary ayd of money towards such great charges as he had bin by divers wayes occasioned to be at. Befoe this Holinshed, p. 242 Anno 1250. this Bishop excommunicated a Priest for in∣continency, who continuing for some daies without seeking to be reconciled, the Bishop sent to the Sheriffe of Rutland within whose Bayliwicke the Priest dwelt, to apprehend him as a diso∣dient and rebellious person, who not executing the Bishops commandement, the Bishop thereupon excommunicates the Sheriffe: whereof the King being informed tooke displeasure, and sending to the Pope, procured an inhibition, that no Archbishop or Bishop should compell any Officer of the King to follow any suit before them for those things that appertaine to the Kings jurisdiction, or give sentence against them for the same. This Matth. Paris, hist. major, p. 693 694. Grosthead Bishop of Lincolne, Anno 1246. upon the suggestion of the Friers Predicants and Minorites, raged more then was meet or expedient against those of his Docesse, ma∣king strict inquisition in his Bishopricke by his Archdeacons and Deanes, concerning the chastity and manners as well of Noble as ignoble (upon oath) to the enormious hurt and scan∣dall of the reputations of many Quod nun∣quam antea fieri consueverat (saith the Au∣thour.) Which had never beene accusto∣med to be done before. The King hearing the grievous complaints of his people against these Innovations, did thereupon by the advice of his Counsell and Courts of Justice, send a Writ to the Sheriffe of Hertford in these words. Henry by the grace of God, King of England, &c. We command thee, that as thou lovest thy selfe, and all things that are thine, that thou from henceforth suffer not any Laymen of hy Baylywicke to assemble together in any place, at the will of the Bishop of Lincolne, or of his Archdeacons, Officials, or rurall Deanes, to make any acknowledgments or attestations upon their oath, unlesse in cases of Matrimony and testament. Matth. Paris, hist. major, p. 705 And the very next yeere fol∣lowing, in pursurance thereof, the King (by Parliament) en∣acted, and commanded these things ensuing to be inviolably observed; That if any Lay men were convented before an Ecclesia∣sticall
Iudge, for breach of faith and perjury that they shoud be pro∣hibited by the King. And that the Ecclesiasticall Iudge should be pro∣hibited to hold plea of all causes against Laymen, unlesse they were of Matrimony and Testament. All which Matthew Paris precisely relates. Which prohibition and statute nullified the constitution of Oho, and hindered this Bishops innovation; whereupon, that insolent traytorly Martiall Archbishop of Canterbury, Boni∣face (Antiquit. Ec∣cles. Brit. Boni∣facius, p. 185. better skilled in affaires of a Campe then of the Church) Anno 1256. (but nine yeeres after this prohibition and forenamed statute) published this peremptory audacious constitution in affront of them both: Statuimus quod Laici ubi de subditorum pec∣tis & excessibus corrigendis per Praelatos & Ecclesiasticos judices inquiritur ad praestandum de veritate dicenda juramentum per excom∣municationis sententias, si opus furit, compellantur; impedientes verò ne hujusmodi juramentum praestetur: (for the Judges with many othes then generally oppugned and hindred the ushering in of this Innovation) per interdicti & excommunicationis sententiam arceant. To evacuate which exorbitant illegall constitution (meant onely of witnesses, not of Churchwardens, Sidemen, or Stangers oathes as the Lindew. Prov. Constit. l. 2. De jurejurando, . 80. Glosse of Lindwood (who records it) resolves in expresse termes, trenching both upon the peoples li∣berties and the Courts of Justice too; the Judges frequently granted out sundry generall prohibitions to all, or most of the Sheriffes of England; as is evident by Pars 2. fol. 36. b. 43.50. the Rgister of Writs. Nat. Bre. fol. 41.4. Fitz herberts natura Brevium. Rastall, and others; commanding the Sheriffe to inhibite Bishops and their Officers, to cite Laymen before them, to take an oath in any case whatsoever, except of Matrimony or Testament only;Abrid. of Sta∣tutes. Tit. Prohi∣bition 5. and not to suffer the people to appeare before them to take such oathes. The continuer of Matthew Paris his History of England, p. 966, 967. writes of this Bishop of Lincolne, That Simon Earle of Leicester (who most opposed Henry the third, and warred against him) adhered to him, and delivered his children to him to be educated. That by his counsell tractabat ardua, tentabat dubia, finivit inchoata, ea maximè, per quae meritum sibi succrescere aestimabat. And this Bishop is said to have enjoyned the Earle in remision of his sinnes, that he should undertake this cause of the Barons against the King, for which he contended even unto death, affirming, that the peace of the Church of England could not be established, but by the materiall Sword; and that all who died for it, should be crowned with martyrdome. And some say, that
this Bishop laying his hand sometimes on the head of this Earles ldest sonne, said unto him; Oh my deere sonne, both thu and thy father shall both die in one day, and with one kind of death, yet for justice and vrity. Such an animater was he both of rebellion and warres. HENRY LEXINTONHenry Lexinton the next Bishop of this See, Anno 1257. offered some kind of hard measure unto the University of Oxford, by in∣fringing certaine liberties tht of old belonged unto it.Matthew Paris Hist. Ang. p. 915, 916. Godwin, p. 241, 242. For re∣dresse hereof, they were forced to make their complaint unto the King, lying then at S. Albons, and sent nine Masters of Art to the Court for that purpose; Matthew Paris a Monk of S. Al∣bons was present at the delivery of the petition, and (as himselfe writeth) was bold to sep unto the King, using these speeches to him in private. I beseech your Grace, even for Gods sake, to have compassion upon the Church now tottering, and in great danger of utter subversion: The Vniversity of Paris, the nurse of o many excellent and famous Prlates, is now greatly troubled: If the Vniversity of Oxford be disquieted and moleted also, (especially at this time) being the second Vniversity of Christendome, and even another foundation of the Church, it is much to be feared, lea it cause a generall confusion and ur ruine of the whole Church. God forbid (said the King) that that should happen, especially in my time; I will endeavour to prevent it. I doubt not he was as good as his word, for I finde no more mention of any further stirres. This I have thought good, the rather to set downe, to shew, what was the reputation of our University of Oxford in those daies, and what indignities this Bishop offered to it, to cause a publike combustion. HENRY BVRVVASHHenry Burwash the 15. Bishop of Lincolne, though advanced to that See by King Edward the second his speciall favour, within two yeeres after his consecration,Godwin, p. 303. for some contempts and misdemeanors he fell so faire into the Kings displeasure, that his temporalties were seized upon into the Kings hands for two yeeres space. Anno 1324. they were restored to him againe, and he to the Kings favour,Hist. Angliae, Anno 1326, 1327. p. 101, 104 105. Speeds hi∣story of Great Brit. l. 9. c. 11. p. 678, 680, 681. but the grudge thereof so stcke in his stomacke, as the Queene rising against her husband seeking to depose him, (as afterward shee did) no man was so forward to take her part, no man was so eager against the King, his un∣doubted true and naturall Prince, as this Bishop. Thomas Walfing∣ham writes, that almost all the Prelates joyned with the Queene against the King, & precipuè, &c. but especially the Bishop of Lin∣colne,
Hreford, Dublin and Ely who raised a great Army for her others (and principally the Archbishop o Canterbury) urnished her with money, and when the Queene had taken the King prisoner Anno 1327. keeping her Chistmas a Walingford, the Archbishop of Can∣terbury and Yrke, the Bishop of Winchster (whom she mde Lord Tresurer) the Bihp of Norwich her Lord Chacellour, this good Bishop of Lincolne, the Bishops of Ely, Coventry, and other Prelates kpt their Christmas with her, with great honour, joy, and triumph; whence comming to Westminster, prsently after Twelftide they assembled in Parliament, deposed the King from his Crowne, and elected his sonne in his steed; to which ele∣ction the Archbishop of Canterbury there present consented, ET OMNES PRAELATI, and all the Prelates: the Archbi∣shop making an oration to them to confirme and justifie this election, taking for his text, Vox Populi, vox Dei: Such good Subjects were all the Archbishops and Bishops at that time; and this Prelate one of the ringleaders; who not content thus to spoyle his Soveraigne of his Crown, Kingdome and life too; not long after making a new Pake at Tyinghurst, he inclosed in the same, ground belonging to divers poore men his tenants, for which he had many a bitter curse of them: Wasingham hist. Angl. Anno, 1343. p. 150. whereupon it is reported, that after his death he appeared to one of his Gen∣tlemen in the likenesse of a Keeper, with a Bow and Arrowes in his hand, a horne by his side, and a greene jerkin on his backe; telling him, that for the injurious enclosing of that Parke, he was appointed to the keeping of the same, there to be tormen∣ted till it were disparked againe, desiring him to intreat the Canons of Lincolne, his brethren, that this wrong done by him, by their good meanes might be righted; who upon this infor∣mation, sent one William Batchellour of their Company to see it utterly disparked: which was effected. Anno 1351. the Univesity of Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p 269. Godwin, cat. p. 95. Oxford presented unto Iohn SynwallJOHN SYNVVALL. Bishop of Lincolne (unto whose jurisdiction Oxford then appertained) one William Palmarin for thei Chancellour, and prayed him to admit him. The Bishop (I know not for what cause) delayed hs admission from time to time, and enforced the University to complaine of this hard dealing unto the Arch∣bishop. He presently set downe a day wherein he enjoyned the Bishop to admit this Chancellour, or else to render a reason of his refusall. At the time appointed the Proctours of the
University were ready together with this William Palmorie to demand admission. And when the Bishop of Lincolne came not (trusting belike to this priviledge procured from Rome to ex∣emp himslfe his authority and jurisdiction) the Archbishop causes his Chancellour Iohn Carton Deane of Wels to admit him, writ to the Uniuersity to receive him, and cited the Bishop to answer before him for his contempt. He appealed to the Pope, would not come, and for his contumacy was convicted. Much money was spent in this suite afterwards at Rome. The event was, that the Archbishop prevailed, and the others privi∣ledge was by speciall order of the Pope revoked, who also gran∣ted unto the University at the same time, that the Chancellour hereafter should onely be elected by the Schollers themselves, and so presently authorized to govern them without the admis∣sion of any other. THOMAS WATSON.Thomas Watson Bishop of Lincolne in the first yeere of Queene Elizabeth, was deprived of hs Bishopricke, and imprisoned, for refusing to take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy,Martin hist. p. 453. Godwin, p. 249. and counselling the other Bishops to excommunicate the Queene, for altering religion. Of which see more before in Tonstall Bi∣shop of London. JOHN WILLIAMS.Of other Bishops of this See since his time, I finde little in Hi∣story; As for the present Prelate of that Diocesse, as he deserves due praise for his magnificent Structures of Libraries, Hospitals and the like; So on the other side, his excessive pride and miscar∣riages in his Chancellor-ship, for which he lost that office; and es∣pecially his advancing of the now Arch-bishop of Canterbury (who proved a scourge to him, as well as others,) with his pro∣curing Mountagues Appeale to be printed, which See the Kings Proclamation for calling in his Appelo Cae∣sarem: And his Majesties de∣claration con∣cerning the dissolution of the last Parlia∣ment but one, p. 20, 21. kindled a great Combustion in our Church and State, and laid the foundation of all those Popish Innovations both in doctrine and discipline, which have since, like a filthy leprosie, over-spread our Church, and bred such sad effects and distractions among us) deserve iust blame. Yea, his late extraordinary stickling (much spoken against) to main∣taine the Lordly iurisdiction, and secular authority of our Pre∣lates, without the least diminution or reformation of their ex∣cesses, hath much ecclipsed all the honour and reputation he had gained by his former sufferings, which should have made him (as the vulgar truely say) more Matth. 11.29. meeke and lowly in heart, like Christ his Master, of whom he, and all other Pontifs, should learne Hu∣mility,
not lofty and pontificall domineering like Diotrephes, who loved to have the preheminene, for which St.3 Ihn 9. Iohn condemns him, or like the ambitious Apostles, who contended, Math. 20.25. to 29. Luk. 22.24, 25, 26. which of them should be greatest; for which Christ sharpely rebuked thm sundry times, saying, Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion ovr them, and they that are great, exercise authority upon them, But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister, and whosoever will be chife among you, let him be your srvant: even as the Sonne of man came not to be ministred unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransome for many. Which texts, (toge∣ther with that of Peter, 1 Pet. 5.2.3.5. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready minde; neither as being Lords over Gods He∣ritage, but being ensamples to the flocke &c. Yea all of you be subiect one to another, and be cloathed with humility; for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble) it seemes this Prelate and his Bre∣thren have forgotten, or at least beleeve not to bee canonicall; since they now poynt-blancke oppugne them: yet me thinkes, he should in this case, have remembred, what himselfe had but lately published in print (The very words of the License of Iohn Lincolne Deane of Westminster before that Booke. as most Orthodox in doctrine, and consonant in Discipline to the Church of England, and very fit to be printed and pub∣lished in any place or places, where h as Ordinary was inabled and licen∣ced so to doe: (and so at Westminster.) In the holy Table Name and Thing, pag. 82. against Clergy mens intermedling with secular af∣faires, where thus he writes. Regul. fusior. Reg. 20. pag. 454. O foolish St. Basil, that bids hs Clergie take speciall heed, that their Martha be not troubled with ma∣ny things. O dull Synesius, that held it fitter for an Synes. ep. 52. Aegyptian then a Christian Priest to be over-troubled with matters of wrang∣ling. Well Doctor, God helpe the poore people committed to thy Cure; they are like to finde but a sorry Shepherd: One that will be in the vestry, when hee should be in the Pulpit; and by his much nimblenesse in the one, is like to shew a proportionable heavynesse in the other: which he thus seconds, p. 166.167. St. Cyprian was angry with one Geminius Victor, for making (a∣gainst the Canon) one Faustinus a Priest, Overseer of his Will, and by that meanes withdrawing him from his calling and mi∣niry. And enlarging himselfe in that discourse, how carefull God had beene in providing Tiths and Oblations for the Priest under the Law, giving him not Lands and Husbandries amongst the other Tribes, ut in nulla re avocarur, that hee might have
no occasion to be withdrawne from the Altar; He aggravates the offence of these Testators, that by making Church-men, Exe∣cutors and Overseers of their last Wills, ab altari Sacerdotes & Ministros volunt avocare, will needs withdraw Ministers from their Ecclesiasticall functions, with no lesse offence, then if, under the Law, they had withdrawne the Priests from the holy Altar. So that this plce takes my Doctor a little by the nose, that cannot indure to be a looker on, and a dull Spctator, confined only to his ministeriall meditations. So this Prelate. And do not thse pssages of this Bishop take himselfe a little by the Nose oo, as wll as the Doctor, who cannot endure to be a looker on, and a dull Spectator, confined only to his ministeriall Meditations, unlesse he may likewise sit as a Peere in Parliament, and intermeddle with secu∣lar affaires? If not, as some conceive they doe, yet sure I am, the words of Synesius and Cyprian in their places which hee quots, will round him in the eare, and give him no little checke. For Synesius in his 52. Epistle to Andronicus, writes thus against Bishops sitting as Iudges, and intermedling with publike secular affaires, to which Andronicus would have perswaded him. To ioyne the power of administring the republique, with the Priesthood, is all one as to knit those things together which cannot be coupled by any coniunction. Anci∣ent times permitted the same persons to be Priests & Iudges. For the Ae∣gyptians and Hebrewes for a long time used the government of Priests; Afterwards when, as it seemes to me, that the divine worke began to be done in a humane manner, Deus ambo vitae genera separavit, God se∣parated both kindes of life, and one of these was appointed to sacred things, the other to government and empire; for He designeth some to the dregs of the lowest things, others he hath associated unto himselfe. Those are im∣ployed in secular affaires, not in Prayer But yet in both, God requires what is honest and consentaneous. Why dost thou therefore againe revoke them? Why wilt thou conioyne these things which God hath separated? Who requirest us not to administer, but to deprave us in administring: than which, what can be more unhappy? Hast thou need of a Patron? Goe to him who is President in the Lawes of the Republike, (or Lord chiefe Iustice.) Hast thou need of God in any thing? Goe to the Bishop of the City. Contemplation is the end of Priesthood, if a man not falsly usurpe that name to himselfe. Now Contemplation and Action doe no ways ac∣cord: for the force of the Will is moved into action, which cannot bee without some affection; But the Soule which is to become the receptacle of God, ought to be free from all affection: he had need of vacation from
secular imployments, who with the sudy of Philosophy is imployd in sa∣crd things. After this he there professeh. He neither would nor could undertake and mannage both secular and spirituall affaires; and there∣fore desires, that either another Bishop might be lected in his place, which would discharge both, or else another ioyned to him, to dispatch those worldly afaies which he neither would, nor could administer. And be∣cause this might seem a novelty, he gives his excellent answer to it, necessary for our present time, and answering one grand ob∣iection against the alteration of Episcopall government, now found by long experience to be very pernicious to our Church and State. Quid exclamastis? num quia nondum factum illud est, ficri idcircone nunc non convenit? multa quae necessaria erant, invenit tempus, & emendavit. Non ad exemplum fieri omnia solent, & vnumquodque eorum quae facta sunt initium habuit, & antequam fieret, nondum erat factum. Consuetudini vtilitatem anteponere praestabilius est. Demus & nos meliori consuetudini initium. Thus farre Synesius the Bishops first Author. And as for St. Cyprian his second Author, he was so angry with Geminius Victor for making one Faustinus a Priest overseer of his Will, that he Epist. 9. lib. 1. but Epist 69.  Pamelius his Edition. decreed this dishonourable punishment to him even after his decease. Non est quod pro dormitione eius apud vos fiat oblatio, aut deprecatio nomine eius in Ecclesia frequentetur, ut Sacerdo∣tum decretum religiose & necessario factum, servetur a nobis: simul & caeteris fratribus detur exemplum, ne quid Sacerdotes & Ministros Dei Altari eius & Ecclesi vacantes, ad saeculares molestias devocet; which if the now Bishop of Lincolne had well considered, I dare pre∣sume, it would have strucke him dumbe, and made him ashamed, so much as once to open his mouth in defence of our Prelates u∣surping or exercising temporall iurisdiction, and intermedling in temporall affaires, in which himselfe heretofore hath beene overmuch conversant, farre more then this Clerke, who was but a bare overseer of another mans will. But for him and his Pre∣decessors this may suffice. I shall now hasten to the Bishops of some other Sees. The End of the first Part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE ANTIPATHIE OF THE ENGLISH LORDLY PRELACIE, BOTH TO REGALL MONAR∣CHY, AND CIVILL UNITY: OR, An Historicall collection of the severall exe∣crable Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Sediti∣ons, State-schismes, Contumacies, oppressions, & Anti-mo∣narchicall practices, of our English, Brittish, French, Scot∣tish, & Irish Lordly Prelates, against our Kings, Kingdomes, Laws, Liber∣ties; and of the severall Warres, and Civill Dissentions occasioned by them in, or against our Realm, in former and latter ages. Together with the Judgement of our owne ancient Writers, Martyrs, & most judicious Authors, touching the pretended Divine Jurisdiction, Lordlinesse, Temporalties, Wealth, Secular imployments, Trayterous practises, unprofitablenesse, and mischievousnesse of Lordly Prelates, both to King, State, Church; with an Answer to the chiefe Objections made for the Di∣vinity, or continuance of their Lordly Function By WILLIAM PRYNNE, late (and now againe) an Utter-Barrester of Lincolnes Inne. Woe to thee that spoylest, and thou wast not spoyled; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee; when thou shalt cease to spoyle, thou shalt be spoyled, and when thou shalt make an end to deale treachercusly, they shall deale treacherously with thee. O Lord be gracious to us, we have waited for thee; Isaiah 33.1, 2. LONDON, Printed by Authority, for Michael Sparke senior. An. 1641.
TO THE HIGH AND HONORABLE COVRT OF PARLIAMENT NOW ASSEMBLED. RIght Honourable Worthies, what the Prince of Latine Poets long since observed in generall — Virg. Georg. l. 2. Aliur vitium crescitque tegendo; That maladies are nourished and augmented by concealing them; is in a more especiall manner verified
in our Lordly Prelates, (one of the greatest maladies in our Church and State) who have beene fostered and suffered to grow great among us, onely through the concalement, palliating, or ignorance of their disloyalties, and other Episcopall vices. The consideration whereof hath induced me to compile and publish, The second Part of this Antipathie; wherein I have (accor∣ding to my weake abilities) anatomized some of their Traiterous, Seditious, Rebellious Contumacious, Oppressive, extravagant Pra∣ctises, in ancient and moderne times, laying them open unto publique view: and withall discovered the frivolousnes of those grounds, the insufficiency of those Reasons alledged for the pretended Divinity, Antiquity, and perpetuating of their Lordly Prelacy a∣mong us; Mat. 15.3. A Plant (I dare say) which our Heavenly Father never planted in our Church; and therefore certaine to be rooted out in his due time; which in all probability is now neare at hand. If these my endeavours (which I humbly prostrate at your Honours Feete, recommending them to your Noble Patro∣nage, as I did the former part) may contribute any thing to this much desired, long expe∣cted good worke, I shall thinke my labour
happily bestowed. In the meane time, I shall be a daily Oratour to the Throne of Grace, for a superabundant blessing upon your Hono∣rable Persons and publique Consultations, till you have cleansed both our Church and State from all Corruptions which infest them, and Psal 100.8. Cut off all wicked doers from the City of our God. Your Honours devoted, and eternally obliged Redeemed one, WILL. PRYNNE.
TO THE COVRTEOVS READER. HAving now according to promise (kinde Reader) with all convenient expe∣dition finished this Second Part of the Antipathy of the English Lordly Prelacy to Regall Mo∣narchy & Civill Unity, I humbly submit it to thy favourable Censure, and charitable Interpretation, which I must implore. The rather, because some uncharitable Lordly Prelates, and their malitious Instruments, have not spared to traduce my loyall intentions, and to mis-conster my innocent words even to the King my Soveraigne, endeavouring to make me and others guilty of no lesse than High Treason, for discovering our Prelates notorious Treasons, Conspiracies, and Rebellions to the world. For finding this passage in my Prologue to the first Part: If then we consider the paucity of our Arch-bishops, and Lord Bishops, &c. on the one side, and then on the other hand,
compare the multitude of the Prelates noo∣rious Treasons, &c. we must necessarily conclude, their NO BISHOP, NO KING, to be a notorious Bull, and NO KING UNLESSE NO BISHOP, to be a more probable and Some Cop∣pies have most for more, through the Printer mi∣stake. more true position. They con∣trary to the whole designe and scope of my Antipa∣thy, yea, of this very passage, (as hee that Reades it at large may at first discerne) most injuriously suected to his Majesty, that the meaning of my, No King unlesse no Bishop, was, that I and the Commons intended to depose his Majestie, and to have no King at all unlesse his Maje∣sty would put downe Bishops. Hereupon his Majestie to satisfie himsele in a point of such high and neare concernment, calling for the booke, per∣used the passage, and concluded, there was no such meaning couched in it as was suggested, but the quite contrary; namely, That he could not be an absolute King unlesse the Bishops (who had still beene Rebellious, dsloyall and opposite to their Soveraignes, so farre as to uncrowne or make them no Kings in a manner) were suppressed; which was all I intended in this passage, as is evident by its opposition to their no Bishop, no King, by the speech of King John, who hearing of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury his death, sayd See Part. 1. p. 31. I was never a King till now; by reason of Huberts presumptuous daring to crosse and frustrate his
royall resolutions; from whence I borrowed this mis-interpreted clause; by Mr William Tyndals passages here cited to the same effct, Part. 2. p. 366.369. which I alluded to, and by the whole scope of the Antipathy to this effect. By this malicious false suggestion, with others of like nature heretofore, (the sole cause of al my former sufferings) the world may easily judge what malici∣ous calumniators, what impudent false informers our Lordly Prelates are, and how much I have beene beholding to them for their malicious mis∣interpretations of my words, and misrepre∣sentations of my sincere intentions to his Ma∣jestie, whom they ever laboured to incense against me by these most sinister meanes; and not content therewith, since his Majestie hath beene satisfied touching this fore-cited passage, some of them have not spared to report abroade to others; That there were such passages in my Prologue, for which my life might be questioned; and I be∣leeve it true, were they to be both my accusers and Iudges: but blessed be God, this ever hath beene and shall be my consolation, that they can onely slan∣der, not convict me of any disloyalty or misdemea∣nor. And if they will still calumniate me for well doing (as hitherto they have done) that golden Apo∣thegme of Alexander the great, will be a suffici∣en Antidote against the poyson of their tongues
and pens; Plutarchi Apoph. Regium est malè audire, cùm benè facias. Now lest they should chance to slander me for any false quotations by reason of the variety of the Im∣pressions and Pages of some of our Historians, I have frequently quoted; to prevent this inconveni∣ence, I shall advertise them and thee (kind Reader) what Editions I have used. Malmesbury, Hun∣tindon and Hoveden here quoted, were Printed at Francfort by Wichlus, Anno, 1601. Mat∣thew Paris, Tiguri. 1589. Matthew Westm. Londini. 1570. Walsingham, Londini, 1574. by Iohn Day. Speed, London. 1623. Holinshed, the last Edition. Of Godwins Catalogue of Bi∣shops there are two Editions; the first Printed by Geoge Bishop 1600. the latter with a Dis∣couse of the Conversion of Britaine, and some Additions, Printed for Thomas Adams. London 1615. both these Editions I have quoted for the most part promiscuously, and sometimes with distin∣ction; if the pages vary in one Edition, peruse the other, and these Editions of the Historians which I follow, and then every page and quotation will prove true and punctuall, if examined. And now (Reader) having given thee this ad∣vertisement, I shall desire God to Sanctifie this Treatise to thy private information, and the publick Reformation of all corruption in our Church. Farewell.
A COMPLEATE TABLE OF THE SEVERALL CHAPTERS of this Second Part of the Antipathy, which may serve in steede of an Index. Chap. IV. COmprising the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Contumacies, Disloyalties, &c. of the Bishops of Ely, Exeter, Worcester and Hereford. Chap. V. Containing the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Contu∣macies, Disloyalties, &c. of the Bishops of Chichester, Carlile, Norwich, Chester, Coventry and Lichfield. Chap. VI. Comprising the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Contu∣macies,
Disloyalties, &c. of the Bishops of Rochester, S. Davids, Landaffe, Bangor, Asaph, Bath and Wels; with a short touch of the Bishop of Oxford, Bristow, Peterborough, and Glocester; and of our Bi∣shops in generall. Chap. VII. Containing the severall Treasons, Rebellions, Seditions, Schismes, Contumacies, Warres, and disloyalties of the Bishops of France, Normandy, Scotland, and Ire∣land, in reference to our Kingdome and Kings of England. Chap. VIII. Containing certaine Conclusions, deduced from the Pre∣mises, with the judgements and resolutions of divers of our ancient Writers, Martyrs, and some of our learnedest Bishops and Authors in Queene Elizabeths Reigne, touching the pretended Divine Institution and Iurisdiction of Bishops, their Treasons, Rebelli∣ons, Temporalties, large possessions, intermedling with secular affaires; the taking away of their Temporalties not to be sacriledge; and the uselessenesse, unprofitable∣nesse, and mischievousnesse, of Lordly Bishops, and their government in our Church. Chap. IX. Comprising an answere to the principall Objections al∣leaged by the Prelates in defence of the pretended di∣vine Institution, and for the continuance of their Epi∣scopacy in our Church.
Kind Reader I pray correct these subsequent Errors which have escaped the Presse in some Coppies, in my absence. ERRATA. IN the booke p. 200. l. 18. or read for. p. 203. l. 12. insolently, 207. l. 2. him to  him. To. p. 235. l. 12. mony. p. 238. Manwaring, p. 242. l. 2. than. l. 6. henries, Stephens. p. 250, l. 10. forced. p. 251. l. 36.11000. p. 255. l. 1. Eiicrent. p. 322. l. 2. not. p. 328. l. 1. after, averre. p. 322. l. 34. Churches, Churchmen. p. 342. l, 7. our, your. p. 356. l. 10. Cefenas. p. 393. l. 11. It is. p. 404. l. 11. and destruction. p. 405. l. 18. that p. 411. l. 8. perceive. p. 417. l. 19 Fisher, Fish. p. 419. l. 11. be, both. p. 424 l. 3. dele in. p. 430. l. 21. can, cannot, l. 22. In Ma∣ster. p. 434. l. 23. fol. l. 24.32.22. l. 37. or spirituall. p. 435. l. 6. dele greate p. 446. l. 5. Pastures. p. 440. l. 3. he thus writes; And l. 10. where, which, p. 453. l. 5. understand, l. 15. Erasmus. p. 481. l. 31. Angelorum l. 33. this booke. p. 482. l. 16. never, ever l. 31. of, and. p. 484. l. 32. men. p. 486. l. 6. by Paul. p. 490. l. 27. deny, deem l. 35. it, them. p. 499. l. 23. habetur. p. 501. l. 13. dele, together. p. 503. l. 11. dele other. p. 510. l. 6. dele ad. l. 31. whole. In the Margin. p. 208. l. 2. Fordham. p. 357. Ioan Baleus. Scrip. Brit. Cent. 3. c. 61. omitted, p. 253.254. are omitted p. 365. l. 9, Common, Canon. p. 487. l. 2. Timotheum. l. 5. Romanorum. p. 499, l. 12. H. 8. p. 500, l. 14. Finan. p. 513. l. 25. Ingulph.
THE SECOND PART OF THE Antipathy of the English Lordly Prelacy, both to Regall Monar∣chy and civill Vnitie. CHAP. IV. Conteining the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Contumacies, and disloyalties of the Bishops of Ely, Exeter, Worcester, and Hereford. THe Bishopricke of Ely was Godwin Cat. p. 200 Holinshed. p. 36. Rogre de Hoveden Annalium pars prior p. 472. Matth. Paris Hist. Ang. p. 61. Matth. West. An. 1109. p 26. Eadmerus. Hist. Novorum. l. 4. p. 95.96. & Iohannes Se∣deni spiciegium, ibid. p. 209. o 213 & 165 to 169. first e∣rected by the pride of Richard Abbot of Ely, who in respect of his great wealth disdained to live under the jurisdicti∣on of the Bishop of Lincolne, to whose Diocesse Cambridge-shire at that time appertained. But hee had reasonable pretences or his ambition. He caused the King to be told, that the Diocesse of Lincolne was too large for one
mans government, that Ely were a fit place for an E∣piscopall See, &c. These Reasons amplified with gol∣den Rhetoricke, so perswaded the King, as he not one∣ly consented himselfe, that this Monastery should be converted into a Cathedrall Church, and the Abbot made a Bishop; but also procured the Pope to con∣firme and allow of the same; but Richard dying be∣fore his enstalement, Henry the first, Anno 1109. ap∣pointed this Bishopricke unto one Hervaeus,HERVAEVS. that had beene Bishop of Bangor, and agreeing ill with the Welchmen, was faine to leave his Bishoppricke ther, and seeke abroad for somewhat elsewhere. Nigellus,NIGLLVS the second Bishop of this See, by reason of his imployment in matters of State and Councell, could not attend his Pastorall charge, and therefore committed the managing and government of his Bishoppricke unto one Ranulphus,Godwin. Ca. p. 201. sometime a Monke of Glastonbury, that had new cast away his Cowle, a covetous and wicked man. Matth West. Anno. 1139. p. 36. King Stephen and he had many bickerings, and as Hist. Ang. p. 74. Matthew Paris writes, hee banished him the Realme; he was Nephew to Roger Bishop of Salisbury, from whom, in ejus perniem traxerat incntiuum, he had drawne an incentive to his distructi∣on; but of him, and his contests with this King, you may read more in Roger of Salisbury his Vncle. This Matth. Paris Hist. Ang p. 47. Godwin. ca p. 202. See, continuing void five yeares, without a Bishop after Nigellus death, Geoffery Rydell,GEOFFRY RYDEL. Anno. 1174. succeeded him, a very lofty and high minded man, cal∣led commonly, The Proud Bishop of Ely. King Richard the first, and he accorded so ill, that he dying inte∣state, and leaving in his coffers great store of ready money, namely, 3060. markes of silver, and 205. pound of gold, the King confiscated and converted it to his owne use. William Longchamp,WILLIAM LONCHAMP. next Bishop of this See, being made Lord Chancellour of England, chiefe Justice of the South part of England, & Protector of the Realmeby Richard the first, when he went his voyage to the Holy-land,
Hveden. Annal. pars este∣rior p. 687.700 to 708.718.719 720.735.663 680. &c. Nubrigen. Hist. l. 4 c. 14.15.16 17.18. Matth. Paris Hist. Ma∣jor. p. 151.155.156.157.160 161 Fox Acts and Monumn. p: 114: 23.224. Godw. Cat p. 247. to 261 Holinshed. p. 21.129.130.131.132. Speed. p. 531: &c. set the whole Kingdome in a combustion, through his strang insolence, oppression, pride, vio∣lence: For having all temporall, and spirituall Juris∣diction in his hands, the Pope making him his Legate here in England, at the Kings request, (which cost him a thousand pounds in money, to the great offence of the King,) infatuated with too much prosperity, and the brightnesse of his owne good fortune, he be∣gan presently to play both King and Priest, nay Pope in the Realme; and to doe many things, not onely untowardly, and undiscreetly, but very arrogantly and insolenly, savoring aswell of inconscionable covetous∣nesse and cruelty, as lacke of wisedome and policy in so great a government requisite. He calling a Convocati∣on by vertue of his power Legantine, at the intreaty of Hugh Novant Bishop of Chester, displaced the Monkes of Coventree, and put in secular Priests in their roomes; Officers appointed by the King himselfe, he dischar∣ged, and removed, putting others in their steeds. He utterly rejected his fellow Justices whom the King joyned with him in Commission for government of the Realme, refusing to heare their Counsell, or to be advised by them. Hee kept a guard of Flemmings and French about him. At his Table, all Noblemens chil∣dren did serve and waite upon him. Iohn the Kings brother, and afterward King himselfe, hee sought to keepe under, and disgrace by all meanes possible, op∣posing him all hee could that he might put him from the Crowne; He tyrannized exceedingly over the No∣bility and Commons, whom he grieved with intolle∣rable exactions, oppressions, extraordinary outward pomp, and intollerable behaviour. He was extreame burthensome one way or other to all the Cathedrall Churches of England. His Offices were such prolling companions (bearing themselves bold upon their Masters absolute authority) as there was no sort of peaple whom they grieved, not by some kinde of ex∣tortion, all the wealth of the Kingdome came into
their hands insomuch that scarce any ordinary per∣son had left him a silver belt to gird him withall, any woman any brooch or bracelet, or any gentleman a ring to weare upon his finger. Hee purchased every where apase, bestowed all Temporall and Ecclesiasti∣call Offices and places that fell where he pleased. Hee never rode with lesse than 1500. horse, and comman∣ded all the Nobility and Gentry when he went a∣broad to attend him, lodging for the most part at some Monastery or other, to their great expence: having both Regall and Papall authority in his hands: hee most arrogantly domineered, both over the Cleargy, and Layety; and as it is written of a certaine man,The fruit of Clergy mens, ha∣ving both tem∣porall and spi∣rituall jurisdi∣ction. That he used both hands for a right hand; so likewise hee for the more easie effecting of his designes (as our Lordly Prelates doe now) used both his powers one to assist the other; for to compell and curbe potent Laymen, if peradventure he could doe lesse than he desired by his secular power, he supplied what was wanting with the censures of his Apostolicall power. But if perchance any Clergy man resisted his will, (him without doubt al∣ledging the Canons for himselfe in vaine) he oppres∣sed and curbed by his secular power. There was no man who might hide himselfe from his heate, when as he might justly feare, both the rod of his Secular, and the sword of his spirituall jurisdiction to be inflicted on him; and no Ecclesiasticall Person, could by any meanes or authority be able to defend himselfe against his royall preheminence: Finally glorying of his im∣mense power, that the Metropolitane Churches, which as yet did seeme to contemne his excellency, might have experience of his authority, he went in a terrible manner to both. And first of all to Yorke, to the Bishop elect whereof hee was most maliciously di∣spitefull. And sending before him a mandate to the Clergy of the said Church, that they should meete him in a solemne manner, as the Legate of the Aposticke
See; when as they had thought to appeale against him, he regarded not the appeale made to the higher power, but gave the appellants their choyce, that they should either fulfill his commands, or be committed to pri∣son, as guilty of high It was treason then to resist this proud Prelates will. Treason Being therefore thus affrighted, they obeyed, and not daring so much as to mutter any further against him, as to one triumphing, they with a counterfeit sorrow bestowed as much honor & glory on him as he would himself. The chiefe Chan∣ter of that Church had gone out of the way a little be∣fore, that he might not see that which he could not be∣hold without torment of mind, which the Bishop un∣destanding, raging against this absent person as a re∣bell with an implacable motion by his own Sergeants spoiled him of all his goods. Having preyed upon the Archbishoppricke, and pursed all up into his Treasury, this famous tryumpher departed. And not long after he triumphed in like manner over those of Canterbury, when as no man now durst to resist him. Having therefore both Metropolitane Sees, thus prostrate to him, he used both as he pleased. In a word,Note the ms∣chiefe of Pre∣lates temporall and secular Iu∣risdction com∣bined. the Lay∣men in England at that time (writes Neubrigensis) found him more than a King, and the Clergy men more than a Pope, but both of them an intollerable tyrant. For by occasion of his double power, hee put on a double tyrants person, being onely innoxious to his compli∣ces and co-operators, but equally grievous to all o∣thers, not onely in his greedy desire of monies, but likewise in his pleasure of domineering, his pride be∣ing more than Kingly almost in all things. Matth. West. An. 1191 p. 6. Hee carrying himselfe above himselfe, consumed much Treasure in walling about the Tower of London, which he thought to have compassed with the Thames, Et regem de magna parte pecuniae multipliciter damnificauit, and many wayes damnified the King in mispending a great part of his money. Therefore in the end he was precipitated from the top to the bottome of confusion.
He set over every Province, rather to be destroyed than governed, most wicked executioners of his covetousnes, who would neither spare Clergy man, nor Lay man, nor Monke, whereby they might the more advance the profit of the Chancellour; for so was he called, when as he was a Bishop; the name verily of a Bishop being no∣thing at all, or Lukewarme in him, but the name of a Chancellor was famous and terrible throughout all England. Hee appointed the Governours of every county, under pretence of suppressing theeves, to have great troopes of cruell and barbarous armed persons to ride with them, every where, to terrifie the people; who going abroad in every place without punish∣ment, comitted both many enormities and cruelties. Hoveden  and Holinshed note, that the King con∣firming this Bishop Chancellor, and Lord chiefe Iustice of all England, and the Bishop of Durham to be Lord chiefe Iustice from Trent Northwards; when they were thus advanced to these dignities, howsoever they came by them, directly, or indirectly: that immediatly, thereupon strife and discord did arise betwixt them; for waxing proud and insolent, they disdained each o∣ther, contending which of them should beare most rule and authority: insomuch that whatsoever seemed good to the one, the other misliked. The like hereof is noted before, betweene the Archbishops of Canter∣bury and Yorke. For the nature of ambition is, to de∣light in singularity, to admit no Peere, to give plac to no superiour, to acknowledge no equall, as appeares by this proud Prelate. Who afterward depriving Hugh of Durham of all his honour and dignity; and putting the Bishop of Winchester to great trouble; and doubting least the Nobles of the Realme should put him out of his place, who detested him for his pride and insolen∣cie, he thereupon matched divers of his Kinswomen to them, to make them true unto him, promising them great preferments; the rest of the Nobility hee either
crushed, or otherwise appeased: fearing none but Iohn the Kings brother, who was like to succeede him to curbe him, hee sent his two brothers to the King of Scots, to joyne in a firme league with him to crowne Arthur King, and not Iohn, in Case the King died with∣out issue. These everall particulars, insolencies, and oppressions, being related to the King Wintring in Sicily, he thereupon sent Waler, Archbishop of Rhoan, a prudent and modest man, with a Commission to be joyned with this Bishop in the government of the Kingdome, and that nothing should be done without his consent, sending Hugh Bardulfe Bishop of Durham with him to governe the Province of Yorke, (where the Bishops brother played Rex in a barbarous man∣ner) granting him likewise the custody of the Castle of Windsor: Hugh meeting with the Bishop at the towne of Ely, shewed him the Kings Letters to this purpose, to which he answered, that the Kings commandement should be done, and so brought him with him to Euwell, where he tooke him and kept him fast, till hee was forced to surrender to him the Castle of Windsor, and what else the King had committed to his custody, and moreover was constrained to leave Henry de Pu∣tnco his own sonne, and Gilbert Lege, for hostages of his fidelity to be true to the King and the Realme. The Bishop hereupon contemned this command of the King, pretending that hee knew his minde very well, and that this Commission was fraudulently procured; and when the Archbishop of Rhoan, according to the Kings direction went to Canterbury to order that See, being void, this proud Chancellor, aspiring to the prero∣gative of this See. prohibited him to doe it; threat∣ning, that he should dearely pay for this his presump∣tion if he attempted to goe thither, or doe any thing in that businesse: so that this Archbishop continued idle in England. But the Chancellor impatient of any collegue in the Kingdomes government, like a inguler wilde beast
preyed upon the Kingdome. Whereupon he sends for a power from beyond the sea, puts Gerardus de Cammilla, from the government of Lincolne Castle his wives inhe∣ritance and commands him to resigne it into his hands: he refusing to doe it, repaies to Iohn the Kings brother for aide, and assistance; where∣upon the Bishop in a rage presently goes and besiegeth the Casle; and seekes to force it: Iohn in the meane time takes Notingham and Tikehill, and sends to the Bishop, to give over his siege, who losing one of his hornes or hands (his spirituall Legantine power by the Popes death, and a little affrighted therewith) by the advice of his friends, he comes to a parly with Iohn, and made his peace with him for the present upon the best termes and conditions hee could. But hearing shortly after that the forraigne forces he had sent for to ayd him were arrived, he takes courage, and falls off from his Covenants, protesting, that he would drive Iohn, or Iohn should drive him out of the Kingdome; intimateing, that one Kingdome was to little to containe two such great and swelling persons. At last they come to new Articles of agreement; soone after, which Geoffery Plantagenet Archbishop of Yorke, the Kings and Iohns base brother, procured his consecration from the Archbishop of Towres, which the Chancellour hindred and delayed all he might. The Chancellour, his bitter enemy and prosecutor hea∣ring of it, presently ends his owne Officers to Yorke, invades and spoiles all the possessions of the Bishop∣prick, and what ever belonged thereto, and com∣mands all the Ports to be stopped, to hinder his lan∣ding and accesse to his Church, writing this Letter to the Sheriffe of Kent. We command you, that if the Elect of Yorke shall arrive in any Port or Haven within your Bayly∣wicke, or any Messenger of his, that you cause him to be ar∣rested, and kept till you have commandement from us there∣in. And we command you likewise to stay, attach, and keepe all Letters that come from the Pope, or any other great man.
He notwithstanding arrives at Dover, but found a greater storme on shore, than at sea, for the Captaine of Dover Castle, who had married a Kinswoman of the Chancellors, hindred his progresse, and certified the Chancellour of his landing withall speede, who no wayes dissembling the rage of his fierce minde, commanded him to be stript of all his goods, and to be thrust pri∣soner into the Monastery of Dover. The Officers here∣upon sent from this most cruell tyrant seize upon all his carriage and goods, and strip him and his of all they had, and finding him in the Church of S. Martyn in Dover, neither respecting the greatnesse of his per∣son, nor the holinesse of the place, dragging him by force from the very sacred Altar, and violently halling him out of the Church in a most contumelious man∣ner, thrust him prisoner into the Castle. The same of this enormity flying, as it were upon the wings of the winde, presently filled all England. The Nobility storme at it, the inferiour sort curse him for it, and all with common votes detest the tyrant. Iohn most of all grieved at the captivity and abuse of his brother, ear∣nestly seekes, not onely to free him from prison, but to revenge his wrong. Wherefore he speedily gathers to∣gether a great army: many Bishops and Nobles that formerly sided with the Chancellor joyning their forces with him, being justly offended with his tyran∣nicall proceedings, and immoderate pride, as well as others, and raged against him more than others, both with their tongues and mindes. The Chancellor here∣upon releaseth the Archbishop; who comming to London, allayed and recompensed the griefe of the inju∣ry sustained, with the more aboundant affections and offices of many. But Iohn with the other Nobles, and Prelates, not satisfied with his release, though stirred up with his imprisonment, proceeded on to breake the hornes of this Vnicorne, who with his friends and forraigne souldiers encamped about Winchester; but
finding himselfe too weake, and most of his friends and his souldiers to fall off from him, flees first to Windsor, and from thence to London; where finding the Citizens, who formerly feared him for his pride and cruelty, to incline to Iohn, flies with all his com∣pany into the Tower; which being oppressed with the multitude, was more likely to betray than defend them; whereupon he seeing his danger, oes forth and submits himselfe to Iohn, craves leave for thse included in the Tower to depart resignes up the Tower, and all the other royall forts to him, and flieth privatly in an inglorious manner to Dover to his Sisters husband, thinking to steale secretly beyond the seas to the King: and knowing that his enemies, if they should have any inkling of his intent, would assuredly hinder the same, or worke him some mischiefe by the way, he disguised himselfe in womans apparell, and so went unto the Sea side at Dover mufled, with a met-yard in his hand, and a webbe of cloth under his arme. There he sate up∣on a rocke ready to take shippe; where a certaine leude marriner thinking him to be some strumper, be∣gan to dally wantonly with him; whereby it came to passe, that being a stranger borne, and not able to speake good English, nor give the marriner an answer either in words or deeds, he suspected him to be a man, and called a company of women; who pulling off his kerchiefe and muffler, found his crowne and beard shaven, and quickly knew him to be that hatfull Chancellour whom so many had so long cursed and feared; whereupon in great dispite, they threw him to the ground, spit upon him, beat him sore, and drew him by the heeles alo te ands, the people flocking out of the Towne, deriding and abusing him, both in words and deeds. The Burgsses of the Towne, hea∣ig of this tumult, came and tooke him from the people his servants being not able to rescue him, and  him into a seller, there to keepe him prisoner,
till notice had beene given of his departure. It is a world to see he that was a few monethes before hono∣red and reverenced of all men like a petty god, atten∣ded by Noblemens sonnes, and Gentlemen of quality,This is the com∣mon fate of ill Officers whn in disgrace. whom he matched with his Neeces and Kindswomen, every man accounting himselfe happy whom he fa∣voured, yea to be acquainted well with his Porters and Officers, being thus once downe, and standing in neede of his friends helpe, had no man that moved a finger to rid him out of the present calamity & trouble. Whereupon he lay prisoner in this pickle a good space. The Earle Iohn was desirous to have done him some further notable disgrace and contumely; neither was there any one almost, that for his owne sake with∣stood it; But the Bishops, though most of them his enemies, regarding notwithstanding his calling and place, would not suffer it, but caused him to be relea∣sed. So not long after being deposed of his Office of Chancellor by direction of the King, deprived of au∣thority, and banished the Land by the Lords, Barons, and Prelates of the Realme, hee gat him over Sea into Normandy, where hee was borne, and complained of these proceedings against him to the Pope, whose Le∣gate he was, who thereupon writ Letters in his favour to all the Archbishops and Bishops of England, com∣manding them to excommunicate Iohn Earle of Mor∣ton, and interdict the Realme, till the Bishop was re∣stored unto his former estate; which the Bishops neglecting to doe, notwithstanding this Bishops owne Letter to the Bishop of Lincolne, touching this matter, he there rested himselfe after this turmoile till the returne of King Richard from the holy Land,See Fox, vol. 1. p. 319.320.321. the Arch∣bishop of Roan governing the Kingdome the meane while, whom he caused the Pope to excommnnicate. Hoveden, Annal pars p∣stirior. p. 735 Anno. 1194. Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Bishops of Lincolne, London, Rochester, Winchester, Wor∣ceter, Hereford, the Elect of Exeter, and many Abbots
and Clergy men of the Province of Canterbury, after they had excommunicated Earle Iohn with all his Fau∣ters and Councellours, in an Assembly at Westmin∣ster, in the Chappell of the infirme Monkes, on he 4th. of February, appealed to the presence of the Pope, against this Bishop of Ely, that he should not from thenceforth enjoy the office of a Legate in England, which appeale they ratified with their seales, and sent it first to the King, and afterwards to the Pope to be confirmed. Vpon the Kings returne, this Bishop ex∣cused himselfe the best he might, reconciled himselfe to Geoffery Archbishop of Yorke, purging himselfe with an hundred Clerkes his compurgators, from the guilt of his wrongfull imprisonment and misusage at Dover, and being after sent Embassadour to the Pope with the Bishop of Durham and others fell sicke by the way at Poyters, and so died. From this and other forci∣ted presidents we may see, how dangerous and per∣nicious a thing it is for any one man to have the exer∣cise of spirituall and temporall Jurisdiction vested in him, since it makes him a double tyrant and oppressour. EVSTACHI∣VS.Eustachius, this turbulent Prelates successor Matth West. Anno. 1208. p. 86. Matth. Paris Anno. 1208. p. 217.318. God. at. p. 261. Holinsh p. 171 172. &c. was one of those Bishops, that pronounced the Popes ex∣communication against King Iohn, and interdicted the whole Realme; for which he was glad to flee the Realme, continuing in exile for many yeares: his tem∣poralties & goods being seised on by the King in the interim: yea, the King for this Act warned all the Pre∣lates and Clergie of England, that they should present∣ly depart the Realme, that all their Lands and goods should be confiscated, which was done, and they all put out of the Kings protection. The Bishops and Abbots hereupon stood on their guard, sending the King word, that they would not depart out of their Bishopprickes and Monasteries, unlesse they were thrust out perforce, whereupon all their possessions, barnes, corne, and goods were seized on by the Kins
Officers, and the Parents of those Bishops who interdi∣cted the Realme, apprehended, spoiled of all their goods, and thrust into prison. In the yeare 1266. whiles Matth Paris Hist. Aug. pag. 969.906.921. Godw. Cat. p. 209. King Henry the third besieged Kenelworth Castle,HVGH BALSAM. some rebells whom the King had disinherited, entred the Isle of Ely, and wa∣sted the Country thereabouts. Whereupon Hugh Balsam (about whose election there was great contention) comming to the King to complaine, being then Bishop of this See, was unworthily received, & ei ca∣sus iste apluribus imputatur: This accident being impu∣ted unto him by many, hee being suspected to favour and side with these Rebells. Matth. Paris p. 600. In William Kilkenny, his next predecessors time, there was a great suit betweene this Bishop and the Abbot of Ramsey about the Fennes, and the bounding of them; which Fennes having beene formerly unhabitable, and unpassable by men, beasts, or carts overgrowne with Reeds, and inha∣bited onely by birds, that I say not devills, about that time were miraculously converted into delectable meadowes, and arable ground. Et quae ibidem pars e∣getes vel faena non producit, gladiolum, cespites, & alia ignis pabula, cohabitantibus utilia, germinando abundanter submini∣strat. Vnde lis, & gravis contentio, de termins locorum tali∣um & terrarum inter eos qui ab initio Mariscum inhabitabant exorta, lites & praelta suscitabat; writes Matthew Paris, and among others, betweene the Bishop of Ely, and this Abbot of Ramey. King Edward the third was so highly offended with the Monks election of this Bishop Balse∣am contrary to his direction that he caused the woods of the Bishoprick to be cut downe and sold, the Parkes to be spoiled, the Ponds to be fished and wasted, and havocke to be made of all things: whereupon the Bishop got him over sea to Rome to seeke reliefe: a∣gainst whom Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, to gra∣tifie the King, writ divers Letters to his friends of Rome, and set up one Adam de Marisco, to be a counter∣feiter
to the Pope against him. Matth. Paris p. 921.In this Bishops time, the King standing in neede of money, the Prelates granted him 42. thousand markes, to the great hurt, and irreparable damnage of the Church and King∣dome, upon condition, that the King should speedi∣ly redresse the oppressures of the Church, and reduce it to the State of due libertie: whereupon the Bishops fra∣med about fiftie Articles, and put them in writing, that being read before the King, Nobles, and Prelates, they might be confirmed in due time; which Arti∣cles, writes my author, were like to those which Tho∣mas, Archbishop of Canterbury the Martyr contended for, and became a glorious conquerour, (and therefore directly against the Kings Prerogative, and the Lawes of the Realme). THOMAS LILDE.Thomas Lilde Bishop of Ely, a furious and undiscreet Prelate, in King Edward the third hisGodw Cat p. 269.270.271.272. dayes had many quarrels with the Lady Blanch Lake, a neere Kinswoman of the Kings about certaine bounds of Lands and tres∣passes in burning of a house by the Bishops command or privity belonging to this Lady who recovered 900. pound dammages against him, which he was inforced to pay downe presently. After this he had divers con∣testations with the King himselfe, one about Robert Stretton Bishop of Lichfield, he reprehending the King for making him a Bishop, which the King tooke so tenderly, that he commanded him in great displeasure to avoid his presence. Another about his suits with the forenamed Lady, and some harsh speeches used by him of the King concerning them for which words and other matters, the King accused him to the Par∣liament then assembled, and there testifying these ob∣iected wrongs upon his Honour: the Bishop thereupon was condemned, and this punishment laid upon him, that hereafter he should never presume to come in the Kings presence. Which History William Hari∣son Hist. l. 2. c. 1. p. 143.144. Godw. Cat. p. 269.270.271.272. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 271.272.273.274. Holinsh. p. 391.392. hom. Walsing. Anno. 1358. Hist. Agl. p. 165. Ypodigma Ne∣triae. p. 125. William Harrison thus relates, and others quoted in the Margin. There was
sometime a grievous contention betweene Thomas Lilde Bishop of Ely, and the King of England, about the yeare of grace. 1355. which I will here deliver out of an old Record, because the matter is so partially pen∣ned by some of the brethren of that house in favour of the Bishop; and for that I was also abused with the same in the entrance thereof at the first into my Chro∣nologie. The blacke Prince favouring one Robert Stratton his Chaplaine, a man unlearned and not wor∣thy the name of a Clearke, the matter went on so farre, that what for love, and somewhat else, of a Canon of Lichfield, he was chosen Bishop of that See. Hereupon the Pope understanding what he was by his Nuncio here in England, stayed his consecration by his letters for a time; and in the meane season committed his ex∣amination to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Rochester, who felt, and delt so favourably with him in golden reasoning, that his worthinesse was commended to the Popes Holinesse, and to Rome he goes. Being come to Rome, the Pope himselfe oppo∣sed him, and after secret conference utterly disableth his Election, till he had proved by substantiall Argu∣ment, and of great weight before him also, that he was not so lightly to be reiected. Which kinde of reaso∣ning, so well pleased his Holinesse; that, ex mera pleni∣tudine potestatis, he was made capable of the Benefice, and so turneth into England; when he came home, this Bishop being in the Kings presence told him, how he had done he wist not what, in preferring so unmeete a man unto so high a calling; with which speech the King was offended that he commanded him out of hand to avoid out of his presence. In like sort the Lady Wake, then Dutchesse of Lancaster, standing by, and hearing the King her cozen to gather upon the Bishop so roundly, and thereto bearing an old grudge against him for some other matter, doth presently picke a quar∣rell against him, about certaine Lands then in his pos∣session,
which he defended, and in the end obtained against her by Plea and course of Law, yet long also afore hapned in a part of her house, for which she ac∣cused the Bishop, and in the end, by verdict of twelve men found that he was privy unto the fact of his men in the said fact; wherefore he was condemned in 900 pound damages, which he paid every penny. Ne∣verthelesse being sore grieved, that she had (as he said) wrested out such a verdict against him, and therein packed up a Quest at his owne choyce; he taketh his horse, goeth to the Court, and there complaineth to the King of his great iniury received at her hands; but in the delivery of his tale his, speech was soblockih & termes so evill favoredly (though maliciously) placed, that the King tooke yet more offence with him than before; insomuch, that he led him with him into the Parliament house (for then was that Court holden) and there before the Lords, accused him of no small misdemeanor towards his person, by his rude and threatning speeches; but the Bishop eagerly denieth the Kings Obiections, which he still avoucheth upon his Honour, and in the end confirmes his Allegations by Witnesses; whereupon he was banished from the Kings presence during his naturall life by verdict of that House. In the meane time the Dutchesse hearing what was done, beginneth anew to be dealing with him, and in a brabling fray betweene their servants, one of her men were slaine; for which the Bishop was called before the Magistrate, as chiefe accessary unto the fact; but he fearing the sequell of his third cause, by his suc∣cesse had in the two first, hideth himselfe; after he had sold all his moveables, and committed his money un∣to his trusty friends; and being found guilty by the Inquest, the King seizeth upon his possessions, and cal∣leth up the Bishop to answer unto the trespasse. To be short, upon safe conduct, the Bishop commeth to the Kings presence, where he denieh that he was accessary
to the fact, either before, at, orafter the deede com∣mitted, and thereupon craveth to be tried by his Peeres. But this Petition is in vaine; for sentence passeth against him also by the Kings owne mouth; whereupon hee craveth helpe of the Archbishop of Canterbury and priviledges of the Church, hoping by such meanes to be solemnly rescued. But they fearing the Kings displeasure, who bare small favour to the Cleargie of his time, gave over to use any such meanes, but rather willed him to submit himselfe to the Kings mercy, which he refused, standing upon his innocen∣cie, from the first unto the last. Finally, growing in∣to chollor, that the malice of a woman should so pre∣vaile against him; hee writeth to Rome, requiring that his Case might be heard there, as a place wherein greater Justice (saith he) is to be looked for, than is to be found in England: upon the perusall of these his Letters also, his accusers were called thither; but for so much as they appeared not at their peremptory times, they were excommunicated; Such of them al∣so as died before their reconciliations, were taken out of the Church-yards, and buried in the Fields and Dunghills, Vnde timor & turba (saith my Note) in An∣glia. For the King inhibited the bringing in, and re∣ceipt of all Processes, Bulls, and whatsoever instru∣ments should come from Rome; Such also as adventu∣red contrary to this Prohibition to bring them in, were either dismembred of some joynt, or hanged by the neckes: which rage so incensed the Pope, that hee wrote in very vehement manner to the King of Eng∣land, threatning farre greater curses, except hee did the sooner stay the fury of the Lady, reconcile himselfe unto the Bishop, and finally, make him amends for all his losses sustained in these boyles. Long it was ye that the King would be brought to peace: neverthe∣lesse in the end he wrote to Rome about a reconcilia∣tion to be had betweene them; but ye all things were
concluded, God himselfe did end the quarrell by ta∣king away the Bishop. IOHN HORDHAMAnno 1388. the Nobles being assembled at West∣minster said to King Richard the second, that for his ho∣nour and the weale of the Kingdome,Thmas Wasi. Hist. ngl. p. 365. Ypodigma. Nustriae, p. 142 it behoved that Traytors, Whisperers, Flatterers, Malefactors Back∣biters and unprofitable persons should be banished out of his Palace and company, and others substituted in their places, who knew & were willing to serve him more honourably & faithfully; which when the King had granted (Licet merens) they determined that Alexander Nevell Archbishop of Yorke Iohn Fordham then Bishop of Durham, and afterwards of this See of Ely, Thomas Ru∣shoke the Kings Confessor Bishop of Chichester (who being conscious to himselfe fled away and hid in Yorkeshire) Richard Clifford, & Nicholas Lake, Deane of the Kings Chappell, all Clergy men, whose words did ma∣ny things in the Court, should be removed; all these they sent to divers prisons to be strictly garded till they should come to their answers the next Parliament. NICHOLAS WEST. God. p. 284.Nicholas West Bishop of Ely, in Henry the eigh his dayes (who kept daily an hundred servants in his house to attend him and gave them great wages) fell into the Kings displeasure, for some matters concer∣ning his first marriage, who for griefe thereof fell sicke and died. Thomas Thirlby was advanced by Queene Mary,THOMAS THIRLBY. not onely to the Bishoppricke of Ely, but also made of her privy Councell.Godwin. p. 225.226. Martius Hist. p. 453. After her death for resisting obstinatly the reformation intended by our gracious Soveraigne Queene Elizabeth, hee was committed to the Tower, and displaced from his Bishoppricke by Act of Parlia∣ment Having endured a time of imprisonment, nei∣ther very sharpe nor very long, his friends easily ob∣tained license for him, and the late Secretary Roxall to live in the Archbishops house, where they had also the company of Bishop Tunstall, till such time he died.
To these I might adde Bishop Buckeridge, Bishop White, and Bishop Wren, late Prelates of this Sea, who occasi∣oned much mischiefe and distraction in our Church and State; but I shall referre them to another place and passe on to the Prelates of Exeter. Exeter. About the yeare 1257. Walter Bronscome. 12. B of Ex∣eter,WALTER BRONES∣COME. had a Fryer to his Chaplaine and Confessor, which died in his house of Bishops Clift, and should have beene buried at the Parish Church of Farringdon,Godw at. p. 325.327. Ho∣linsh. p. 1303.1304. because the said house was, and is in that Parish, but because the Parish Church was somewhat farre off, the wayes foule & the weather rainy, or for some other causes, the Bishop commanded the corps to be carried to the Pa∣rish Church of Sowton, then called Clift Fomeson, which is very neere, and bordereth upon the Bishops Lordship, the two Parishes there being devided by a little Lake called Clift. At this time, one Fomeson a Gentleman was Lord and Patron of Clift Fomeson, and he being advertized of such a buriall towards his Pa∣rish, and a leach way to be made over his Land with∣out his leave or consent requited therein, calleth his Tenants together, goeth to the bridge over the Lake, betweene the Bishops Land and his; there meeteth the Bishops men bringing the said corps and forbid∣deth them to come over the water. The Bishops men nothing regarding this Prohibition, doe presse for∣wards to come over the water, and the others doe withstand so long, that in the end, my Lords Fryer is fallen into the water. The Bishop taketh this matter in such griefe, that a holy Fryer, a religious man, his own Chaplaine and Confessor, should so unreverently be cast into the water, that he falleth out with the Gentle∣man, and upon what occasion I know not, he sueth him in the Law, and so vexeth and tormenteth him,
that in the end he was faine to yeeld himselfe to the Bishops devotion, and seeke all the wayes he could to curry the Bishops good will; which hee could not obtaine, untill for redemption he had given and sur∣rendred up his Patronage of Sowton with a peece of Land; all which the said Bishop annexeth to his now Lordship. Thus by policy he purchaseth the Mannor of Bishops-Clift, by a devise gaineth Cornish-wood, and by power wresteth the patronagne uf Sowton from the true owner, to the great vexation and disturbance of the Country. PETER QVIVILL.Petr Quiuill, his next successor had great contests with the Citizens of Exeter; in so much that in his time. 1285.Godwin. p. 327.328.329. Walter Lihlade the first Chaunter, was slaine in a morning, as hee came from the morning Service, then called the Mattens, which was wont to be said shortly after midnight; upon which occasion the King came unto this city, and kept his Christmas in the same, and thereupon a compoition was made betweene the Bishop and the City, for inclosing of the Church-yard, and building of certaine gates there, as appeareth by the said composition bearing date, in fe∣sto Annunciationis beatae Mariae. 1286. The King at the suit of the Earle of Hereford (who at his being here, way lodged in the house of the Gray-Fryers, which then was neere the house of S. Nicholas) obtained of the Bishop, that they should be removed from thence to a more wholesome place without South-gate; whereof after the Kings departure grew some controversie, be∣cause the Bishop refused to performe his promise made to the King, being disswaded by Peter Kenefield a Do∣minicane or a Blacke-Fryer, and confessor unto the said Bishop: for he envying the good successe of the Fran∣ciscans, adviseth the Bishop, that in no wise he would permit them to enjoy the place which they had gotten, fo (saith he) as under colour of simplicity they creepe into the hearts of the people, and hinder us poore Prea∣chers
from our gaines and livings; so be ye sure that if they put foote within your Liberties, they will in time finde meanes to be exempted from out of your Liberty and jurisdiction. The Bishop being soone dis∣swaded, utterly forbiddeth them to build, or to doe a∣ny thing within his See or Liberty: About two yeares after, the Bishop kept a great feast upon the Sunday next before S. Francis day; and among others, was present with him one Walter Wilborne, one of the Kings chiefe Justices of the Bench, who was present when the Bishop at the request of the King made pro∣mise to further and helpe the Franciscans. He now in their behalfe, did put the Bishop in minde thereof, and requested him to have consideration both of his owne promise, and their distresse. The Bishop misliking this motion, waxed angry, and did not onely deny to yeeld thereunto but wished himselfe to be choked what day soever he did consent unto it. It fortuned that the same weeke, and upon the day of S. Frances Eve, The Bishop tooke a certaine Sirope to drinke, and in too hastily swallowing thereof, his breath was stopped, so as hee forthwith died. The Franciscans hearing thereof made no little adoe about this matter, but blazed it abroad that S. Francis wrought this miracle upon the Bishop, cause he was so hard against them Anno. 1326. Holinshed p. 338.1305. Fabian part. 7. p. 181.182. Walsingh. Hist. Ang p 104.105 Godwin. p: 330 Walter Stapleton Bishop of Exeter,WALTER STAPLETON. to whom King Edward the second left the charge of the city of London, was assaulted by the people at the North∣doore of Pauls Church, who threw him downe, and drew him most outragiously into Cheape-side, where they proclaimed him an open Traytor, a Seducer of the King and a destroyer and subverter of their Liberties; the putting off his Aketon, or coate of defence, with the rest of his garments, they shore his head from his shoulders, with the heads of two of his servants. The Bishops head was set on a pole for a spectacle that the remembrance of his death, and
the cause thereof might continue; his body was bu∣ried in an old Church yard of the Pied Fryers, with∣out any manner of Exequies or Funerall service done for him. Belike he was a wicked instrument, that hee became so odious to the people, who thus cruelly hand∣led him. IOHN GRANDISONSymon Mephara Archbishop of Canterbury began his Metropoliticall Visitation, in the yeare 1332. and comming to Exeter, Iohn Grandison Bishop of that See,Antiquit. Ec∣cles. Brit p. 231.235. Walsing∣ham Hist Angl. p. 313. Godw. Cat. p. 333. Ho∣linsh p 1306. either scorning or fearing his jurisdiction, appealed a∣gainst it to the Pope; and when the ArchBishop came to visite his Diocesse, hee resisted him, and kept him from entring into it with Iohannes Exoniensis cum miitari, anu prohibus; cum{que} Archieisopus armis um Exo∣niensi congedi Statuit, re regi nunciata literis regiis revocatus, infectovisitatio∣ns negotio x illa diocaesi turpiter & ignominiose recessit. a Military band of Souldi∣ers, and when as the Archbishop resolved to encoun∣ter him and his forces in the field with armes, and raised an army in Wiltshire for that purpose; the King being there with acquainted, recalled him by his roy∣all Letters; so as he returned shamefully and ignomi∣niously out of that Diocesse without visiting it, and falling sicke for griefe of this his repulse, he died at Macfield in his returne thence, of a deadly feaver. This Bishop built a faire house at Bishops Taington which he left full furnished unto his successors, and did impro∣priate unto the same the Parsonage of Radway, to the end (as he setteth downe in his Testament) ut haberent Episcopilocum ubi caput suum reclinarent, si forte in manū re∣gis eorum temporalia caperentur. Presuming no doubt, that many of them would prove contemptuous to their Soveraignes, and have their temporalties seised for it. THOMAS BRENTING∣HAM.Thomas Brentingham the 18th. Bishop of Exetr, at the Godw. p. 334. Ant. Eccles Brit. p. 301.302. Walsingham. Hi. Angl. p. 373.374. Parliament holden at Westminester, in the tenth yeare of King Edward the second, was chosen to be one of the twelve Peeres for the government of the Realme un∣der the King. In this mans time, Anno. 1388. William Courtney, Archbishop of Canterbury intending to keepe a Metropoliticall Visitation in his Province; and having formerly visited the Diocesse of Rochester,
Chichester, Worcester, Bath and Wells, without any resi∣stance or contradiction, came into the Diocesse of Exeter; and having begun his Visitation there oft times proroged the same from day to day, and from place to place, and suspended the Jurisdiction of the Bishop and other Prelates in that Diocesse during his Metropoliti∣call Visitation; Herupon the Bishop of Exter comman∣ded all within his Diocesse, that they should not obey the Archbishop in his Visitation, and that they should receive their Institutions, Collations, and Admissi∣ons to Benefices Commissions of Administrations, Confirmations of Elections, Conusances, and Deci∣sions of all causes, Corrections of crimes and ordina∣ry rights, from no other but himselfe and his Officers, excommunicating all who diobeyed this his Edict. The Archbishop abolished and repealed this Prohibi∣tory and Mandatory Edict of his by a contrary one, and made void his sentence of Excommunication. After which he appealed foure severall times to the Pope, and fixed his appeale in writing on the doores of the Cathedrall Church of Exeter. The Archbishop rejected, and refuted them all, and proceeded in his Visitation notwithstanding; citing the Bishop him∣selfe by divers Edicts to answer to certaine Articles objected to him in his Visitation. But some of the Bishops adherents, caught Peter Hill, the Archbishops Somner in a Towne called Tapsham, and punishing him grieviously, compelled him to eate with his teeth and swallow downe a Parchment Citation, wax and all written and sealed with the Archbishops seal, which he carried in his bosome wherewith to cite the Bishop. Of which misdemeanor the Archbishop complaining to the King; hee commanded William Courtney Earle of Devonshire to curbe these Rebells, and to apprehend and carry them to the Archbishop, who enjoyned them pennance, and withall removed William Byd (a Dr. of Law, and Advocate of the Court
of Arches) from his Order and place, because hee had given counsell to the Bishop of Exeter against the dignity of the See of Canterbury; and thereupon pre∣scribed a set forme of Oath to all the Advocates of that Court, not to give any advice to any person against that See. The Bishop of Exeter after much contention, finding the Archbishop too potent for him, and that his appeales were like to succeede but ill, by reason the King favoured the Archbishop, submitted himselfe to the Archbishops Iurisdiction, and craved pardon for what was past. EDMVND LACY.In Edmund Lacyes time, the 21. Bishop of this See, there arose Godw. Cat. p. 335. Holinshed p 637. great contentions betweene him and the city for Liberties, which by arbitrement were compoun∣ded. After which, Anno. 1451. King Henry the sixth, came in progresse to the city of Exeter; where after great entertainment, there was a Sessions kept before the Duke of Sommerset, and certaine men condemned to die for Treason, and had judgement to be executed to death. Edmond Lacy and his Clergy understanding hereof, with open mouth complained to the King, that he caused a Sessions to be kept within his Sanctu∣ary contrary to the priviledge of his Church, and that therefore all their doings (being done against Law) were of no effect. And notwithstanding the King and his Councell had discoursed to them the just and or∣derly proceeding, the hainousnesse of the offences, and of the offenders, and the necessitie of their con∣digne punishment, yet all could not availe, for holy Church; for neither holy Church, nor the Sanctuary might be prophaned (as they said) with the deciding of temporall matters; whereupon the King in the end yeelding to their exclaimes, released a coupple of ar∣rant Trayors, reversed all his former lawfull procee∣dings, and so departed and returned to London, his Lawes and Justice being thus captivated to this Pre∣lates will, and trayterly encrochments upon his Pre∣rogative
so farre as even to exempe and rescuee notori∣ous condemned Traytors from his Justice and con∣demnation, even after judgement of death pronoun∣ced against them. George NevillGEORGE NEVILL. the 23. Bishop of Exeter (afterwards Archbishop of Yorke) March the 4. 1460. after a so∣lemne procession preached at Pauls Crosse,Grafton 38. H. 7. p. 641. God. p. 335. where hee tooke upon him by manifold evidence to prove the Title of Prince Edward (afterwards Edward the fourth) to the Crowne to be just and lawfull, answering all objetions that might be made to the contrary: where∣upon, the aid Prince accompanied with the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, and a great number of the common people, rode the same day to Westminister Hall, and there, by the consent & approbation of them all, tooke possession of the Kingdome against King Henry the sixth, who made him Bishop. See more of him in Yorke. part. 1. p. 196.197. The Rebellion in Cornewall and Devonshire in Ed∣ward the sixe his raigne, was Speeds Histo. p. 1111. Godw. Cat. p. 37. Holinshed. p. 1306. imputed to Iohn VoyseyIOHN VOYSEI. Bishop of Exeter, and other Priests; who thereupon resigned his Bishoppricke into King Edwards hands, ha∣ving much wasted and impoverished it before. God∣win writes of him, That hee was Lord President of Wales, and had the government of the Kings onely daughter, the Lady Mary (who afterwards proved a bloody persecuter by the Prelates cruell instigation tutership, and evill counsell, when she came to the Crowne.) Of all the Bishops of the Land, he was ac∣counted the best Courtier; being better liked for his Courtly behaviour than his learning, which in the end turned not so much to his credit, as to the utter ru∣ine and spoyle of the Churh; For of 22. Lordships and Mannors which his Predecessors had left unto him, of a goodly yearely revenew, he left but three and them also leased out, and where hee found thirteene houses well furnished (too much for one Prelate) he
left onely one house bare, and without furniture, and yet charged with sundry fees and anuities. So as by these meanes, this Bishoppricke which sometime was counted one of the best, is now become in temporall lands one of the meanest. IAMES TVRBEVILL.Iames Turbevill the 32. Bishop of this See, was depri∣ved in the first yeare of Queene Elizabeh for deny∣ing the Queenes Supremacy and refusing to take the Oah of Allegiance.Martyns Hist p. 453.454. Godw p 339. WILLIAM COTTN.William Cotton the 37th Bishop of Exeter, was a great persecuter and silencer of godly Ministers in his Dio∣cesse; and so was Bishop Cary after him for a season, but at last, both of them being mollified with gifts and gratuities became more milde, selling that liberty of preaching for money, which they formerly restrained gratis, of purpose to advance this sale to an higher price, so as may apply that of Sermo 77. in Cant Ad Cle∣rum conci in Concil Rhe∣mensi. Bernard to them. Episcopi hujus temporis Christi approbria, sputa, flagella, claues, lancem crucem, & mortem, haec omnia in fornace avaritiae conflant, & profligant in acquisitionem turpis quaestus, Et praecium vniversitatis suo marsupio includere festinant hoc solo san a Iuda Ischariota differentes; quod ille horura omnium denariorum emolumentum denariorum numero co∣pensavit; isti voraiori ingluvie lucrorum infinitas exigunt p∣cunias; his insatiabili desiderio inhiant; pro his ne amittant timent, & cura amittunt dolent, Animarum nec casus reputa∣tur, nec salus. Bishop. HALL.For the present Bishop of this See, a man formerly much honored and deservedly respected, both for his Writing and Preaching before he became a Bishop, he hath much degenerated and lost himselfe of late, not onely by his too much worldlinesse, but by his over-confident defence of Episcopacy to be Iure Divino, in some late Bookes he hath published, and that upon such See Smectym∣nius; and a vindica∣tion to the An∣swer to the hum∣ble Remon∣strance. weake sandy grounds as vanish into smoake, when seriously examined. I read that Godw. Cat. p. 322. Osbertus the second, and William Warewest the third Bishop of this
See, became blinde in their latter dayes. I wish this reverent Prelate may not doe the like, who doth al∣ready Caecutire, through the splendor of that Episcopall Lordly pompe and honour, which some feare hath dazled his eye-sight. I come now to Worceter. The Bishops of Worceter. DunstanDVNSTAN. the sixteenth Bishop of Worceter (afterwards of Canterbury) put King Edgar to seven yeares penance for ravishing Wildfrid,Holinshed. Hist. of England l. 6. c. 24. p. 436 and kept him some twelve or fourteene yeares from the Crowne. Which fact of Dunstans Acts and Mo∣numents vol. 1. p. 201.202. Mr. Fox thus expresseth; you heard before how King Edgar is noted in all Stories to be an incon∣tinent liver in deflouring Maids and Virgins, three notoriously are expressed in Authors, to wit, Vlstride, or Vlfride; the second was the Dukes maide at Andever, neere to Winchester; the third was Elfrid mother of Edward, for the which Elfrid he was staied and kept backe from his Coronation, by Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury, the space of seven yeares, and so the said King beginneth his raigne in the sixteene yeare of his age, being the yeare of the Lord, 959. was crowned at his age, One and thirty, Anno. Dom. 974. as is in the Saxon Chronicl of Worceter Church to be proved. For the more evident declaration of which matter,Ex chronic Saxnico Ec∣clesiae Wigorni∣ensis. concerning the Coronation of the King restrained, and the presumptuous behaviour of Dunstan against the King, and his pennance by the said Dunstan injoyned; yee shall heare both Osburne, Malmesh. and other Au∣thors speake in their owne words, as followeth. Per∣petrato itaque in virginera velatam peccato, &c. After that Dunstan had undertanding of the Kings offence perpe∣trated with the professed Nun, he comes to the King,Ex Orbrno in vita Dunstn. who seeing the Archbishop comming, eftsoones of gentlenesse arose from his regall seat towards him, to take him by the hand, to give him place. But Dunstan re∣fusing to take him by the hand and with sterne counte∣nance bending his browes,Dunstan refu∣seth to take the King by the hand. spak after this effect of words (as
Stories import) unto the King,The words of Dunstan to King Edgar. You that have not feared to corrupt a Virgin maide hand fast to Christ, presume you to touch the consecrated hand of a Bishop? you have defiled the Spouse of the Maker, and thinke you by flattering service to pacifie the friend of the Bridegroome? No Sir, his friend will not I be, which hath Christ to his enemy, &c. The King terrified with these thundring words of Dunstan, and compuncted with inward repentance of his sinne perpetrated, fell down with weeping at the feet of Dun∣stane, who after he had raised him up from the ground againe, began to utter to him the horriblenesse of his fact, and finding the King ready to receive whatsoever satisfaction he would lay upon him, injoyned him this Pennance for seven yeares space, as followeth.Penance enjoy∣ned to King Ed∣gar to Dunstan. That he should weare no Crowne all this space, that he should distribute his Treasure left to him of his Ancestors liberally unto the poore, he should build a Monastery of Nunnes at Shafts-bury, that as be had robbed God of one Virgin through his trans∣gression, so should he restore to him many againe in times to come. Moreover he should expell Clerkes of evill life (meaning such Priests as had wives and children) out of Churches, and place covents of Monkes in their roome, &c. It followeth then in the Story of Osberne, that when the seven yeares of the Kings pennance were expired; Dunstan calling together all the Peeres of the Realme, with Bishops, Abbots, and other Ecclesiasticall degrees of the Clergy, in the publike sight of all, set the Crowne upon the Kings head at Bath,King Edward reigned but three yeares crowned King. which was the one and thirtieth yeare of his age, and thirtenth yeare of his reigne, so that he reigned onely but three yeeres crowned King. All the other yeares besides, Dunstan belike ruled the land as he listed. As touching the Son of the said Elfled, thus the Story writeth Puerum quo∣que ex peccatrice quadam progenitum, sacro fonte regeneratum lavavit, & aptato illi nomine Edwardo, in filium sibi adop∣tavit, i.e.lfled proved a Nun, and Ed∣ward her sonne proved a bastard, The child also which was gotten of the harlot he baptized in the holy Fountaine of regeneration, and
so giving his name to be called Edward did adopt him to be his sonne, Ex Osberno. But of this Dunstan, See more in Cantebury. p. 3, 4.5. Living the 23. Bishop of Worceter,LIVING. Anno. 1040. was accused for procuring the death of Alfred,Matth West. Anno 1040. Malmesbury de Gestis Regum Angl. l. 2. c 12. p 77 Godw p. 436. the eldest sonne of King Elthelred and King Hardeknutes brother his accusers were Elfricke Archbishop of Yorke, with many others. Whereupon the King being very angry degraded him, and gave his Bishoppricke to Elfricke he died at Tauestocke, March 2.1046. At which time, just as he gave up the ghost, there was such an horrible tempest of thunder and lightning, as men thought that the day of Doome had beene come. Alfred Bishop of Worceter,ALFRED. was Speeds Hist. p. 405.411. Holinshed. l 7. c. 15. p. 1851. expulsed that See by King Hardicanute for his misdemeanor and opposi∣tions against him, till his money had purchased his peace. This Bishops hands (as was said) was deepe in the murther of Alfred the Kings halfe Brother, who had his eyes inhumanely put out, his belley opened, and one end of his bowells drawne out, and fastned to a stake his body pricked with sharpe needles, forced about, till all his entralls were extracted: in which most savage torture hee ended his innocent life: for which barbarous act this Bishop was for a time depri∣ved, afer which being restored, he went & fought with Griffith King of South-Wales, but with such successe that many of his Souldiers were slaine, and the rest put to flight which made the Welchmen farre more bold, and Rese the brother of Griffith to make incur∣sions to fetch preyes out of England, till at length hee was slaine at Bulenden, and his head presented to King Edward at Glocester. Not to mention Wulstan,WVLSTAN the 19. Bishop of this See, surnamed God p. 358.359.360. Malms. de Gest. Pontif. Angl. l. 4. p. 279.280.281 Reprobus, the reprobate, belike for his leude reprobate actions; S. Wulstan the 24. Bishop, refused obstinatly to yeeld consent to his election a long time, protesting he had rather lay his head upon a blocke to
be chopt off, then to take so great a charge as a Bishop∣prick upon him. At last, undertaking it by the perswasi∣on of one Wullsius an Anchorite; he permitted publike drinking in his Hall after dinner for whole houres to∣gether, and made as if he dranke in his turne, but in a lesser cup to make the guests the merrier, pompam ra∣litum secum ducens, leading still a stately traine of Soul∣diers with him, who with their annuall stipends, and dayly provision wasted a hugh masse of money. Matth. West. Anno. 1066 p. 431. In his time Edward the Confessor falling sicke, and conti∣nuing speechlesse for two dayes space, on the third day rising as it were, from the dead, and groaning excee∣dingly, he began to speake thus. O Almighty God, if it be not a fantasticall illusion which I have seene, give me leave to relate it to those that stand by: or if on the contrary it be false, I beseech thee substract from me the power of uttering it. As soone as he had ended his speech, speaking expeditely enough, and very arti∣culately, he said, I beheld two Monkes standing by me, whom when I was young, I saw live very re∣ligioully in Normandy, and I knew that they died most Christianly. These affirming themselves to be Gods Messengers sent unto me, added; because the chiefe men of England, Duces, EPISCOPI & Abbates, non sunt Ministri Dei sed DIABOLI, the Dukes, Bishops, and Abbots, are not the Ministers of God but of the Devill; God hath delivered this Kingdome in one yeare, and in one day into the hand of the enemy, and Devills shall wander over this whole Land. And when I answered, I would shew this unto the people, that so sinners having made confession and condigne satisfaction might repent, and obtaine mercy like the Ninivites: they replied, neither of these shall be; be∣cause neither shall they repent, neither shall God have mercy on them. And I demanding, when remission, of so great calamities might be expected? To this, they answered, concerning this it shall be so, as in case of a
greene tree, if it be cut in the midest, and the part  off be carried farre from the Trunke, when that with∣out any helpe shall be reannexed to the Trunke, and begin to flourish, and bring forth fruit, then a remissi∣on of such evills may be hoped for. The truth of which prophesie (writes Matthew Wstminster) the English soone after had experience of, in this, that England be∣came the habitation of strangers, and the dominion of forreiners; for a little after no English man was either a Duke, Bishop, or Abbot (upon the comming in of the Conqueror,) neither was there any hope of ending this misery. The Conqueror comming to the Crown, had some contests with this Bishop, whom he would have removed from his Bishoppricke for insufficiency in point of learning; but being found more able than he was reputed, he held his Bishoppricke, and reco∣vered some Lands from the Archbishop of Yorke, taken by the Archbishops from this See, which some three or foure Archbishops before had held in Commendam with Yorke. The Cathedrall of Worceter being stately built a new from the ground in his time, the Monkes thereupon forsaking their old habitation built by Os∣wald, which they pulled downe, betooke themselves to this new stately building. Which Wulstan seeing, burst out into teares, and being demanded a reason thereof, by some that told him, he had rather cause to rejoyce; our predecessors (saith he) whose Monu∣ments wee deface, rather (I doubt) to set up the ban∣ners of our vaine-glory, than to glorifie God, they in∣deede (quoth he) were not acquainted with such stately buildings, but every place was a Church suffi∣cient for them to offer themselves a reasonable, holy,Note this Speech. and lively sacrifice unto God: we contrariwise are double diligent in laying heapes of stones, so to frame a materiall Temple, but are too too negligent in setting forward the building of that lively Temple the Church o God. In King William Rufus time, this Bishop ar∣ming
such an number of people, as the city of Worce∣ter could afford, caused to sally out, and set upon Roger, Earle of Mountgomery and others, who attempted to take it, whom they discomfited, killing and taking a number of them prisoners. MAVGERE.Maugere, the 36. Bishop of Worceter, was one of those foure Bishops, who Anno. 1208. upon the Popes command excommunicated King Iohn, and put the whole Kingdome under interdict: whereupon his goods and temporalities were seised, and he inforced to flie the Realme, dying at last in exile at Pontiniac in rance: during the time of this interdict, the King (writes Matth West Anno. 1208 Godw. p. 362. Matth. Paris Hist. Ang. p. 217.232. Walsing Ypodig. Neust. Anno. 1208. p. 53. Pag. 222. Matth West. Anno. 1211. 1212. p. 90.91. Matthew Parts) had most wicked Councellors, Qui Regi in omnibns placere cupientes, cousiliura non pro ra∣tione, sed pro voluntare dederunt; who dsirous to please the King in all things, gave counsell not according to reason, but will: among these he reckons up Tres E∣piscopi curiales, three Court Bishops, to wit, Philip Bishop of Durham, Peter, Bishop of Wincester, and Iohn Bishop of Norwhich. WALTER de CANTELV∣PO.Walter de Cantelupo the 40. Bishop of Worceter, as he stoutly opposed the Popes exactions in England, so in the yeare 1264. he Gdw. Cat p. 363.364. Mat∣thew Paris p. 961.962.963. Holinshed. p. 265.271. tooke great paines, to worke a peace betweene the King and the Barons: in whose behalfe when he had offered the King conditions (as he thought most reasonable) which might not be ac∣cepted, he addicted himselfe unto their party, exhorted them to fight valiantly in the cause, and promised hea∣ven very confidently to them that should die in de∣fence of the same. For this he was after justly excom∣municated by the Popes Legate, and being sicke unto death, repenting much this fault of disobedience unto his Prince, he humbly craved and received absolution from that excommunication: whereupon ensued bloody warres and rapines so as Pag 965. Matthew Paris writes, Nec Episcopi, nec ahbates, nec ulli religiosi de villa in villam progred potuerunt, quin à vespilionibus praedaontur.
And concludes this yeare thus. Transit annus iste fru∣gifer, benè temperatus, & sanus sed in cunctis eventibus An∣gliae dispendiosus, propter bellum commune, propter rerum coramunium & privatarum flebilem direptionem. Most of the succeeding Bishops of Worceter (as Adam de Orleton that Arch-traytor and such like) were translated to other Sees, where I shall meete with them, and therefore pretermiting them here, I passe to those of Hereford. The Bishops of Hereford. Iune 16. An. 1056. Griffin King of Wales having over∣throwne the forces of the Engishmen about two miles from Hereford,LEOVEGAR immediatly assaulting the city tooke it,Matth. Westm. Ann. 1056. p. 423. Godw. Cat p. 371. slew Leovegar the Bishop, and seven of the Canons there, who denied him entrance into the Church and held it against him, spoiled it of all the reliques and ornaments that were portable; and lastly, fired both Church, City, and all. This See continued voyd foure yeares after the death of Leofuegar,WALTER. 2. after which Godw. Cat. p. 371.372. Mal. de Gstis Pont l. 4. p. 286. Po∣lychron. l. 7. c. 2. . 263 An. 1071 Walter Chaplaine to Queene Edith was consecrate at Rome by the Pope, in the yeare 1060. his end was much more unhappy than his Pre∣decessors. He chanced to fall in love with a certaine comely woman that he met in the street. A long time he contended with this vile and unseemely affection, and he thought hee had quenched the same; when a small occasion renewed it to his destruction; having certaine linnen to cut out, this woman was commen∣ded to him for a very cunning Seamster. He sent for her, and his old flame of filthy desire easily kindling by this little sparke, he found errands to send his men out of the way, while he set upon her first with words, and they not prevailing by force: she resisted what shee might, but finding him too strong for her, thrust her Sheeres into his belly, and gave him his deaths wound. The King being desirous it should be esteemed false,
forbid the report of it by a Proclamation, which af∣terwards came to be Chronicled. RAYNEL∣MVS.Raynelmus the 30 Bishop of this Diocesse, received that Bishoppricke at the hands of King Henry the first, who bestowed it freely on him,Malmbs. de Gestis Ponti. l 4. p. 287 Godw p 373. and was invested into it (as the manner of those times was) by the delivery of the Ring and the Crosier. Anselme then Archbishop refu∣sed to consecrate him and divers others, who received their investitures in this manner from the King: he was so farre from importuning him in this matter as being now perswaded this his election to be insufficient, he renounced the same, delivering againe unto the Kings hands the Ring & Crosier that he had received. Here∣with the King was so offended (as he had cause) that presently he banished him the Realme: after much ado betweene the King and Anselme, a reconciliation was wrought and this man consecrated. GYLES de BRVSE. Matth. Westm. Anno. 1208. 1215 Godw. p. 375. Gyles de Bruse the 30. Bishop of Hereford in the Barons warres, was a great stickler wjth them against King Iohn, and at last was glad to flie the Realme with other Prelates, the King seising on his and their goods and banishing him the Kingdome. PETER de Egueblancke. Matth. Paris p 881.882.885.886.887.903,: 907.916 917.924.934.960.961. Godw p 375. Holinsh. p. 251.252. Ann 1255 1256. Peter de Egueblancke the 42. Bishop of that See (Cujus Memoria sulphureum faetorem exhalat ac deterrimum, writes Matthew Paris) An. 1255. put King Henry the 3. upon a strange and intolerable kinde of exaction, such, and so great, as even beggered all the Clergie of that time: he got certaine authenticke seales of the Bishops of England, wherwith he sealed Indentures, Instruments, and Writings, wherin was expressed that he had recei∣ved divers summes of money for dispatch of businesses for them and their Churches of this or that Marchant of Florence or Spaine, whereby they stood bound for payment thereof by the same Instruments and Wri∣tings so made by him their agent in their name. This shift was devised by the said Bishop, with license of the King and Pope, into whose eares he distilled this poy∣sonous
councell; the maner whereof Matthew Paris relates at large. These debts being afterwards deman∣ded the Prelates denied them to be true, and said, there was a greater occasion for them to suffer Martyrdome in this cause than of that of Thomas Becket of Canterbury; whereupon the Bishops of London and Worceter, prote∣sted they would rather lose their lives and Bishopprickes than consent to such an injury, servitude, and op∣pression. Haec & alta detestabilia à sulphurto fonte Romanae Ecclesiae, proh pudor, imo & proh dolor tunc temporis emana∣runt, Writes Matthew Paris of this and such like chea∣ting projects to get mony An. 1263. the Barons arrested this Bishop (who plotted much mischiefe against them) in his owne Cathedrall Church, seised upon his goods, devided his Treasure unto their souldiers before his face, imprisoned him a long time in the Castle of Ordley, as a meere pest and Traytor both to Church and State. He was accursed of so many for his strange Oppressions, Treacheries and Extrava∣gances, that it was impossible many calamities should not light upon him. Long before his captivity, his face was horribly deformed with a kind of Leprosie Morphea, or Polypus, which could by no meanes be cu∣red till his dying day; this disease made him hide his head, so that none within his Diocesse knew where he lurked. Some reported that he went to Mount Pessula to be cured of this his infirmity: Tot in caput suum con∣gessit imprecationes multipliciter à Doraino meruit flagellari, ad sui, ut sperandum est, correctionem, Hist. p. Angl. p. 924.934 Writes Mat∣thew Paris, who further addes, Episcopus Herefordensis turpissimo morbo, videlice Morphea, Domino percutiente, merito deormatur, qui totum Regnum Angliae PRODITIOSE damnificauit. About the yeare of our Lord, 1256. the Archbishop of Burdeaux being old and decrepit, began to be deadly sicke, and being thought to be dead, who was but halfe alive, this Bishop of Hereford, who most earnestly gaped after this Archbishoppricke thinking to
obtaine it procured the Kings Letters, who was very favourable to him, because hee was his Tax-gatherer, and went with them beyond the Seas, but when the truth appeared, that the Archbihop was still alive hee lost both his journey, labour, travell, and expenses and received many scoffes, as one Mr. Lambin did in the like case, of whom these two Verses were composed, Aere dato multo, nondum pastore sepult, Lambi ad optatum Lambinus Pontificatura. He to reimburse his expences not regarding the pub∣like good, but his owne privae benefit, by license from the King and Pope, collected a tith for him∣selfe in the borders of Ireland and the places adjoyning, which amounted to no small quantitie of money; this he reputed the price of his paines, and the reward of his treason; and he caused it to be so strictly exacted that shame prohibites the relation of the manner of the extortion. And because fraud is not accustomed to want feare; meticulosus armatus, armatus vallatus incessit; being fearefull, he went armed, and being armed hee went with a guard about him. ADAM de ORLETON.Adara Walsingh. Hist Angl. p: 98.99 101.104. Holinshed. p. 329.339.340.1245. Camd. Brit p. 375. de Orleton, the 46. Bishop of Hereford, was a notable wicked Traytor and Rebell against his Sove∣raigne, King Edward the second, who advanced him, and was the chiefe cause both of his deprivation and murther: Of whom you may read more at large in Winchester, p. 265.266. IOHN BRVTON.Iohn Bruton or Briton was the 43. Bishop of Hereford, on him the King bestowed the keeping of his wardrobes which he held long time with great honour, as his Regester saith. A wonderfull preferment that Bishops should be preferred from the Pulpit, to the custody of WardrobesHarrison l. 2 c. 2. p 142. but such was the time, neverthelesse his humble custody of that charge is more solemnely re∣membred then any good Sermon, that ever he made, which function peradventure hee committed to his Suffragane, sith Bishops in those dayes had so much bu∣sinesse
at Court, that they could not attend to Doctrine and Exhortation. This Bishop was Godw. p. 376. Sir Edwards Cookes Epistle to the 8. Report. Doctor of both Lawes, and very well seene in the common Lawes of the Land and writ a great volume De juribus Anglicanis, yet extant: but that he ever Preached, or writ any thing of, or had any skill at all in the Law of God, I finde nothing at all in story. Iohn Trevenant the 51. Bishop of Hereford,IOHN REVENANT. sided with King Henry the 4th. against Richard the second, who advanced him, and was sent to Rome,Walsing. Hist. Angl. Henricus 4th. Anno 1439. p. 401. Holinsh. p. 503.504 505.506.507.508. Speed Hist. p. 763. Godw. p. 378. to informe the Pope, what good Title King Henry the 4th. had unto the Crowne of England, which he usurped. So the Bishop of Duresme was then sent unto France, the Bishop of Saint Asaph to Spaine, the Bishop of Bangor to Germany, ar∣med with all orts of instructions for the justification of their new advanced King his Title too, and usur∣pation of the Crowne. So ready have Prelates beene not onely to act, but to justifie, defend and boulster out Treasons, and Rebellions of the highest nature, with the depositions and murthers of their lawfull Princes Anno. 1499. this Bishop of Hereford had a chiefe hand in deposing King Richard the second, and was the second commissioner sent from the States in Par∣liament, named in the Instrument wherein they de∣clare his voluntary resignation; and he, with the Arch∣bishop of Yorke made report to the Parliament of the Kings voluntary resignation of his Crowne and King∣dome, the instrument whereof subscribed in their pre∣sence, was delivered unto Thomas Arundels hands then Archbishop of Canterbury, an Arch-traytor, as I have formerly manifested. The most of the succeeding Bishops of this See were translated to other bishopprickes,CHARLES BOOTH. where you may meete with them who were most obnoxious, onely I observe, that in the generall pardon of 22. H. 8. c. 15. the Bishop of Hereford (then Charles Booth) is specially excepted out of the pardon of the Premunire. It seemes his crime was very great. And for the present Bishop of Hereford, George Cooke,GEORGE COOKE.
he stands now impeached by the Commons in Parlia∣ment for the late Canons, Oath, and benevolence in the pretended Synod, in which he had a finger; which proceeding of our Prelates, may justly induce us to passe the same censure on them now, as famous Henry Bullenger did of old on the Bishops then, in his Booke De Episcoporum Functione & Iurisdicione Tiguri, 1538. . 112.113.143.1150.159. to 163. and 172. and as Mr. Calvin after him did, in his nota∣ble Booke De Necessitate Reformandae Ecclesiae. Edi. 1543 p. p. 24.25.26.104.105.106. to which I shall referre the reader. As for Dr. Manwaring who had some relation to this church, we all know that he received a Censure in the Parliament House 3. Caroli. for two seditious Sermons, Preached at the Court before his Maiestie, and then published in Print by the now Archbishop of Canterbu∣ries meanes; wherein he indeavoured to undermine the Subjects liberties, and the proprietie of their goods (etled in them by our Lawes) by false divinity and to give the King an absolute power against Law, to impose what taxes he pleased and to take away such a proportion of goods and treasure from his people as himselfe should thinke meete, upon any occasion. For which Sermons, though he were censured by both Houses to be never more capable of any future pre∣ferment in Church or Common-wealth, yet immedi∣atly after the dissolution of the Parliament, he was by Canterburies meanes, in affront of that Sentence advan∣ced, first to a great living granted formerly to another, then to a Deanery, and soone after to the Bishopricke of St. Davids, where he so demeaned himselfe in advan∣cing of superstition, prophanesse, and idolatry, that now he dares not shew his face in Parliament, and lies lur∣king, in obscure Places (and Ale hoses as some report) fearing a deprivation from this usurped dignity given him in contempt of his former sentence in Parliament. And thus much for the Bishops of these Sees, I now proceede to others.
CHAP. V. Containing the Treasons, Conspiracies, Contu∣macies and disloyalties of the Bishops of Chi∣chester, Carlile, Norwich, Chester, Coventry, and Litchfield. NOt to mention how Wigorniensis, Matth Westm. Matth. Paris Malmes. Hun∣tindon and Ho∣veden. Anno. 1070. Godw. p. 383. Agilricke Bishop of the South-Saxons,AGELRICK. with divers other Bish∣ops and Abots, were deprived by Willi∣am the Conqueror, Anno 1076.  in the Councels of Winchester and Wind∣sor, and after that committed to perpetu∣all Prison upon suspition of Treason, and Rebellion against the Conqueror, to deprive him of the Crown. Ralph the third Bishop of Chichester,RALPH. a man of high Stature, and no lesse Malmes. de Gestis Pontifi∣cum. l. 2. p. 257.25. Eadmerus Hist. Novrum. l. 1.2, 3, 4. Godw. p. 384.385. high of mind stood very stout∣ly in defence of Bishop Anselme, in so much that when King William Rufus threatned him for the same, he of∣fered him his Ring and Crosier, saying, It should better become him to loose his place than his duety to the Archbishop, whom he could never be induced to forsake, untill he seemed to forsake his owne cause, by flying the Country. After this when King Henry the first, was content to dispense with the marriage of Priests, to which Anselme was an hea∣vy enemy, notwithstanding the Canons lately made in the Councell of London to the contrary, the Priests granting him an yearely summe of money to defend
them against Anselme, this Bishop resisted the collecti∣on of that money in his Diocesse, calling it, the tribute of Fornication; and when notwithstanding his resistance it was payd, he interdicted his owne Diocesse, com∣manding the Church doores to be every where stopped up with thornes. The King whether not vouchsafing to contend with him, or taking his well meaning in good part, was not onely content to pardon this his contemptuous disobedience, but also bestowed the money so gathered in his Diocesse upon him, saving, It was a poore Bishoppricke and needed such helpes. This Bishop went every yeare thrice about his Diocesse, Causa praedicandi, onely to Preach the Gospell to the people, exacting nothing from his Provincialls by his Episcopall power, but receiving onely what they wil∣lingly presented to him as a free gift, rebuking those who offended, which was the sole kind of Visitation in those dayes, without any such Visitation Articles, Procurations, presentments, Fees, &c, as are this day practised, imposed, exacted, both against Law and See Summa Angelica. Tit. Visitaio. Canon too. HILARY:Hilary the fifth Bishop of this See, though hee was Godw. p. 385. content absolutely to allow of the Declaration after published at Claridon, without mention of that odious clause (saluo ordine suo) being shreudly baited of his brethren for his labour, yet afterwards hee had some contests with the King, and sought to impeach his prerogative royall, as appears by this notable pas∣sage, of the Author of the Holy Table, name and Thing p. 30.31. Sure I am, that [according to this advice of Eleutheius] the Bittish, Saxon, Danish and first Norman Kings have governed their Churches and Churchmen by Capitulas and mixed Digests, com∣posed (as it were) of Common and Canon Law, and promulged with the advice of the Counsell of the King, as we may see in those particulars set forth by In his excel∣lent Booke called Archaionomia pr totum Mr. Lambard, In is Analect. Anglo-Brit l. 2. c. 3.6.7. Mr. Selden History of Cambria p. 59. Howell. Dsha. Dr. Powell,
and others. And I doe not beleeve there can be shewed any Ecclesiasticall Canons for the government of the Church of England, untill long after the conquest, which were not either originally promulged or after∣wards approved and allowed by either the Monarch, or some King of the Heptarchy, sitting and directing in the Nationall or Provinciall Synod. For all the Colle∣ctions that Lindwood Comments upon, are (as Theo∣phrastus speakes)  but rough and rugged mony of a more fresh & later coyning:Theophrat. . and yet in those usurping times I have seene a Transcript of a Record, An. 1157.3o. Henry the 2. wherein when the Bishop of Chichister opposed some late Canons against the Kings exemption of the Abby of Battells from the Episcopall Jurisdiction;In M S. Chron. Abbatiae de Bell it is said, That the King being angry and much moved therewith, should reply. Tu pro Papae au∣thoritate ab hominibus concessa, contra dignitatum Regalium authoritates mihi à Deo concessas, calliditate arguta niti prae∣cogitas,? Doe you Sir goe about by subtilties of wit to oppose the Popes authority, which is but the favour or connivence of men against the authority of my Regall Dignities, being the Charters and Donations of God himselfe? and thereupon requires Reason, and Justice against the Bishop for this soule insolencie. A good evi∣dence, that the Canon Law, had little esteeme or foce among us in that age; and not long after it was prohi∣bited by speciall Writ to be read among us, as appeares by the Writ of 19. Hen. 3. directed to the Major and Sheriefes of London, commanding them,Claus. 19. H 3 memb. 22. Quod per totara Civitatem London Clamari faciant & firmiter prohiberi, ne ali∣quis Scolas regens de Legibus in eadem Civitate de caetero ibi∣dem Leges doceat.M. Seldens Review of Tiths p. 491. Et si aliquis ibidem fuerit hujusmodi Scolas regens, ipsum sine dilatione cessare faciat. T. Rege apud Basing XI. die Decembris This was five yeares after the Decre∣talls published, and it seemes most probable, that these Leges were Canon Lawes, perhaps mixt (as usually they were in the profession also,) with the Imperialls
(for both of them were it seemes, studied here under Videsis 3. H.  ad Matth. Paris Hist M∣jori. an 125. Henry the third by the Clergy, more han any other part of learning,) and therefore were forbidden, as being bth in regard of their owne authority, against the supreme majestie, and independency of the Crown of England. Selden Ibid. p. 489 And before this, in King  reigne, in that great controversie in the Synod of Winchester touching the Castles of Newarke, Salesury, and the Vies, the King denied utterly Censuram Canonum pati,G. Males Hist. Novell. l. 2. p. 103 b. that is, to have it determined by them whether or no the two Bishops Roger of Salisbury and Alexander of Lincolne might lawfully kepe their Castles that they had fortifi∣ed. But while the rest of the Bishops stood so much upon their Canons, and even in the face of majestie, profest a rebellion, the King, and the Lay subjects, it seemes grew so exasperated against them, that by pub∣like command for the preservation of the Liberty of the Crowne and Laity, they were forbidden to be of any more use in the Kingdome: for so perhaps is that to be understood in De Nugis u∣rialium. l. 8. c. 21. Iohn of Chartres, where he sayes; that, Tempore Regis Stephani a regno jussae sunt Leges Roma∣nae quas in Brittanniam domus venerabilis Patris Teobaldi Britanniarum Primatis asciverat. Ne quis etiam libros retine∣ret, edicto Regio prohibitum est. The Canon Law made by Popes and Prelates being inconsistent with the Kings Supremacy, and Subjects Liberty. STEPHEN BERKSTEED. Matth. Paris p, 970. Godw p. 387. Holinsh. p. 271. Stephen Berksteed the 14th. Bishop of Chichester, Anno. 1265. was excommunicated by Otobon the Popes Le∣gate, for rebelling and taking part with the Barons against King Henry the third, who thereupon repaired to Rome for absolution. IOHN de LANGHTON.Iohn de Langhton, the 16th. Bishop of Chichister, Anno. 1315. excommunicated Warren, Earle of Kent, for adul∣tery:Godw. p. 387. whereupon the Earle came unto him with ar∣med men, making some shew to lay violent hands up∣on him, unlesse he would absolve him. The Bishops men perceiving it, by their Masters command set upon
them, and put both the Earle, and his men in prison, whereupon ensued great combustions. Walsing Hist. Ang. n. 1388 p. 365. Grafton 11 R. 2 . 37. Godw. p. 388. Thomas Rushocke the 20th Bishop of Chichester,THOMAS RVSHOCK. a lewde pernicious Prelate. Anno. 1388. was driven a∣way from the Court by the Barons, as a Traytor, for his ill Councells to Richard the second, his Lands and goods confiscated, he banished and deprived of his Bishoppricke by 11 R 2 c 6 Act of Parliament, himself had suf∣fered as a Traytor, but that his guiltinesse made him flie before he could be apprehended. Adam Molins the 31. Bishop of that See,ADAM MOLINS. falling at variance with Richard Duke of Yorke was slaine at Ports∣mouth by certaine Marriners, Iune 9. 1449.Godwn. p. 389. Holinsh. p. 951. Richard Sampson the 37th. of Chichester.RICHARD SAMPSON. Anno 21. Hen. 8. was committed to the Tr for relieving certaine Trayterous persons, who denied the Kings Supremacy. George Day the 21. Bishop of this See,GEORGE DAY. October 10. 1551. Godw p 390. was deprived from his Bishoppricke, for de∣nying the Kings Supremacy, and maintaining the Popes, and other misdemeanours, but was afterwards restored by Queene Mary, at whose Coronation hee preached. Godw p 390. Martyns Hist. p. 452, 453, 454.Iohn Christopherson the 40. Bishop of this Diocesse,IOHN CHRISTO∣PHRSON. was deprived by Act of Parliament in the beginning of Queene Elizabeths happy reigne, for denying her supre∣macy, and refusing to take the oath of alegiance. To passe by the subsequent Bishops of this See, Richard Mountague the last Bishop thereof but one,RICHARD MOVNTAGVE. was the principall abetter and reviver of those late Armi∣nian and Popish Doctrines, Ceremonies, Innovations which for sundry yeares have disquieted both our Church and State; and that not onely in his Booke, intituled Appello Caesarem, published in the yeare 1625. complained against in three severall Parliaments, and called in by his Majesties speciall Proclamation, Se the De∣claration for the Dissolution of the Parlia∣mnt. p 20.21. as a Booke that opened the way to those Schismes and
Divisions which have since ensued in our Church; (though for this very Booke he was advanced to this See, by the practise and confederacy of some swaying Prelates;) and in his Gagge; but likewise in his Visita∣tion Articles, his Antidiatribae, his Aparatus ad Historiam Ecclesasticam, and other Workes, as you may rea more largely in Mr. Bayly his Canterburians sefe-Conviction, the last Edition: which Bookes of his have given great scandall to our Church, much advantage to our Po∣pish Adversaries, and much distracted not onely our Church, but State; for which no doubt hee should have received his just demerits in the high Court of Parliament, had not hee died suddenly out of feare, (being sent for to answer his old and new offences upon some fresh complaints) to ease the Parliament, and prevent a censure. Of his successor in this See, I neede say nothing hee is so well knowne: wherefore I shall next visit Carlile Diocesse, and give you but a touch of some speciall Acts of the Bishops of that See. The Bishops of Carlile. WALTER MALCLERKE Godw. p. 538.539. Matth West. An. 1233. p. 134. Walter Malclerke, in the yeare 1223. was conse∣crated unto the Bishoppricke of Carlile, which hee ac∣knowledged to have obtained by evill and corrupt meanes, and therefore resigned the same (moved in conscience so to doe as hee alledged) Iune 29. 1246. and tooke on him the habit of a Fryer Preacher at Oxford, in which he continued till his death. Being Treasurer of England under King Henry the third; the King upon a sudden, at the instigation of Peter, Bishop of Wnchester, not onely displaced him from that of∣fice, but revoked certaine Grants made unto him heretofore, & charged him with the debt of 100. pound. which hee acknowledged not. For redresse of these wrongs (as he tooke them) he determined to travell to Rome, but was stayed at the waters-side by the Kings
Officers; whom Roger, Bishop of London excommuni∣cated for the same; and riding presently to Worceter, where the Court lay, renewed that Excommunicati∣on in the Kings presence How he thrived with these businesses afterward I find not. But likely enough it is, that these troubles rather made him weary of the world, than any such scruple induce him to leave his Bishoppricke. Sylvester de Everdon,Sylvester de Everdon. the 5th. Bishop of this See, was elected in the yeare, 46. but not consecrated till February 5th. 1247. because he refused to accept of the election,Matth. Westm. Anno. 1246. 1247. p 216. Godw. p. 539. alledging his owne unworthinesse; but at last upon better deliberation, yeelded: he was one of them that joyned with Boniface the Archbishop, and Ethelmare the Elect of Winchester in their request to the King that remembring his promise often made, here∣after he would not impeach the Libertie of Elections by interposing his armed requests, &c. The King ac∣knowledged hee had indeede offended that way, and that especially (quoth he) in making meanes for you your selves, that thererefore of all other should least find fault with it. To this man particularly hee used these words. I remember how I exalted thee Sylvester of Carlile unto a Bishoppricke, having hankered a long time about the Chancery, and being a petty Chaplaine to my Chaplaines, preferring thee before many grave and reverend Divines, &c. His conclusion was that if they would give over their places which they had obtained by so undue meanes, he would hereafter for∣beare to commend any so unworthy. This was the yeare 1253. The yeare following, May the 13th This Bishop riding a horse somewhat too lusty for him, was cast, and so brused with the fall, as he died by and by, to wit, May 13 1254. THOMAS MERKES. Godw. p. 540541.542. Walsing. Hist. Ang. An 1490. p. 404. Graton. Chron. p. 407.408.409. Speeds Histo. p. 764.765.766. Halls Chron. 1. H. 4.. F. 11. to 15. Holinsh. p 514.516.512 Thomas Merkes the Fiftenth Bishop of this See, amongst many unworthy preferred to Bishopprickes in those dayes, was undoubtedly a man well-deserving that
honour; for he was both learned and wise, but prin∣cipally to be commended; first, for his constant and unmoveable fidelity unto his Patrone and preferrer King Richard, then for his excellent courage in profes∣sing the same, when he might safely, yea, and honestly also, have concealed his affection. Some other there were of the Nobility that remembring their duety and allegiance, when all the world bsde forsoke this un∣fortunate Prince, followed him with their best assi∣stance, even till the time of his captivity. This man nothing regarding the danger might ensue, not onely refused to forsake him when he had forsaken himselfe, but defended him and his cause the best he could, when he might well perceive, his endeavour might hurt him∣sefe much, without any possibility of helping the o∣ther, when the furious and unstable multitude, not contented that King Richard had resigned his Crowne to save the head that wore it, and their darling Henry the fourth. seated himselfe in his royall throne, importuned the Parliament assembled to proceed yet farther against him, desiring no doubt that to make all sure, his life might be taken from him. This worthy and memora∣ble Prelate stepping forth, doubted not to tell them, that there was none amongst them meete to give judge∣ment upon so noble a Prince as King Richard was whom they had taken for their Soveraigne and Leige Lord, by the space of twentie two yeares and more, And proceeding further, I assure you, quoth he (I re∣port his words as I find them in our Chronicles) there is not so ranke a Trayter, nor so arrant a theefe, nor yet so cruell a murtherer, apprehended or detained in pri∣son for his offence, but he shall be brought before the justice to heare Judgment; and will you proceed to the judgment of an annointed King, hearing neither his answere nor excuse? I say and will avow, that the Duke of Lancaster (whom ye call king) hath more tres∣passed to King Richard and his Realme; the King Rich∣ard
hath done either to him or us: for it is manifest and well knowne, that the Duke was banished the Realme by King Richard and his Councell, and by the judgement of his owne Father for the space of tenne yeares, for what cause ye remember well enough This notwithstanding, without Licence of King Richard, he is returned againe into the Realme, and (that is worse) hath taken upon him the name, title, and pre∣heminence of King: and therefore I say that you have done manifest wrong to proceede against King Richard in any sort without calling him openly to his answer and defence. This Speech scarcely ended, he was at∣tched by the Earle Marshall, and for a time committed to ward in the Abbey of St. Albanes. Continuing yet his loyall affection unto his distressed Master, soone afer his inlargement, he trayterously joyned with the Hollands, and others in a conspiracy against King Henry the 4th. which being bewrayed to the destruction of all the rest, he onely was pardoned, peradventure in regard of his calling (for it had seldome or never been seene hitherto, that any Bishop was put to death by order of Law;) peradventure in some kind of favour and admiration of his faithfull constancy (for vertue will be honoured, even of her enemies;) peradventure also to this end, that by forcing him to live miserably, they might lay a punishment upon him more grevious than death, which they well saw he despised. The Pope (who seldome denied the King any request that hee might afford good cheepe) was easily intreated, to translate forsooth, this good Bishop from the See of Carlile, that yeelded him honourable maintenance, unto Samos in Greece, whereof he knew he should never receive one penny profit: he was so happy, as neither to take benefit of the gift of his enemy, nor to be hurt by the masked malice of his counterfeit friend, disdai∣ning (as it were) to take his life by his gift, that tooke away from his Master, both life and Kingdome, hee
died shortly after his deliverance, so deluding also the mockery of his Translation, whereby (things so falling out) he was nothing damnified. Hall reports, that hee died for feare, more than sicknesse, as one rather desi∣rous to die by deaths dart, than the temporall Sword, which this his Treason deserved, being a great ble∣mish to his former fidelity. OWEN OGLETHORP Godw. p. 543. Martyns Hist. p. 452.453.454. Owen Oglethorpe the 31. B. of this See, was deprived with divers other Bishops for withstanding Q. Eliza. proceedings, and refusing to take the Oath of Allegi∣ance, in the yeare 1559. Of other Bishops of this See, since his dayes, I find little mention, most of them be∣ing translated to other Sees; I shall therefore proceede to the Bishops of Norwich. The Bishops of Norwich. IOHN de GRAY.Iohn de Gray, the fifth Bishop of Norwich (if we be∣leeve Hist. Angl. p. 221.222. Matthew Paris,) was one of those three Court Bishops who were consiliarios iniquissimos most wicked counsellors to King Iohn, during the time of the inderdict of the Realme: who desiring to please the King in all things, consilium non pro ratione, sed pro volun∣tate dederunt, gave the King counsell, not according to Reason, but Will, and thereby wrought much trouble both to the King and Kingdome. See Matthew Paris Hist. Angl. p. 204. to 278. Matth. West An. 1207. to 1224: Fox Acts and Monu. p 26 to 234. Pandulphus the next Bishop of this See,PANDVL∣PHVS. consecra∣ted by the Pope at Rome, Anno. 1222. was the Popes Legate, and the chiefe instument, who perswaded King Iohn, most ignominiously, and shamefully to re∣signe up his Crowne and Kingdome to the Pope, to become his Vassall, to his eternall infamy, and to sub∣mit himselfe to Sephen Langhton, and those other Tray∣terly Prelates who intardicted the Realme, excom∣municated this King, published the Popes deprivati∣on of him from his Crowne, and instigated the French King to invade the Realme of England, and usurpe
the Crowne, which the Pope had conferred on him upon King Iohns deprivation from it, of which you may read more at large before in Stephen Langhton, Archbishop of Canterbury, p. 33. to 41. Onely let me informe you, that during the time of this inderdict (aboue six yeares space) all Ecclesiasticall Sacra∣ments ceased in England, except Confession, and the viaticum in extreame necessity, and the Baptisme of In∣fants; so as the bodyes of dead men were carried out of Townes and Villages, and burried like dogges in Highwayes and Ditches without prayers, and the mi∣nistry of Priests, as Matthew Paris and others testifie. Such was the Prelates piety and charity. About the yeare of our Lord, 1271. In the time of Roger de Skerwing,ROGER de SKERWYNG. 12. Bishop of Norwich, there was raysed a dangerous sedition betweene the Citizens of Norwich and the Monkes of the Cathedrall Church;Matth. Paris Hist. Angl p. 976.977. Matth. West Anno. 1271. p. 351. Holish p. 275.276. God∣win p. 346.347. the History whereof is briefely this. At a Faire that was kept before the gates of the Priory, there hapned a fray, in which some servants of the Covent, lew cer∣taine citizens: A Jury being empaneled hereupon, found them guilty, and the Officers tooke order for the apprehending of the murtherers if they might be met withall. The Monkes greatly offended herewith, first, excommunicated the Citizens, then shutting the gates, not onely prepared themselves to defence. but also began to offend the other, shooting at the passen∣gers first, and afterward issuing out of their gates, kil∣ling divers persons, and spoiling many houses: The Citizens greatly incensed herewith, fired the gates, en∣tred the Monastery. and after a long conflict (a great number being slaine on both sides) prevailed, rifled the Priory, and set fire on the same in divers places at once. This fire consumed not onely the Cells and Of∣fices of the Monkes, but the Almes house also, the steeple, and greatest part of the Cathedrall Church. The King hearing of this tumult, with all speed posted
thither, with the Bishop of Rochester, and others. The Bishop of Rochester, excommunicated all those who had consented to this wickednesse, and the King cau∣sed divers Citizens to be hanged drawne, and quar∣tered; amongst the rest that were executed a woman that carried fire to the gates was burned. The Monkes for their part appealed to Rome, and so handled the matter, that they not onely escaped punishment but al∣so forced the Citizens to pay them 3000. markes after 500. markes a yeare, toward the reparation of their Church, and to present them with a Pix or Cup of gold of seven pound weight. This end was made by King Edward the first (his Father being now dead) at the request and solicitation of the Bishop. But the Pri∣or (saith Holinshed) was well enough borne out and defended by the Bishop of Norwich named Roger, who (as it is likely) was the Master of the mischiefe, though hands were not layde upon him, nor upon his adhe¦rents, perhaps for feare, peradventure for favour; and no marvell, though the lesse faulty lost their lives, as most guilty; for — Rarus venator ad ursos Accedit, tutos conservat Sylva Leones; Debilibus robusta nocent, & grandia paruis. Ales fulminiger timidos infestat olores; Accipiter laniat Turdos, mollesque Columbas. Verficoler Coluber ranas miserasque lacertas; Irretit muscas, transraittit aranea vespes. So Holinshed. ANTHONY de BECK.After him Anthony de Becke, the 17th. Bishop of this See attaining this dignity at the Popes hands. behaved himselfe so imperiously in the place,Godw. p. 348. that he bereaved the Monkes of divers ancient and long enjoyed privi∣ledges suffering them to doe nothing in their house but what seemed good unto him, plucking downe and preferring amongst them whom he listed.
Neither could he onely be content thus to tyrannize over them, but scorning to have his actions reformed or called in question by any other, he openly with∣stood Robert Winchelsey, Bishop of Canterbury in his Visitation; affirming, that he would not answer to those things which were objected against him, unlesse it were at the Court of Rome. This boysterous and unruly dealing purchased him such hatred of all men, that at the last he was poysoned by some of his owne servants. William Bateman the 18th. Bishop of NorwichWILLIAM BATEMAN. forced the Lord Morley for killing certaine Deere in one of his Parkes, and abusing his Keepers,Godw. p. 349. to carry a bur∣ning Taper in his hand, through the streetes of Nor∣wich unto the High-Altar by way of Pennance. And although King Edward the third became an earnest in∣tercessor for him to the Bishop, mingling sometimes threates with requests, yet nothing could move the Bishop following his determinate course; such arro∣gant, malicious, dispitefull froward creatures are Pre∣lates for the most part, both towards Kings and No∣bles. In his time there hapned a great Pestilence, so that in many Monasteries and religious Houses, there were scarce two of twenty left alive, there died onely in Norwich in one yeare, besides religious men 57104 persons. Henry Spencer,HENRY SPENCER. a Gentleman of great valour and skill in martiall affaires, Walsingh. Hist. Angl p. 278.279.315.316 319. to 334.348. Speed. Hist. p. 735.537 Polichro. l. 7 c 5. f 320. Antiquit. Eccl. Brit p. 298. Holinsh p. 442.443.444.445. Godw. p. 350.351.352. serving the Pope as Generall in his, warres, in the yeere 1370. was made Bishop of Norwich. And being a better Butcher and Souldier than a Shepheard, he (notwithstanding the Kings Commandement to the contrary) procured the Popes authority for levying of an army here in England, which he transported about the yeare 1385. into the Low-Countries for the Popes service in his wares, where after hee had slaine above 1100. men, in a set battll (wherein the Priests and religious men that were with
the Bishop fought valiantly and most eagerly, some of them slaying sixteene men apeece in one battell against the lemmings: vanquished an army of 30000. and burnt the Townes of Graveling, Dunkirke, Newport and others, returned againe into England, the King seising his Temporalties into his hands & detaining them two yeares space for his contempt, in raising an army with∣out, and against his expresse command. This Martiall Prelate, had forgotten what answer all the Bishops, Abbots, and Clergy of England gave to King Henry the third, Anno. 1267. in a Parliament at St. Edmonds Berry, where the King demanding, that all Clergy men holding Baronies, or Lay Fee, should goe armed in person against the Kings enemies, or should finde so many men to serve the King in his Expidition, as per∣tained to so much land or tenement. To this they an∣swered, Matth Paris Hist. Angl. p. 970.971. Quod non debent pugnare cum gladio raateriali; That they ought not to fight with the materiall sword, but with the spirituall, naraely with teares, and sighes, and devout Prayers; and that for their Benefices they were bound to main∣taine peace not warre: and that their Baronies were founded in pure Franck-Almoigne, where they owed no Knights Ser∣vice but what was certaine; neither would they begin any new: and when it was replied, that the Prelates were obliged to grant all the Kings requests (there specified and contradicted by them) whether they would or no, by reason of the Oath they had taken at Coventrie, where they swore, that they would ayde their Lord the King by all meanes that they could. To this they gave this equivocating answer; that when they made this Oath, they understood it not of any other ayde, but spirituall and wholesome councell, denying to grant the King any mony at all. But it seemes that this was then the Bishops received distinction, that they might lawfully beare armes, and fight with the materiall sword, and grant Subsedias to ayde the Pope against his enemies, as this Bishop and the Clergy in his time did; but not to assist the King against his enemies This Martiall Act of his war∣like
Prelate is thus censured by Fox Acts, and Monuments, vol. 1. p 613. William Swinderby, one of our Martyrs in Richard the seconds raigne. Fur∣ther I say, if the Pope hold men of armes, in maintai∣ning his Temporalties and Lordship to venge him on them that gilten and offend him, and gives remission to fight and to sley them that contrary him as men say he did by the Bishop of Norwich, not putting his sword into his sheath, as God commanded Peter Mitte, &c. hee is Antichrist, for he does contrary to the Commande∣ments of Jesus, that bade Peter forgive to his brother se∣venty times seventy. Si peccaverit in me frater meus, quotiens dimittam ei? Septies? &c & Christus; non dieo tibi septis, sed septuagesies sepcies. Which Walter Brute another mar∣tyr in that time thus seconds, Ibid. Fox. vol. 1. p 633. Againe, Christ saith, You have heard that it is said, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, but I say unto you, see that you resist not evill. But if any man shall strike you upon the right cheeke, give him the other too; and to him that will strive with thee for thy caate in judgement, let him have thy cloake also, and whosoever shall constraine thee one mile, goe with him also two other. Hee that asketh of thee give him, and he that will borrow of thee, turne not thy self from him. By these things it may plainely ap∣peare how that Christ the King of peace, the Saviour of mankind, who came to save, and not to destroy, who gave a Law of Charity to be observed of his faithfull people, hath taught us not to be angry, not to hate our enemies, nor to render evill for evill, nor to resist evill. For all these things doe foster and nourish peace and charity, and doe proceede and come forth of charity, and when they be not kept charity is loosed, and peace is broken. But the Bishop of Rome approveth and alloweth warres and slaughters of men in warre, as well against our enemies, that is, the Infidells, as also against the Christians for temporall goods. Now these things are quite contrary to Christs Doctrine, and to charity; and to peace, &c. And indeede if wee consider Pope Vrbanes Commission and priviledges
granted to this martiall Prelate against Clement the Antipope and his complices, wee shall see how farre the Popes practises are opposite to Christs practie and precepts, and what mercifull, peaceable men Lordly prelates are, I shall give you a taste hereof out of Walsing. Hist. Angliae p 312.313.314. &c. Wal∣singham. In the yeare of our Lord 1382. Henry Spencer Bishop of Norwich, received Bulls from the Pope his Lord directed to him, to signe with the Crosse all those who were willing to goe with him into France, to the distruction of the Antipope, who called himselfe Clement, and to sanctifie a warre against all who adhe∣red to him. Which Bulls, because they conferred great power to him, hee caused to be published in Parlia∣ment, and sent abroad Coppies of them round about into every place, which he caused to be fixed on the doores of Churches and Monasteries in open view. These Bulls relate at large the injuries that Clement the Antipope, and the Cardinalls confederating with him, had offered to Vrban, and that Pope Vrban, being un∣able without great offence of Christ, and remorse of conscience any longer to endure so many great ex∣cesses, thought meet to rise up against those wicked ones in the power of the most high, and proceeding judici∣cially against them by a definitive sentence denounced and declared them to be scismatickes, and conspira∣tors against the Pope, and blasphemers, and that they should be punished like Hereticks, and persons guilty of high Treason, and did thereupon excommunicate and accurse them, and withall deprived them from all their Benefices and Ofices whatsoever, making them uncapable to retaine or receive them, or any other, both for the present and future; withall, he degraded all the Nobls and Knights who adhered to him from all their honours, dignities, and Knightships, decreed all their goods, moveables and immoveables, rights, and jurisdictions to be confiscated, and their persons to be detestable, and so to be esteemed, and exposed
them to be apprehended by all Christians, and so ap∣prehended to be kept in such sort, that they should not escape, and either be sent immediatly to the said Pope, or else detained close prisoners in safe custody, till hee should give further order therein: Moreover he excommunicated all those who should either be∣leeve, receive, defend, or favour any of them, so as they should not be absolved from this sentence without his privity, unlesse it were at the very point of death; hee further decreed, that whosoever should wittingly pre∣sume to admit any of them to Ecclesiasticall buriall, should be subject to the sentence of Excommunica∣tion, from which he should not be absolved, unlesse at the very point of death; except (O barbarous cruelty) they would first with their owne hands digge them out of their graves, Et procul eecrent ab Ecclesiastica sepul∣tura corpora eorundem; and cast out their bodies far from the Church-yard or Ecclesiasticall burying place. Moreover, he inhibited all Christians wittingly to harbour any of them, or to presume to bring, send or suffer to be brought or sent, any corne, wine, flesh clothes, wood victuals, or any other thing profitable for their use, to any place where any of them should dwell or abide, if it lay in their power to prohibit it; he commanded likewise, that no man should presume in any wise to hinder the apprehention and detention of the said Antipope and his adherents and their trans∣mission to him, and commanded every man to be as∣sisting to their apprehention. And if any did contrary to the premises, or wittingly name, believe in, or preach Clement to be Pope, if he were a single person he should be excommunicated, if a Commonwealth or Corpo∣ration, they should be interdicted, and their cities and Lands, deprived of all commerce with other cities, places, and countries, and that the cities themselves should be deprived of their pontificall dignity, and that none but the Pope himselfe should have power to
absolve them from this interdict, or excommunicati∣on, unlesse it were at the very point of death, hee fur∣ther granted to all persons truely penitent, and confest who would fight against the said Antipope, and his confederates in their proper persons, or by others for one whole yeares space, from the day this Bishop of Norwhich should appoint, either continually, or by times if they were lawfully hindred, to all, as well Clergy men as Lay men who should follow the stan∣dard of the Church, and likewise to all such that should contribute towards the expences of this warre according to their ability, either to the Bishop or to his Deputy, or should hire fit souldiers to warre and continue with him for the said space, the same indul∣gence that was usually granted to those who went to aide the holy Land. Moreover this Pope grants these Priviledges to this his Generall the Bishop of Nor∣wich, for the better promoting of this warre. First, that the said Bishop might execute capitall punishments a∣gainst the Antipope, his adherers, factors, and coun∣cellours in any place, with strong hand. Item that hee should have power to publish processe against the An∣tipope and his adherents and any other, to be fulmina∣ted out by the said Lord the Pope himselfe, against them and every of them. Item, that he should have power summarily, and plainely to enquire of all and singular Schismaticks, and to imprison them, and to confiscate all their goods, moveables, and immove∣ables. Item, that he should have power to deprive Lay Schismatiques of all secular Offices whatsoever, and to conferre their Offices upon fit persons. Item, That he should have power of depriving and declaring to be deprived all Schismaticall Clergy men, and of con∣ferring their Benefices with Cure, or without Cure, their dignities, Personages, or Offices to other idone∣ous persons. Item, That he should have power over all exempt persons, Clerkes or Laicks, Seculars or
Regulars, though they were brethren of the Order of the Mendicants, or Professors, or Professed of other Houses, or of the Hospitall of St. Iohns of Ierusalem, or of St. Mary of the Teutonicks, or professors of any other Orders. Item, That he should have power of dispensing with any Beneficed secular Clerks, with Cure, or with∣out Cure, or such who had any dignities, parsonages, or Offices, and with regulars exempt or not exempt, that every of them might be absent with him from their benefices, dignities, offices, and houses un∣der the signe of the Crosse, without any license of their Prelates obtained, with the notice and re∣ception of the fruits of their benefices, as if they per∣sonally had resided. Item, It is granted to all, who goe oversea with him at their owne cost and expences, or at the charges of any other plenary remission of all sinnes, and so many priviledges, as are granted to those who goe to the aide of the holy Land. Item, They who out of their proper goods and meanes shall mi∣nister sufficient wages to fit souldiers, according to the discretion of the said Bishop, or of any deputed by him, albeit he himselfe shall not be personally present in the execution of the said businesse, shall have like remis∣sion of sinnes and indulgence as aforesaid, as they had beene personally present with him. Item, All shall be partakers of this remission who shall congruously mi∣nister of their goods to the said Bishop towards the ex∣pugnation of the said Heretickes. Item, if any in fol∣lowing the same Standard shall chance to die in the journey undertaken, or if the businesse it selfe shall chance to be finished in the interim with a convenient end, he shall intirely receive the same grace, who shall be partaker of the forenamed indulgence & remission. Item, he hath power of excommunicating, suspending, interdicting all rebellious persons; or those who hinder him to execute the power granted to him, of what dig∣nity, state, degree, preheminence, order, place, or condi∣tion soever they shall be, allthough Regall, Queenely,Note this. or
Imperiall,Note this. or of what other Ecclesiasticall or worldly dignity soever they excell in. Item, He hath power of compelling all religious persons whatsoever, even the professors of the Order of the Mendicants, if it shall seeme expedient to him, to destinate or transmit them where he please for the execution of the premises. This Bishop armed with this large Commission, sends out his Mandates, every where for the advancement of this holy papall warre; and among other his precepts, di∣rects this ensuing mandate to the Clergy of the Pro∣vince of Yorke. Henry, by Divine permission, Bishop of Norwich, Nuncio of the See Apostolicke, to our be∣loved in Christ, all and singular the Rectors, Vicars, and Chaplaines Parochiall within the City and Dio∣cesse of Yorke, greeting in the Lord; Albeit wee have exhorted all, and every of you by Apostolicall autho∣ritie in the Lord, and strictly commanded you, that you should publish the crosse committed to us and its vertue to your parishioners in the most opportune time and places, whose sustainers, fauters, and aiders ac∣cording to Ours, or Our Deputies discretion have plenary remission of sinnes granted, and besides this, have augmentation of eternall salvation permitted, as is more fully contained in the Apostolicall Bulls lawfully published throughout all England. And be∣cause we understand by the relation of credible men, that our exhortation and command hath taken none, or small effect, especially (as is beleeved) by reason of the negligence of Curates, to the diminution of the Catholicke faith, and danger of soules, who easily by your councell and exhortation might obtaine the foresaid priviledges and sempiternall grace. There∣fore wee much affecting the salvation and pofit of soules, lest the precious gift of this spirituall universall grace or our power, should not as much as in us lieth be unknowne to any of your parishoners, for time to come; doe you cause the names of all your
Parishioners to be written, setting downe the summe and donations of those that pay upon their names, and those that pay not, from day to day, as often, and when it shall be most expedient, not onely the rich, but also the poore, according to the similitude of the poore widdow, the healthy, and those that are sicke, especial∣ly in confession, doe you prudently handle, and perswade to put their helping hands to this holy voy∣age, to the destruction and extermination of moderne Heretickes, that so they may be partakers of the merit and reward granted in this behalfe, and your selves hereby very much eased from the burthen of your Cure. Moreover, the desturbers of this holy Voyage, or Rebells to our Commands, or rather to the Apostles, and fauters of the moderne Schisme, you, or some of you shall peremptorily cite, that they personally ap∣peare before us, or our Commissioners by a certaine day perfixed by you, or some one of you in the Cathe∣drall of St. Paul in London, to shew cause, at a precise and peremptory time, wherefore they ought not to be pronounced to have fallen into the censures thundred out against those who perpetrate such things. And further to doe and receive what Justice shall per∣swade. You or some one of you shall distinstly and wisely certifie us or our Commissioners of the nam and quantity of the almes conferred in this kinde and also of the dayes of your citations, and of the manner and forme thereof: Of all, and every of which we burthen every of your consciences, firmely injoyning you by vertue of that obedience you stand obliged to the See Apostolicke that you publish these our pre∣sent Letters among your Parishioners, reteining the Coppies of them with your selves, and that yee speedi∣ly transmit them to the next Curate in the foresaid Diocesse: In witnesse whereof wee have to these pre∣sents set to our usuall Sle in this behalfe: Given at Our Lodging t Charing neare Westmister the 9th.
day of the Monesh of February, Anno. Dom. 1382. and the 13th. of Our Consecration. And withall he granted this forme of Absolution to all ayders and Assistants to this holy warre. By the Apostolicall authority com∣mitted to me in this behalfe, wee absolve thee, A. B. from all sinnes confessed with the mouth and sorrowed for with the heart, and which thou wouldst confesse if they came to thy memory, and we grant thee plena∣ry remission of all thy sinnes, and promise thee retri∣bution of just men, and augmentation of eternall sal∣vation; and we grant to thee so many priviledges as are granted to those who goe to the aide of the holy Land, and we impart to thee the suffrages of the prayers and benefits of the Synod of the Vniversall Church,Bulls. and of the holy Catholike Church. By these recited Letters and Absolutions, you may clearely discerne, 1. The extraordinary insatiable malice, uncharitable∣nesse, cruelty, rage of Popes and Lordly Prelates against their opposites. 2. Their earnest desire and promotion of bloody warres by all manner of instiga∣tions and enforcements. 3. Their exorbitant incroach∣ments and usurpations upon Emperors, Kings, Prin∣ces, Subjects, and all sorts of men, who must be sub∣ject to their Censures, Excommunications, and De∣privations, if they resist their wills and bloody designes. 4. Their notable abuse of Excommunications, and other Ecclesiasticall censures to avenge their owne meere personall wrongs and execute their owne malicious designes. 5. Their politicke inventions to raise moneyes, and men to maintaine their warres. 6. The impiety and strange abuse of their pretended indulgences wherewith they grossely cheate poore silly people. 7. The industry of this Martiall Prelate of Norwih to promote this holy warre, as he termed it, onely in maintenance of Pope Vrbans inurbanity. This Bull and large Commission of the Pope to the Bishop was many dayes debated in Parliament, and so his Voyage: During which time the Bishops fore∣said
Letters & Popes Bull being published throughout the Realme, the silly people, hearing the sweetnesse of so great a benediction to have arrived to the English, would neither reject nor receive in vain so great grace, but inflamed with the heat of devotion and faith, those who thought themselves fit for warre, prepared them∣selves with all speede, and those who seemed unable for the Expedition, according to the councell of their Confessors liberally contributed out of their goods towards the use of those who wentt, t they might de∣serve to be partakers of so great remission and in∣dulgence. And the hearts of all men were so generally inflamed with devotion, that there was almost no man found in so great a Kingdome, who did not either offer himselfe to the said businesse or contribute some∣thing towards it, out of his estate: So that in a short space, divers great summes of money were brought to the Bishop out of many parts of the Kingdome, and multitudes of souldiers resorted to him: whereupon the Bishop takes his journey with part of his army to∣wards the Sea-side, and comes to Northborne in Kent; where making some small stay, he received the Kings writ, commanding him to returne to speake with the King and to know his pleasure. The Bishop thinking that if he returned, the King would command him to stay his Voyage, and so all his paines and provision should be lost, and himselfe exposed to derision, ga∣thering together those souldiers he had present by the helpe of Iohn Philpot, transported both him∣selfe and them to Chalis, from whence hee went and besieged Graveling; where in a set battell he van∣quished the Flemmins and Schismaticks, and obtained a glorious victory, slaying at least 12. thousand of them in the battle and flight. The newes whereof comming over into England, so affected the people moved with the hope of the prey they should gaine, that many Ap∣prentices in London, and many servants tooke the Crosse upon them without their Masters consent, and
against their wills, whose example others following throughout the Kingdome, leaving their parents, kind red, and deare consorts, being unarmed, having onely swords, bowes, and arrowes went out to this war; and many religious persons of all Orders, (who craved li∣cense to goe but could not obtaine it) presumed to undertake that Voyage, In magnum personarum suarum dedecus & detrimentum, quia non propter Iesnm tantum pere∣grinare decreverunt sed ut patriam mundumque viderent. Iohn Philpot prong all these with necessaries, trans∣ported them to the Bishop: whose temporalties the King seised and detained many yeares in his hands for undertaking this warre, and passing the sea with his subjects, contrary to his inhibition. A little before this warre, this Martiall Prelate had occasion given him of imploying his valour at home to better purpose. In the yeare 1381 the Commons of Suffolke, and Nor∣folke made one Iohn Lister their Leader, a Dyer of Norwich, called the King of the Commons, endea∣vouring to joyne their forces with those notable Re∣bells Wat yler, and Iacke Straw. The Bishop hereupon armed from top to toe, marcheth with such forces as he could raise against these Rebells: meeting with some of them at Ickingham, hee presently laid hold of the three chiefe of them, and without more adoe, cut off their heads, which hee caused to be set upon poles at Newmarkt: Thence hee marched towards Norwich, where he understood the Rebells had determined to make some stay. By the way divers Gentlemen that had hid themselves Videntes Episcopum militem in∣duisse, & galeam assumpssse raetalicam, & lorcam duram quam non possent penetrare sagittae, nec non gladium maerta∣lem ancipitem arrpuisse (as Walsingham writes) joyned with him; so as by that time he came to Norwich hee had a reasonable company about him. With that troope (such as it was) he set upon the Rebells, who had fortified themselves with trenches, and barraca∣does
very strongly, having their carriages, and wa∣gons behinde them. The Martiall Bishop without de∣lay, about to give them open battell, moved with their audacity, commands the Trumpets to blow, and the Drummes to beate; and taking a Lance in his right hand, puts spurres to his horse, and is carried with so great animosity and impetuous boldnesse against them, that with a most speedy course hee pre-ocupies their trenches, before his Archers could come up to him, neither was there neede of Archers, they being come to fight hand to hand. The warlike Prelate therefore, like a wilde Boore gnashing his teeth, spa∣ring neither himselfe nor his enemies, where hee per∣ceives most danger thither hee directs his strength, running through this man, casting downe that man, wounding another, and ceaseth not to hurt the enemy most vehemently, untill all the troope which followed him had gotten the Trench, and were prepared to the conflict: the Bishops party then fought valiantly, and so did the Commons, Donec infirmior conscientia partem terreret injustams & animum ab audacia & voluntate sub∣traheret moriendi.Waling. Hist. Anglicae p 278.279. Hereupon the fearefull vulgar betake themselves to flight, and because they had no way left besides their Carts and Carriages which they had pla∣ced behinde them, they strove to leape over them, and so to escape. But the Bishop, exercising every where the Office of a circumspect Generall dashed these endea∣vours, and hindred those who thought to flee by kil∣ling them, and in hindring slayes them, till hee had ta∣ken their Ringleaders, and Iohn Litcestere their King, whom he caused to be drawne, quartered, and be∣headed. Which done, this Bishop rested not, untill ha∣ving searched out the malefactors throughout the country, he caused Justice to be executed on them, Sicque pacem peperit regioni, & indicibile toto regno com∣modum, laudanda probitas, & audaca commendanda Pontifi∣cis bellicosi. This Act was very commendable, I con∣fesse
yet unsuitable to his calling. There wa great contention betweene him and the Monkes of Norwhich for fifteene yeares, concerning their pri∣viledges and jurisdictions; at last they gave him 400. Markes to enjoy their priviledges. ALEXAN∣DER. Godw. p 35.Alexander Pyor of Norwich was next elected B. by the Monks, but the King so misliked their choise, as he not only kept him from his dignity, but also imprisoned him at Winsor almost a whole yeare after his election, yet afterwards at the request of Thomas Arrundell Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, and divers other of the Nobility, he was released, set at liberty, and afforded Consecra∣tion, Anno. 1408. Richard Nyx. 29. Bishop of this Sea,RICHARD NYX. had a report of a vicious and dissolute liver, and was blind long be∣fore his death. Hilary 25 H. 8. Coram Rege Rot. 15. he was attainted in a praemunre,Godw p. 354. See a Briefe of the Prelates Incrcments. &c. p. 246.247. put out of the Kings pro∣tection, his person imprisoned, Lands, Goods, and Chattles forfeited to the King, for citing Richard Cocke∣rall, Major of Thetford, and others into his Spirituall Court, and enjoyning them under paine of Excom∣munication, to call a Jury of the said towne before them, and cause them to revoke and cancell a Present∣ment they had found upon Oath touching their Li∣berties, to wit, that none of the said Towne ought to be cited into any Spirituall Consistory, but onely in∣to the Deane of Thetfords Court; and that if any one cited any of that Towne into another Spirituall Court, he hould forfeit sixe shillings eight pence for the same, The Glasse-windowes of Kings-Colledge Chappell in Cambridge were bought and set up with part of this Bishops Fine and Forfeiture upon this his attainder, as the Author. of the Catalogue of the Chancellors and Colledges of Cambridge Record, in his Collegim Regis. IOHN HOPTON. Godw. p. 355. Iohn Hopton the 32th Bishop of this Sea, was a great persecuter, and a cause of putting many of our
Martyrs to death; as you may read in Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments. Samuel Harsnet Bishop of this Diocesse,SAMVEL HARSNET. a turbulent Prelate and great opposer of Godly Ministers in the latter end of King Iames, and the beginning of King Charles raigne was questioned and proceeded against in Parliament for divers oppressions, Extortions, and Superstitious innovations introduced in that Diocese. Of whom, See more in Yorke, to which he was transla∣ted. Dr. White,D. WHITE. and Dr. Corbet his immediate successors,Dr. COR∣BET. were men of the same straine with Harsnet, and where∣as Dr. White had gained great fame and reputation in our Church for his learning and Bookes against the Papists whilst he continued an ordinary Minister, his carriage and change was such, that he soone lost all his honour and reputation after he became a Bishop, and when as other men grow commonly white in their old age, he contrariwise like the Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 7 c. 2. Herodotus l. 2. Albanes (who doe in senectute nigrescere) waxed blacke in his declining dayes, and as some say, deserved the title of that Popish Trea∣tise which he answered in his Orthodox, White dyed blacke. A strange effect of a white Rochet. But his Successor in this See, Matthew Wren,MATTHEW WREN. a man of a more active spirit, thinking it a disparagement to him, not to transcend his predecessors in superstitious Popish Innovations, and extravagant oppressions, both of the Ministers and people of that Diocesse, hath beene so exorbitantly outragious in his procee∣dings, that upon the hearing of sundry Petition and complaints against him in Parliament, the whole House of Commons have transmitted to the Lords these subsequent Articles of impeachment against him (already Printed) wherein the malicious venome of his spirit against piety and our Religion, with his se∣ditious, oppressive practises are Anatomized to the full, and most elegantly displaied in their proper co∣lours
by Sir Thomas Widdrington in his Speech at their transmission, which Articles and Speech here I insert. ARTICLES of Impeachment, of the COMMONS Asembled in Parliament in the name of themselves, and of all the Commons of England, against Matthew Wren, Dr. in Divinity, late Bishop of Norwich, and now Bishop of Ely, for severall Crimes, and Misdemeanors committed by him. THat the said Matthew Wren, being Popishly and superstitiously affected, did at his first comming to be Bishop of Norwich, which was in the yeare 1635. endeavour by sundry wayes, and meanes, to suppresse the powerfull and painefull Preaching of the Word of God; did introduce divers Orders, and Injunctions, tending to Superstition and Idolatry; did disturbe, and disquiet the orderly, and settled estate of the Mi∣nisters, and people, and Churches of that Diocesse, to the great prejudice of His Majestie, the great griefe and disquiet, and hazard of the estates, consciences, and lives of many of his Majesties Loyall Subjects there, to the manifest bringing in, and increasing of prophane∣nesse, ignorance, and disobedience in the Common people, (as by the particulars ensuing may appeare.) I. Whereas many Chancels of Churches, during all the time of Queene Elizabeth, King Iames, and of his Majestie that now is, had laid and beene continued, even and flat, without any steps ascending towards the East-end of the same, and are ordered to continue as they were, and so ought to have continued; He of his own minde and will, without any lawfull warrant of authority, in the yeare 1636. being then Bishop of Nor∣wich, ordered and enjoyned, that the same should be raised towards the East-end, some two, some three, some foure steps, that so the Communion Table there placed Altarwise, might be the better seene of the people.
II. He in the same yeare 1636. ordered, That the Com∣munion Table which is appointed by the said Rubrick, at the time of the celebration of the holy Communion, to be placed in the Body of the Church or Chancell, where Divine Prayers are usually read, and where the people might best heare, should be set up close un∣der the Wall at the East-end of the Chancell Altar∣wise, and not to be removed from thence; whereby the Minister, who is by the Law to Officiate at the North-side of the Table, must either stand and offici∣ate at the North-end of the Table so standing Altar∣wise, or else after the Popish and Idolatrous manner, stand and officiate at the Westside of the Table with his backe towards the people. III. He in the same yeare 1636. enjoyned that there should be a Rayle set on the top of the new raised steps before the Communion Table so set Altarwise as a∣foresaid, which Rayl should raise from the Southside of the Chancell to the North within, which the Mi∣nister onely should enter, as a place too holy for the people; and some of the people were punished for step∣ping into it, as namely Daniel Wayman, and others. IV. The more to advance blinde Superstition, hee in the same yeare 1636. ordered that all the Pewes in the Church should be so altered, that the people might kneele with their faces Eastward, towards the Com∣munion Table so set Altarwise as aforesaid; And that there should be no seats in the Chancell above, or on either side even up with the said Table. V. He in the same yeare 1636. enjoyned that every Minister after he had finished the reading of some part of the Morning Prayer, at the Deske, should goe out from the same to the holy Table set Altarwise, as to a more holy place, and there, when no Communion was to be administred, reade at the said Table a part of the Communion Service, now commonly called the se∣cond Service, whereby the consciences both of the Mi∣nister,
and people, have beene not onely very much of∣fended, and grieved, but also the Service it selfe was made very unprofitable to the people who could not heare what was said, or prayed in that place. VI. That both he in his owne person, his Chaplains, and others of the Clergy as namely, Master Iohn Novell, Master William Guest, Master Iohn Dunckon, and others following his example, did ever after the Table was so set Altarwise, use and performe such, so many, and so frequent bowings and adorations before, and to∣wards the said Table as have beene dangerous exam∣ples to draw others to the like superstitious ge∣stures, and have given great scandall and offence to the sound, and sincere, and well affected Christi∣ans. VII. Hee in the said yeare 1636, enjoyned all the people to come up to the Rayle to receive the holy Communion, and there kneele, and doe reverence be∣fore the holy Table placed Altarwise and gave directi∣ons to the Ministers not to administer the Communi∣on to such people as should not so come up, and do such reverence as aforesaid, And that the Minister should within the Rayle deliver the Bread to such people onely as should so come up and kneele before the said Table as aforesaid. This was to the offence of the con∣sciences of many good people, who for feare of Idola∣try and Superstition, durst not come to kneele at the aid Rayl before the Table so placed Altarwise; and many people not comming up thither, though presen∣ting themselves upon their knees in the Chancell, have not had the Communion delivered unto them, and af∣terward for not receiving have bin excommunicated, as namely, Iohn Shyming, Samuel Dunckon, Peter Fisher, Tho∣mas Neuton, Edward Bedwell, Edmund Day, Iohn Frowar, and many others. VIII. He did in the said yeare, 1636. enjoyn and command, that there should be no Sermons on the
Lords Days in the afternoone or on the weeke dayes at all, without his Licence. And also enjoyned that there should be no Catechising, but onely such questions, and answers as are contained in the Booke of the Common prayer. Not allowing the Ministers to expound or open the points of the same to the poople. He and his under Officers affirming in publike places, that such an exposition might be as ill as a Sermon. And the more to hearten, and confirme the people in prophaning the Lords Day, He enjoyned the Ministers to read publikely in their Churches, a Book published touching Sports on the Lords Day. For not reading whereof, some Ministers were by the command and directions of the said Bishop suspended, viz. Master William Leigh, Mr. Richard Proud, Mr. Ionathan Burr, Mr. Mathew Brumwrigg, Mr. Mott, and divers others, some deprived Master Powell, Mr. Richard Raymond, Mr. Jeremy Borrowes, and some otherwise troubled. By all which, knowledge was suppressed, and ignorance and prophanenesse introduced in that Diocesse. IX. There having beene formerly two kinds of rin∣ging of Bells, and calling people to the Church in that Diocesse (viz.) one kinde, when there were one∣ly Prayers to be read, and another kinde, when there were both Prayers to be read, and a Sermon preached, whereby the people did apply themselves to the Service of God in those places, where both Prayers, and Prea∣ching was to be; He to hinder the people in their good desires of serving of God, and edifying their soules, did in the same yeare 1636. command, and enjoyne that there should be no difference in ringing of Bells to Church when there was a Sermon, and when there was none. X. Whereas many godly Ministers for the preven∣ting of the great sinne in the people of unworthy recei∣ving the holy Communion of the Lords Supper did use to Preach two or three dayes before every Com∣munion,
a preparation Sermon to prepare, and instruct the people in the right and worthy receiving of the Communion, He the said Bishop did in the said yeare, 1636. forbid Ministers, to preach any such prepaati∣on Sermon in that Diocesse, as namely, Master Deve∣reux, Master Swayn, and other Ministers. XI. Whereas all Gods Ordinances are sanctified, and made fruitfull by the blessing of God upon them by Prayer; Hee endeavouring to suppresse the power, and benefit of Prayer in the yeare 1636. enjoyned that no Minister should use any prayer before his Sermon, but move the people to pray onely in the words of the fifty fifth Canon made Anno Dom. 1603. which Canon was not warranted by the Law. And that no prayer should be used before or after the Sermon. And he in his owne person having beene at the Sermon in the Towne of Ipswich when the Preacher did use or make any other prayer, did sit upon his seat without using, or giving any reverence of kneeling, or otherwise, thereby to discountenance such prayer. And he in the said yeere 1636. enjoyned that no prayer should be made in the Pulpit for the sicke, and that such as were prayed for in the reading Deske, should be prayed for onely in the two Collects prescribed for the Visitation of the sicke in private houses. XII. He the more to alienate the peoples heart from hearing of Sermons in the said yeare 1636. comman∣ded, and enjoyned all Ministers to preach constantly in their Hood, and Surplice, a thing not used before in that Diocesse, and much offensive to the people as a scandalous innovation. And the Parishioners of Knatt∣shall wanting a Surplice he did by his Officers in the yeare 1637. injoyn the Churchwardens there, that no prayers should be read in that Church till they had got a Surplice, which they not getting for the space of two Lords dayes after, had no prayers during that time there.
XIII. That during the time of his being Bishop of Norwich, which was about two yeares, and foure moneths, There were for not reading the Service, at the Communion Table set Altarwise, for not reading the Booke of Sports for using conceived prayers before and after Sermons, and for not observing some other illegall innovations by him, and his under-officers, by and upon his directions, and Injunctions, sundry godly painefull Preaching Ministers, that is to say, Master William Powell, Mr. Iohn Carter, Mr. Robert Pek Mr. William Bridge, Mr. William Greene, Mr. Mott, Mr. Richard Raymond, Mr. Thomas Scot, Mr. Greenehill, Mr. Nicholas Beard, Mr. Hudson, Robert Kent, Jeremy Burrow, Mr. Thomas Allen, and others to the number of fifty, were excommunicated, suspended, or deprived and other∣wise censured, and silenced, to the undoing of many of them, their wives, and children, and they could not be absolved without giving promise to conforme to his directions editis & edendis, by meanes whereof some Ministers were enforced to depart this Realme into Holland, and other parts beyond Sea, viz. the said Mr. William Bridge, Mr. Jeremy Burrowes, Mr. Thomas Allen Mr. John Ward, and others of Norwich, to remove into other more peaceable Diocesses, as namely, Mr. Edmund Calamy, Mr. Broome, Mr. Beard and others, and some of them so proscuted, as hath bin suspected to be the cause of their deaths, as namely, Mr. Thmas Scot and others; the terror of which proceedings, hath caused o∣ther Ministers to leave their Cures, and goe away, viz. Mr. William Kirington, M. Thomas Warren, Mr. John Allen and others; & if a stranger preached at the Cure of such person suspended, the Church-wardens permitting such person so to preach, were enjoyned pennance, and otherwise troubled, as namely, the Church-wardens of Snaile-well, and the stranger for preaching, was also therefore molested, viz. Mr. Ash, Mr. Eades, Mr. Man∣ning, and other Ministers.
XIV. That during the time hee was Bishop of the said See of Norwich, he did unlawfully compell the inhabitants of the severall parishes within that Dio∣esse, to raise the floors of the Chancells, of their re∣spective Churches, to raile in their Communion Ta∣bles, to remove the Pewes and Seats, and to make o∣ther alterations in the respective Churches; in the do∣ing whereof the said Inhabitans, were put to great, excessive, and unnecessary charges and expences, a∣mounting in the whole, to the summe of five thou∣sand pounds, and upwards, which said charges and expences, hee did by unlawfull meanes and courses, enforce the said Inhabitants to undergoe; And such of the said Inhabitants, as did not obey the same, hee did vex, trouble, and molest by presentments, Citations, Excommunications, tedious, and frequent Journeyes, and by attendances at the Court of his Chancellor, and other his Officialls, viz. the Church∣wardens of Lin, Ipswich, S. Edmunds Bury, and others. XV. That for not comming up to the Raile, to re∣ceive the holy Communion, kneeling there before the Table Altarwise, for not standing up at the Gospell, and for not observing and performing of his unlawfull Innovations, and Injunctions, many other of his Ma∣jesties subjects, viz. Peter Fisher, Samuel Duncon, Iames Per∣civall, John Armiger, Thomas King and others, have beene by him, his Chancellors, Visitors, Commissaries, and Officialls by his command and Injunctions, much molested, disquieted, and vexed in their estates and consciences by Citations to the Courts, long atten∣dance there, Dismission, Fees, Excommunications, Penances, and other Censures. XVI. That by reason of the rigorous prosecutions, and dealings in the last precedent Articles mentioned, and by reason of the continuall superstitious bowing to, and afore the Table set Altarwise, the suspending, silencing, driving away of the painfull preaching
Ministers, the suppressing, and forbidding of Sermons, and Prayer, the putting downe of Lecturer, the suppressing meanes of knowledge, and salvation, and introducing ignorance, Superstition, and prophane∣nesse, many of his Majesties subjects, to the number of three thousand, many of which used trades of Spin∣ning, Waving, Knitting, and making of Cloth, and Stuffe, Stockings, and other manufactures of Woolls, that is to say, Daniel Sunning, Michael Met∣calfe, John Berant, Nicholas Metcalfe, John Derant, Busby, widdow Mapes, Richard Cocke, John Dicks, Francis Lawes, John Senty, and many others, some of them setting an hundred poore people on worke, have removed them∣selves, their families, and estates into Holland, and other parts beyond the Seas, and there set up and taught the Natives there, the said manufactures, to the great hinde∣rance of trade in this kingdome, & to the impoverish∣ing, and bringing to extreame want, very many who were by those parties formerly set on worke, to the great prejudice of his Majestie and his people. XVII. That he the said Bishop, finding the people to distaste his innovations, hath often in publike, and private speeches declared in the said yeare, 1636. That what he did in the same, was by his Majesties com∣mand, whereby hee contrary to the duty of his place, which he held under his Majestie, being Deane of his Majesties Royall Chappell, and contrary to the duty of a good and loyall subject, endeavoured, to free him∣selfe of blame, and to raise an ill opinion of his Royall Majestie, in the hearts of his loving subjects. XVIII. That hee the said Matthew Wren, being Bishop of Norwich in the said yeare, 1636. in the Tower Church in Ipswich, and other places, did in his owne person, use superstitious and idolatrous actions, and gestures in the administration of the Lords Sup∣per, consecrating the bread and wine, standing at the West-side of the Table with his face to the East, and
is backe towards the people, elevating the Bread and Wine, to be seene over his shoulders bowing low, either to o before them when he after the Elevation, and Consecration, had set them downe on the Table. XIX. That he the more to manifest his Popish af∣fection in the said yeare 1636. caused a Crucifix, that is to say, the figure of Christ upon the Crosse to be en∣graven upon the Episcopall Seale besides the Armes of the See. XX. That he hath chosen and imployed such men to be his Commissioners, Rurall Deanes, and to be his household Chaplaines, whom he knew to be, and stand affected to his innovated courses, and to popish superstition, and to be erroneous, and unsound in judgement and practise, as namely M. Iohn Novel. M. Emond Mapleof, M. Iohn Dunkin. M. Boek, M. Dun, and others. XXI. That he hath very much oppressed divers Pa∣trons of Churches by admitting without any colour of title his owne Chaplaines and others whom he af∣fected into Livings, which became void within his Dioces unjustly enforcing the true and right Patrons to long and chargeable suits to evict such Incumbents, and to recover their owne right, some of which he did against his Priestly word given to the said Patrons or their friends in verbo Sacrdotis not to doe the same. This he did in the case of one M. Rivet. XXII. That he and others in the yeare 1635, sould, granted away the profits of his Primary Visitation for five hundred pounds over and above the charges of the Visitation and for the better benefit of the Farmer, st forth a booke in the yeare 1636 intituled, Articles to be inquired of within the Dioces of Norwich, in the first Visitation of Mathew Lord Bishop of Norwich, consisting of 139 Articles, and wherein are contained the number of eight hundred ninety seven questions, according to all which, the Churchwardens were in∣forced
to present upon paine of perjury. And some Churchwardens, that is to say, Robert Langly, Charles Newton, Richard Hart, William Bull, and Zephany Ford, and others not making presentments accordingly, were cited, molested, and troubled, and injoyned pen∣nance notwithstanding many of the said Articles were ridiculous and impossible. XXIII. That the Churchwardens, and other men sworne at the Visitation, were inforced to have their presentments written by Clarkes specially appointed by such as bought the said Visitation to whom they paid excessive summes of money for the same, some two and twenty shillings, as namely, Richard Hurrell, Iohn Punchard, and others, some more, some lesse, for writing one Presentment, to the grievous oppression of his Majesties poore subjects in his Diocesse. XXIV. Whereas by the Lawes of this Realme no tythes ought to be paid out of the rents of houses, nor is there any custome or usage in the City of Norwich for such payment, yet the said Bishop indeavoured to draw the Citizens, and other inhabitants within the said City against their wills and consents to pay two shillings in the pound in liew of the tithes of houses within the severall Parishes of the said City, unto the Ministers there, of the said respective parishes. And the better to effect this his unjust resolution, he did by false and undue suggestions, in the fourteenth yeare of his Majesties reigne that now is, procure his Majestie to declare under his Highnesse great Seale of England his royall pleasure, That if any person, within the said City shall refuse to pay according to the said rat of two shillings the pound unto the Minister of any Pa∣rish with in the said city, That the same be heard in the Court of Chancery, or in the Consistory of the Bishop of Norwich. And that in such case no prohibition a∣gainst the said Bishop of Norwich, their Chancellors, or Commissaries in the sd Courts of Consistory be
ganting the same upon ight of his Highnesse said Or∣der, shall forthwith grant a consultation to the Mini∣ster, desiring the same with his reasonable costs and charges for the same, which said Order and Decree under the great Seale of England tended to the viola∣tion of the Oathes of the Judges and was devised, con∣trived, and made by the said Bishop. And afterwards by his evill counsels and false surmises he did obtaine his Majesties royall consent thereunto, and by colour of the order aforesaid; and other the doings of the said Bishop, the Citizens and inhabitants of Norwich a∣foresaid, viz. Iohn Collar, Judith Perkeford, and others, have beene inforced to pay the said two shillings in the pound in liew of tythes, or else by suits and other undue meanes beene much molested, and put to great charges and expences, contrary to the Law and Justice. XXV. That he assumed to himselfe an arbitrary power to compell the respective parishioners in the said Diocesse to pay great and excessive wages to Pa∣rish Clarks viz. the Parishioners of Yarmouth, Congham, Tostocke, and others, commanding his of∣ficers, that if any parishioner did refuse to pay such wages, they should certifie him their names, and hee would set them into the High Commission Court for example of them. And that one or two out of Ipswich might be taken for that purpose. And the said Commons by Protestation saving to themselves the libertie of exhibiting at any time here∣after any other accusation or impeachment against the said Matthew Wren late Bishop of Norwich, and now Bishop of Ely, and also of replying to the an∣swer to the said Articles, or any of them, or of of∣fering proofe of the premisses or any other impeach∣ments or accusations that shall be exhibited by them as the case shall (according to the course of Parlia∣ents) require, doe pray that the said Matthew ren
may be called to answer the said severall crimes, and misdeeanours, and receive such condigne punish∣ment as the same shall deserve, and that such further proceedings may be upon every of them had, and used against him, as is agreeable to Law and Justice. Sir THOMAS WIDDRINGTONS SPEECH, At a Conference betweene both Houses, on Tuesday the 20 of Iuly, 1641. At the transmission of the impeachment against Matthew Wren Doctor of Divinity, late Bishop of Norwich, and now Bishop of Ely. My Lords, I am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses now assembled for the Commons in Parliament, to deliver to your Lordships these Articles against the Bishop of Ely. May it please your Lordships first to heare them read. MY Lords, These Articles are dipped in those Co∣lours, in which this Bishop rendred himselfe to the Diocesse of Norwich, they neede no Glosse, nor Varnish. In them you may behold the spirit and disposition of this Bishop, heare the groanes and cries of the people, see a shepheard scattering, (I had almost said) devouring his owne flocke; He that was desi∣red to paint Hercules, thought he had done enough, when he had made a resemblance of the Lyons skin, which he was wont to carry about him as a Trophee of his honour. I will not say that in these you will finde a resem∣blance of the Lyons skin, I am sure you will finde the resemblance of the skins (that is to say,) the tottered and ruin'd fortunes, of poore innocent Lambs, who have extreamely suffered by the violence of this Bishop. In the yeare 1635. this man was created Bishop of Norwich: he is no sooner there, but he marcheth fu∣riously.
In the creation of the world light was one of th first productions, the first visible action of this Bishop after his creation into this See was to put out many burning and shining lights, to suspend diverse able learned and conscientious Ministers he that should have beene the Golden nuffer of these lights, became the extinguisher, and when these are taken away, where shall poore men light their Candles? My Lords, this was not all. He put out lights, and sets up firebrands in their pla∣ces, suspends painfull Ministers, and sets up idle facti∣ous and superstitious Priests, (to use their owne lan∣guage) in their places, yet it is the fortune of these men at this time, like Rivers in the Ocean, to be buri∣ed the in extreme activity of their Diocesan. He made a scourge, not of small cords, but of new Injunctions and numerous Articles tyed about with a strong twist of a most dangerous oath; and with this he whips not out buyers and sellers, but the faithfull dispensers of the word out of their Churches, out of their estates, out of their deere Country. This Noah (if I may so call him without offence) assoone as he entred into the Arke of this Diocesse, he sends, nay forces Doves to fly out of this Arke, and when they returne unto him, with Olive branches in their mouthes of peaceable and humble submissions, he will not receive them into this Arke againe, unlesse like Ravens they would feed upon the Carrion of his new Inventions, they must not have any footing there he stands as a flaming sword to keepe such out of his Diocesse. My Lords, unlesse he had done this, he could never have hoped to have brought that great worke he un∣doubtedly aymed at to any perfection. Whilst the Palladium of Troy stood, that Citie was impregnable, The Greekes had no sooner stollen that away but they instantly won the Citie So then he
first put out the Candles, then was the opportunity to shuffle in his workes of darknesse: h first beas off the Watchmen and seers, then was likely to follow that which the impiety of some was pleased to stile, the piety of the times. This being done, he then begins to dresse out Gods Worship according to his owne fancy, this he expres∣seth in Injunctions and directions, the Minerva's of his owne braine; we find them stiled Regales Injunctiones Domini Episcopi: a stile too sacred to Baptise his brats withall; I shall be bold to cal them Tyrannicas injuncti∣ones Do Episcopi; stories afford not a more barbarous cruelty then to joyne a dead and a living body toge∣ther, the one is miserable, killed with the stinch of the other. This Bi. who like Aaron should have stood between the living & the dead hath joyned to lively ordinances ma∣ny dead & venemous ceremonies, which have no other life, than what they received from the breath of his Injunctions and these are pressed upon the Conscien∣ces even these must be observed as morall lawes. An arbitrary government in the Church is more dangerous, more grievous than that in the state; this is exercised upon men conscienes the most tender parts, and is the very pinacle of yranny, and of all o∣ther most intollerable; tha blow which will hardly be felt by the arme, will put out the eye. (My Lords) in the time of King Rih. 1. one of this mans predecessors, a valiant Bishop went into the ho∣ly warre, this Bishop hath raised a warre at home in his owne Diocesse; a warre not against Saazen, Bar∣barians, Turks or Infidels, but against good & well dis∣posed people. I know not what stile to give this warre: without doubt (my Lords) this was no holy warre. The weapons of this warfare were 28. Injunctions, 9. Articles containing 87. questions. The souldiers were Chancellors, Commissaries, Of∣ficials,
Commissioners, Rurall Deanes, &c. Himselfe commanded in chiefe. The wayes of assault and killing were by excom∣munications, suspensions, deprivations, — I stay here, Mille modis moriur mortales. The Magazin wherein all these were originally hat∣ched and lodged, was the superstitious and malicious brest of this Bishop. This Dioces was the stage where the direfull tra∣gedies of this warre were acted by the space of two yeares and upwards. Thus did he trouble Israel in the time of peace, nay by these he put some of the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel to flight, out of these he raiseth a farme of 500. pounds for his primary Visitation: if it be considered cum pertinentiis, it was not deere, yet well improved; for formerly but 40. pound in the time of some of his pre∣decessors. Will it please your Lordships with patience to cast your eyes upon the modell of this Bishops zeale, piety, and Religion: Let his affection to prayer and prea∣ching speake for all the rest. First, for prayer. It was his hap to finde a prayer which is no prayer, pretended to be prescribed by a Canon which is no Canon, I meane the 55. Canon set forth in the yeare 1603. and no other prayer must be used in his Dioces before Sermons. That monster of conceived prayer (pardon the expression, its not my owne) seemed as bad to him as a spell or charme. It must not be used upon any occasion, without doubt he would never have beene so strait-laced, and severe in this particular, if hee had but dreamed of that strait which a minister a friend of his was put unto by this meanes; the story is short. A Butcher was gored in the belly by an Oxe, the wound was cured, the party de∣sired publike thanksgiving in the Congregation, the Minister finding no forme for that purpose, reads the
Collects for Churching of women. Next for preaching. That hee is most able in this kinde is agreed by all. But that he ever preached him∣selfe in this Diocesse saving once, I never heard affir∣med by any. His next care was that others should not preach too often; if they did, they must be put into his blacke Bill: He changed that golden sentence of (vae mihi si non praedicavero) into vae aliis si praedicaverint; he was so farre from the practise of Saint Paul the great Preacher of the Gentiles, who (we reade) preached till midnight, that there must be no Sermons in the afternoone; there may be, nay there must be sports and pastimes then. And as if he had stood in feare of inarticulate language bells which might foretell a Sermon, hee cannot en∣dure to heare the noise of a Sermon in the toll of a Bell. In a word; he adorned Churches at the charge of other men, and spoyled Pulpits, which ought to have beene the greatest part of his owne charge. (My Lords) you have now presented to your Lord∣ships a brother, nay, one whose place ingaged him to be a father of the Clergy, yet one who like Iosephs bre∣thren hath taken the coat from Ioseph, nay they were forced to fly from him as Ioseph from his Mistris, or else they must taste of his forbidden waters, but in their going away he rents their skirts, nay their whole garments and livelihoods from them, hee hath taken the locks from many Sampsons, and done what he could to put out their eyes, and to make them grinde in the mill of his pernicious and dangerous innovations. He should like Moses have led his flocke. Moses led the children of Israel through the red Sea, this man drives part of his flocke over the Sea, but went not himselfe. Like Nimrod he hath invaded the lawes and liberties of the subject, he hath beene as great a robber as ever
was presented to your Lordships: He hath robbed the King of his Subjects, the greatest glory of Kings; the Kingdome of trade, of tradesmen, the supporters of it. He that deprives the King of one subject, you know his punishment and what shall be the punishment of him who hath robbed the King of so many subjects? 26. H. 3 Wast. 28.In the time of King Henry the third we finde a te∣nant in Dower punished in action of waste, because she had destroyed two rich villeynes, and made them beggers. I appeale to your Lordships, what is his offence who hath committed so much wilfull waste and spoyle, beggered hundreds, not villaines, but free borne subjects. He robbed the soules of that sweet Manna, which is pabulum animarum, the Word of God. (My Lords) I have not yet recounted all his rob∣beries; he hath robbed God of part of his day makes part of that a day of sports; he hath robbed the subjects of their indubitable birth-right, the Lawes of the Kingdome. The citizens of Norwich must pay tythes for the rents of houses; there's no Law in England, nor Cu∣stome in Norwich for it: Nay and that they may be sure to be robbed of justice too, the suite for these tithes must be in his owne Consistory, from whence there must be no appeale, no prohibition. The true Patrons of Churches, they are robbed of their presentations others who had none or small pre∣tence of right are admitted upon this unhallowed maxim, That if hee should institute those who had right, the pretender was without remedy; by this he inverted a fundamentall Law of this Nation, to invest remedilesse rights with unjust possessions. (My Lords) I cannot tell you all, but you can mea∣sure a Lyon by the paw. I am commanded to lay this great malefactour at
your doores, one who hath beene a great oppugner o the life and liberty of Religion, and who set a brand of infamy (to use his own words) upon Ipswich education. In summe, one who is a compleate mirrour of in∣novation, superstition, and oppression he is now in the snare of those Articles, which were the workes of his owne hands. The rod of Moses at a distance was a serpent, it was a rod againe when it was taken into his hands: this Bishop was a serpent, a devouring serpent in the Di∣ocesse of Norwich; your Lordships peradventure will by handling of him make him a rod againe or if not, I doubt not but your Lordships will chastise him with such rods as his crimes shall deserve. (My Lords) I am commanded by the House of Commons to desire your Lordships that this Bishop may be required to make answer to these Articles, and that there may be such proceedings against him as the Course and Justice of Parliament doth admit. You see by this Parlamentary impeachment what a Regulus, Tyrant, and Serpent this Wren hath beene, I shall say no more of him, but leave him to his legall triall. Richard Mountague who next succeeded Bishop Wren, in this Sea, proceeded on in his extravagant courses, and Popish innovations; witnesse his strange Visitation Articles printed for the Diocesse of Norwich; many whereof are directly Popish, others unjust, absurd and strangely ridiculous; as, of what Assise is our Sur∣plesse? What is your Surplesse or Lords Table worth if it were to be sold? Is your Communion Table ray∣led in, so as Cats and Dogges (he might as well have added, Rats and Mice) cannot get through unto it? &c. This Bishop conscious to himselfe of his owne guiltinesse came not up to this last Parliament for feare of questioning, and being complained of for suspending a Lecturer in Norwich without any just
cause, even sitting this Parliament, the House thereup∣on made an Order, that a speciall Committee should be appointed to examine all his offences old and new; the newes whereof so affrighted him, that within few dayes after he died, to ease the Parliament of that la∣bour, of whom see more in Chichester: Since his de∣cease this See hath continued vacant; and the whole Diocesse earnestly desire it may so remaine till Doomesday, having beene almost ruined, and infi∣nitely vexed by their late monstrous Prelates; of whom I shall now take my farewell, and shape my course to Chester Diocesse. The Bishops of Chester. The Bishopricke of Godw. Cata p. 256. Coventry and Lichfield in for∣mer times, had three Episcopall Sees, Chester, Coventry, and Lichfield, whence some of the Bishops in our Chronicles, were formerly called the Bishops of Chester, because they there resided, of some of whose Acts I shall give you a taste: HVGH NOVANT.Hugh Novant Bishop of Chester (whom In his Cata. p. 256. Godwin reckons among the Bishops of Coventry and Lichfield) about the yeare 1188. when King Richard the first was taken prisoner by the Arch-duke of Austria,Roger Hoved. Annal. pars poste p. 734.737.752.776. Speed Hist l 9. p. 541. Matth. Paris Hist p 185 Matth. West. Anno 1198. p. 73. Holish. p. 142.147. Godw. Cat. p. 356.256. joy∣ned with Iohn Earle of Morton the Kings Brother a∣gainst the King, to dispossesse him of his Kingdome; his brother went from this Earle and the French King to the Emperour with Letters, & a message, promising him a great summe of money in their names to detaine the King still in Prison, after the Articles for his re∣lease and ransome were concluded; for which treason and conspiracy after the Kings enlargement, this Bishop was indicted in a Parliament at Notting∣ham, that he being privy to the Kings secrets had re∣volted from him to the King of France and Earle Iohn, his enemies; & adhered to them plotting all mis∣chiefe for the destruction of the King and of the King∣dome, whereupon hee was peremptorily cited to ap∣peare and answer this indictment within 40. dayes,
which he failing to doe, was adjudged to be punished by Ecclesiasticall censures as he was a Bishop, and as an Officer to the King, he was also by the Laity bani∣shed the Realme, and at last enforced to purchase his peace with a Fine of 5000 markes to the King. alaeus Cent. 13. c 31. p 134 Anno 211 90. he having purchased the Monastery of Coventry from the King, came thither with a power of armed men to place in secular Priests in stead of the Monkes, who making resistance against him, he invaded them with forces, chased away some, lamed others of them spoiled their house, burnt their Charters and Evidences, himselfe being wounded (and that in the Church before the High Altar) in this conflict, to the effusion of his blood. Matthew Pa∣ris Hist. Angl. Anno. 1234. p. 381.382.383. Speeds Hist. . 609.610. Godw. Cat. Edit. 2. p. 321. ALEXANDER de SA∣VENSBY. In the yeare of our Lord, 1234. in the Purifica∣tion of St. Mary, King Henry the third came to a confe∣rence at Westminster, wherein he sharpely rebuked cer∣taine Bishops, Et maximè Alexandrū Cestrensem Episopum; & especially Alexander de Savensby Bishop of Chester, that they were over-familiar with the Earle Marshall; Et quòd ipsum de regni solio depellere nitebantur; that they indevoured to depose him from his royall throne. But this Bishop clad in his Pontificalibus, when hee knew such things were objected to him, and also that some had suggested to the King by way of exasperating, that the Bishops favouring the party of the Marshall would create another King, was exceedingly moved, especi∣ally against Roger de Catelu; whereupon hee inconti∣nently excommunicated all those, who imagined any such wickednesse against the King, or maliciously imposed such things upon the Bishops, who were al∣together folicitous of the Kings honours and safety. The innocency of the Bishops being thus manifested and proved, and the sowers of dissention confounded, Catelu held his peace being not free, as it seemed from the Anathema. So the other Bishops who were present in∣tervening, Alexander B. of Chester was pacified, and his spirit quieted, Nimis antè amaricatus, being overmuch im∣bittered
before. Edmond Elect Archbishop of Canterbury with many of his suffragans, were present at this con∣ference, who all condoling at the desolation of the King and Kingdome, came to the King, and as it were with one heart, mind and mouth said. O our Lord the King, let us tell you in the Lord, as your faithfull sub∣jects, that the counsell which you now have and use is neither wholsome nor safe, but cruell and dange∣rous to your selfe, and to the Kingdome of England, to wit, the counsell of Peter Bishop of Winchester (of whom before) Peter de Rivallis and their complices. Fist of all, because they hate and contemne the English Nation calling them Traytors, and causing them all to be so called, and turning your minde away from the love of your owne Nation, and h hearts of your people from you, as appeares in the Marshall, who is the best man of your Land, whom they have perverted and estranged from you by lyes they have scattered a∣broad of him. And through this very counsell, to wit, by the said Bishop, your Father King Iohn first lost the hearts of his people, after that Normandy, afterwards o∣ther lands, and in the end exhausted all his treasure, and almost lost the dominion of England, and had ne∣ver peace afterwards. By the same counsell in our times, the Kingdome was troubled, and the interdict came, and finally, the Kingdome was made tributary, and the Prince of Provinces (alas for griefe) is brought under tribute to ignoble persons, and warres begun, and long protracted, your father died like a banished man, neither in peace of the Kingdome, nor of minde, and so by them he incurred a very perillous death. By the same counsell the Castle of Bedford was detained a∣gainst you, where you lost much treasure, and many valiant men; by meanes whereof in the interim you lost Rochell, to the ignominy of the whole Realme. Item, the now imminent perturbation, perilous to the whole Kingdome, comes to passe through their wicked counsell, because if your people had beene handled ac∣cording
to Justice and the right Judgement (or Law) of the Land this perturbation had not hapned, and you should have had your lands undestroyed & your trea∣sure unexhausted. Likewise we tell you in that allegi∣ance wherby we are obliged to you, that your counsell is not of peace but of trouble to the Land, because they that seeke to thrive by the trouble of the Kingdome, and the disinherison of others, cannot doe it by its peace. Item, because they have your Catles and your forces in their hand as if you ought to distrust your owne people. Item, because they have your Exchequor, and all the greaest Wards, and Escheates in their power, such an expectation pleaseth, and how they will answer you in the end, wee beleeve you shall prove. Item, because by your Seale or Precept with∣out the Seale of Peter de Rivallis, scarce any great busi∣nesse is done in the Realme, as if they accounted you not to be King. Item, because by the same counsell the naturall borne subjects of your Kingdome are expel∣led out of your Court; whence wee have cause to be fearefull both of you and the Kingdome, when as wee see you to be more in their power, than they in yours, as appeares by very many examples. Item, because they have a mayde out of Brittany, and your sister under their power, with many other noble girles, and wo∣men who are marriageable, with Wards and marria∣ges, which they give to their owne creatures and disparage. Item, because they confound and pervert the Law of the Land sworne and confirmed, and ratified, by Excommunication, and Justice likewise; whence it is to be feared least they be Excommunicated, and you also by communicating with them. Item, because they keepe to no man, either their promise, faith, or oath, or writing, neither feare they Excommuni∣cation: whence they who have receded, from the truth are desperate as remaining diffident in feare. Now these things we faithfully relate to you, and wee
counsell, beseech, and admonish you before God and man, that you would remove such counsell from you, and as it is the custome in other Kingdomes, that you governe your Kingdomes, by your faith∣full and sworne men of your Realme. Wee de∣nounce to you in verity, that unlesse you correct these things, within a short time we will proceede against you, and all other contradictors by Ecclesiasticall Censure expecting nothing but the Consecration of our venerable Father, the Elect of Canterbury. These things being thus spoken, the King humbly desired a short time of truce, saying, that hee could not so sodainely remove his counsell untill he had received an account of the treasure committed to him; and so the conference was dissolved, all men departing, with confidence of a concord speedily to be obtained; soone after the Archbishop being consecrated upon the fifth of Aprill, the King with his Nobles being at Westmin∣ster; the Archbishop taking all the Bishops and other Prelates that were present with him, whereof this Bishop of Chester was one, went to the King, and shewed him their counsell touching the imminent de∣solation and danger of the Kingdome, repeating the former inconveniences mentioned in the conference; and denounced to the King expresly, that unlesse hee would speedily reforme his error, and make a peacea∣ble composition with the faithfull men of his King∣dome, he with all the Bishops who were present, would incontinently in ipsum Regem sententiam ferre excommu∣nicationis, pronounce a sentence of Excommunication against the King himselfe, and against all others con∣tradictors of this peace, and perverters of concord. The King hearing this, humbly answered, that hee would obey their counsels in all things. Whereupon a few dayes after understanding his error, moved with repentance, he commanded Peter, Bishop of Win∣chester, to goe to his Bishopricke, to intend the cure
of soules, and that from thenceforth Regiis negotii nequa∣quam interesset; hee should by no meanes intermeddle with the Kings affaires. Holins. p. 313. Gdw. p. 260. 261 Matth. West. Anno. 1301. p. 419. Walsingh. Hist. Angl. p. 68. Speeds Hist. l. 9. p. 667. Walter de Langton Bishop of Chester lived in great authority,WALTER de LANGTON under King Edward the first, who favoured him much; but his sonne Edward the second molested & disgraced him all that eyer he might. His Fatherdy∣ing in the North country, he ommanded this Bishop to conduct his corps up to London: and when hee had done so, for reward of his paines, hee caused Sir Iohn Felton Constable of the Tower to arrest him, seased upon all his goods, and imprisoned him first, in the Tower, then in the Castle of Wallingford, of which imprisonment he was not released in two yeares after. In his fathers life time, he had often reprehended the young Prince for his insolent and dissolute behaviour, which good admonitions he taking in evill part, wronged and dis∣graced him many wayes, namely one time, he brak downe his Parkes, spoyled and drove away his deare, &c. The Bishop complained of this outrage unto the King his Father, who being greatly displeased there∣with, committed the Prince his sonne for certaine dayes. And this was the cause of the grudge between the yong King and him, for which he sent him from Castle to Castle as Prisoner, seised his Lands & Tenements in∣to his own hands, gave his moveables to Pierce Gaviston, and his Lord Treasurership to Walter Reignold. About the same time (or I thinke a little sooner, to wit, in the yeare 101.) hee was accused of certaine hainous crimes before the Pope, and compelled to answer the accusation at Rome in his owne person. Though the proofes brought against him, were either none, or very slender, yet well knowing whom they had in hand (Noverant ipsum prae multis bovem valde pinguem, saith Matth. Westminster) they were content to detaine him there so long, as it forced him to spend an infinite deale of mony & yet was never a whit the nearer atlast: for the Pope remitted the hearing of the cause to the Archbishop o Canterbury and yet reserved the determi∣nation of the ame unto himself at last. The tempests of
these troubles being over-blowne, the rest of his time he lived (for ought I finde) quietly, and being happily dismissed from the Court, attended onely the government of his charge. This Bishop setling his See towards his later end at Litchfield, I finde no mention at all of any Bishops of Chester after him, till towards the later end of King Henry the eight his reigne, Godwin. p. 545. who erected a new Bishops See at Chester, distinct from that of Coventry and Leichfield, and subjected it to the province of Yorke, by Act of Parlia∣ment, to wit, 33. Hen. 8. c. 30. IOHN BIRD. See Godw. Catalog. p. 545. Iohn Byrd, the first Bishop of this new erected See, was deprived in Queene Maries dayes, for being married. CVTBERT SCOT. Cutbert Scot the third Bishop of this Diocesse in the beginning of Queene Elizabeths dayes was Godw. Cat. p. 545. displaced, and for his disobedience committed to the Fleet: whence escaping he fled into Loraine, and there died. To passe by the other Prelates of this See, I shall give you onely a touch of Iohn Brigdman the present Bishop of it.IOHN BRIDGMAN. This man in his wives life time, seemed to be a favowrer of godly Ministers, but since her decease, he hath turned a prosecutor, if not a persecutor of them, uspending and driving many of them out of his Dio∣cesse, especially in Lancashire amidst the Papists where was greates neede of them, to pleasure the now Archbishop of Canterbury, whose great creature and intelligencer he hath been of late yeares: he See a new Dis∣covery of the Prelates Tyrany, p. 93. to. 109.218 to 226. caused di∣vers of the city of Chester to be Pursevanted & Articled against in the High Commission Court at Yorke, and there fined, censured, and almost ruined in their estates, onely for visiting Mr. Prynne at Chester in his passage to Carnarvan, whose Pictures he caused to be publickly defaced, and the frames of them to be openly burnt at the high Crosse in Chester before the Major and his brethren, in a most disgracefull manner; and caused divers of Chester to make a publike impious Recanta∣tion both in the Cathedrall Church and Towne Hall, at Chester, onely for visiting Mr. Prynne at his being there, with the license of his Keepers, who had no war∣rant,
nor authority to keepe any from him: in all which proceedings (as appeares by his owne letters) this Bishop was both the Informer, Accuser, Director, and Judge in some sort. To comply with the times, he erected divers stone Altars in his Diocesse, one in the Cathedrall at Chester used in times of Popery, which hee caused to be digged up out of the ground where it was formerly buried, which Altar since this Parli∣ament for feare of questioning he hath caused to be taken downe and re-enterred: He ordered all the Mi∣nisters in Chester, not onely to read prayers but like∣wise to preah in their Hoods and Surplesses, for which there is neither Law nor Canon, but his Lordly pleasure: he commanded all Sermons there, to end before nine of the clock in the morning, because the Major & Alderman should dance attendance on his Highnesse at the Cathedrall, to which end he emplored the ayde of the Archbishop of Yorke, causing some to be troubled for not comming to the Cathedrall, after they had beene at their owne parish Churches. Hee was a great stickler in the late warre against the Scots, a vehement presser of the loane on the Clergy to maintaine it, threatning to impose armes on those who refused it. He greatly promoted the new Canons, and late &c. Oath which he both tooke, and enforced eagerly on his Clergy. He hath divers great impro∣priations of good value, where he alloweth little or no maintenance at all to finde either a reading Curate or Preaching Minister; he hath caused divers to be ex∣communicated and vexed in his Consistory, for go∣ing to heare Sermons abroad when they had none at home. If any desire to know more of his Episcopall vertues, I shall referre them, to a Booke intituled, P. 93. to 109.18. to 226. A New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny, and to the Petiti∣ons of the inhabitants of Cheshire, Chester, Lancashire, Wiggon, and others, already exhibited or ready to be preferred to the High Court of Parliament against him, and so passe to the Bishops of Coventry and Lich∣field, out of which this Bishoppricke of Chester was de∣rived.
The Bishops of Coventry and Lichfield. Of the first Bishops of this See, there is little extant in our stories, but onely their names, with the time of their Conecrations and deathes; and the Acts of some others of them, I have formerly related in Chester, so as I shall be very briefe in those who remaine. ROGER de CLINTON.Roger de Clinton the 36. Bishop of Coventry and Lich∣field, about the yeare 1147 tooke upon him the Crosse, went to Ierusalem to fight against the Saracens,Godw. p. 255. and died at Antioch Aprill 16. 1148. RICHARD PCHE.Richard Peche, sonne unto Rober Peche, Archdeaon of Co∣ventry in the yeare,Godw. p. 255. 1162. succeeded him in this Bishop¦pricke: of this Archdeacon and Bishop perchance it was that I reade this merry passage in Itiner. l. 2. c. 13. Giraldus Cambrensis & in Camdens Brittannia p. 604. who relates it out of him. It hapned that a certaine Iew travelling towards Shrewsbury with the Archdeacon of Malpas (in Cheshire) whose surname was Peche, that is, Sinne, and a Deane named Devill; when he heard by chance the Arch∣deacon telling, that his Archdeaconry began at a place called Ill-street, and reached as far as to Malpas towards Chester, he considering and understanding with all, as well the Archdeacons surname as the Deanes, came out with this merry and pleasant conceit: would it not be a wonder (quot he) and my fortune very good, if ever I get safe againe out of this country, where Sinne is the Archdeacon, and the Divell is the Deane, where the entry into the Archdeaconry is Ill-streete, and the go∣ing forth of it Malpas? GEOFFRY BLITHE.Geoffery Blithe Bishop of this See, Anno Dom. 1523. was attached for high Treason. Godw. p. 265.And to mention no more, Robert Wright the present Bishop of this Diocesse set up a goodly Crucifix in a frame,ROBERT WRIGHT. with the pictures of men and women devoutly praying to it, in the Cathedrall at Litchfield, over the Altar there: for oppoing whereof he caused the Lady Davis to be laid in edlam; promoted the late Innova∣tions, and had a great hand n composing and impo∣sing the late Canons, Oath, Benevolence and Lone, for which he stands now impeached by the Commons in Parliament, to whose Censure I remit him.
CHAP. VI. Comprising the Treasons, Conspiracies, Se∣ditions, Contumacies, and Disloyalties, of the Bishops of Rochester, St. Da∣vids, Landaffe, Bangor, Asaph, Bath and Wells: With a short touch of the Bishops of Oxford, Bristol, Peter∣burgh, and Glocester. Rochester. PVTTA the sixth Bishop of Rochester,Putta. waxing weary of his Bishopricke,Godw. p. 392.393. Malmesbur. de Gestis Pontif. Angliae. c. 1. p. 231. was halfe determined to leave it, when Edilred King of Mercia, upon some displeasure concei∣ved against him, burning his Church and City, resolved and setled him in that de∣termination. So hee went into Mercia, where he accepted the Charge of a Parish Church under Saxulf Bishop there, mending his living by teaching a singing Schoole, (for he was a great and cunning Musitian.) In that kinde of life hee spent the rest of his time, and could never abide to heare of returning to his Bishopricke. Malmesbury gives this verdict of him, Quantum idoneus oti Eccleiastico, tantm hebes & segnis, forensi negotio: Anno 983.
(As Matth. Westminster,Matth. Westm. Ann. 983. pag. 379. Speed. pag. 414. Antiq. Ec∣cles. Brit. 1. Malmesb. de Ge∣stis Regum Angl. l. 2. c. 10. p. 62. Godwin. p. 394. and others report) King Ethelrede be∣ieged GodwinGodwin. the 27. Bishop of Rochester in his owne City a long time, and being warned by Saint Dunstane, he should take heed least he provoked against him Saint Andrew, Patron of that Church, yet he would not depart thence till he had wrung from the Bishop 100. l. Dunstan wondring thereat, sent this message to the King: Because thou hast preferred silver before God, mony before an Apostle, and covetousnesse before me, violent mis∣chiefes shall come upon thee, which the Lord hath spoken: Yet for all this he continued his siege, and would not depart thence with∣out the Bishops submission, and unlesse he would likewise pay him an hundred pounds. Gilbert de Glanuyll.Gilbert de Glanuyll was consecrated Bishop of this See Septem. 29. 1185. Godwin. Cat. p. 397.398. Betweene this man nd his Monkes of Rohester was long and continuall debate, by occasion whereof, he tooke away from them all their moveable goods, all the ornaments of their Church, their writings and evidences; yea, and a great part of their Lands, Possessions, and Priviledges: wanting mony to follow their suits against him, they were forced to coyne the silver of Saint Paulines shryne into mony. These controversies were ended no otherwise then by his death, which happened Iune 24. 1214. But their hatred against him was so farre from dying with him, as they would afford him no manner of obsequies, but buried him most obscurely, or rather basely, without either ringing, singing, or any other manner of solemnity. Laurentius de Sancto Martino.Laurentius de Sancto Martino, the 41. Bishop of this See, got a dispensaton from the Pope to hold all his forer iings, in ommendam with this Bishopricke.Matth. Pa. Hist. Angl. pag. 893.917. God∣win. pag. 399. And yet alledging that his Bishopricke was the poorest of Egland, much meaner then Carlile, and therefore his living yet unable to maintaine the pot of a Bishop; he never ceased till he had extorted from the Clergy of his Dioes, a grant of a fft part of all their Spirituall livings for five yeares, and appropriated unto his See for ever the Parsonage of riendsbury. oniface the Archbishop of Canter∣bury used this man hardly, invading his possessions, and vio∣lenly taking from him without all right, divers things of old belonging o his Bishopricke. Hee complained unto the King, nto whose Qeene Boniface was Uncle. The King answered him in plaine , e new e should offend his wife much, if e
should become a flickler betweene them, wishing him to seeke some other remedy; and if by importunity he inforced him to inter∣pose his authority, he should doe him more hurt then good; which Matth. aris thus expresseth. Diebus sab isdem, Achi∣piscopus Cantuariensis Boniacius, Ecclesiam Roffensem prgrvn, ejus{que} invadens possessiones, tntam de facto suo oam incurri vitupe∣i, u Ecclesia, c esse debet defensv, per eum dicatur vxari. Epis∣opus autem Roffensis, cum Domino Regi uus ltori lachrymabilir super tanta injuria conquerereur, Rex demisso vultur spondit, Non possum eum ectere ad jutitiam vel humilitatem, e ipsum tam genero∣sum & genus suum àm magnificm, praecipue Reginam, offena vel contristem. Hereupon he sought unto the Pope, but he was so neere a neighbor to the Dke of Savy the Archbishops Brother, as perceiving quickly little good was to be done there, he was faine to take patience for an amends, and so sit him downe; yet at last he obtained a citation from the Pope against the Arch∣bishop, which Matthew Paris thus expresseth. Interim Episco∣pus Roffensis, qui intllerabils ab Archipiscopo Cantuarieni injurias sustinuerat, querimonias lachyabiles coram tota curia Romana repo∣suit, & repositas continuvit, Cumque causa sua cond gam expostu∣lsst ultionem, culpa enim gravis extitit, post mults admonitiones tan∣dem ad Regem factas, qui dicto Archiepiscopo cornua praestitit, & au∣aci delinquendi, meritidem Archiepiscopus citari, ut pesonaliter ompareret coram Papa, de ibi biciendis responsurus & de illatis inju∣riis & damnis stisfactrs. Iohn Fisher,Iohn Fisher. the 65. Bishop of Rochester was grievously questi∣oned in Parliament in King Henry 8. his dayes by the house of Commons for saying,Holnsh. p. 936.937. Hall. An. 25. H. 8. F. 218. b. Speed p. 1029.1046. Godwin. p. 402. Bal Cent. 8. c. 68.100. Fox Acts and Mou∣ments Edit. 1610. p. 975.976 that all their doings were for lack of faith; Of which you may see more in Canterbury Part. 1. p. 12.126. after which he gave credit, and countenance to the forgd visi∣ons and Revelations of lizabeth Barton, tending to the reproach, perill and destruction of the Kings person, honour, fame and dignity, for whicsh he with others was afterwards condemned of high treason, and executed Not long after, this Bishop for de∣nying to acknowledge the Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiasticall matters, was arraigned and condemned for high Treason, and executed on Tower Hill Iune 22. 1535. being made Cardinall about a month before. His head was set on London Bridge, and his body buried in Barking Churchyard He was a great perecu∣tor of Gods faithfull ministers, servants, Gospell, and had this
deserved reward of his disloyalty both to God and his Sove∣raigne. Not to mention all the late Bishops of this See, many of whom were notorious in their generations; Doctor Bols,Dr. ol. the last but one, was a very active talkative man in the high Commission, till he wearied most of his Colleagues there, who commanded him to his Bishoprick; where he was very idustrious in setting up popish ceremonies, Innovations, and in promoting the Booke of ports in the Lords day, breathing out nothing but threats and suspensions against those ministers, who out of conscience refused to publish t in proper person in their Churches; whom he intending to suspend and silence in his visitation, it pleased God, as he was riding towards it, to silence them, that himselfe was suddenly surprised with a dead palsie, which made him speechles for a long season; by means whereof the ministers es∣caped for that season; and he (never able to recover his pri∣tine health) dyed no ong after, leaving a successor behind him, who followeth his foot-steps, had a vote in compiling of the New Canons, and Oath, which he inforced; and hath beene a great fomenter of the late Scotish warres, and differences, be∣ing now one of those Prelates impeached in Parliament by the Commons. But of those Prelates enough. I must now turne a∣bout my rudder, and take a short survey of our Wlch Bishops, beginning with those of Saint Davids, once the See Godwins Catalogue. p. 416 Metropolianes of all that Country, and of some of our English Bishops too. Saint Davids. Guido de Mo∣na. Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 419. Ypodig∣ma Neustriae. An. 1407. p: 172. Godw. p. 512.GVido de Mona, the 62 Bishop of Saint Davids, appointed Treasurer by Richard the 2. in the 21. yeare of his raigne, revolting to Henry the fourth from his old Master, was made his Treasurer likewise in the 4. yeare of his raigne, but continued fo a very short time. This Bishop (saith Walsingham) while he lived was a cause of much mischiefe to the Realme; as others of his succes∣sors have beene whom I pretermit. Landaffe. Oudotius. Spelm. Concil. Tom. 1. p. 62. See Godwins. Catalogue Edit. 2. p. 517.518.519.OVdotius the third Bishop of Landaffe Anno 560. assembled a Synod of a great part of his Clergy and three Abbots,
and in full Synod excommunicated his Soveraigne Mouice King of Glamorgan for laying Cynetu, and breaking the Cov∣nant, which he had made in his presence upon the Altar of Peter the Aposte, and of Saint Dubricius, and Telianus, and then layed their Crosses to the earth, and likewise intermit∣ted Baptisme throughout his Country.  Communio Christiaa, and the Christian Communalty accursed the King and his pro∣geny, the Synod confirming it, and saying; Let his dayes be few, and le his childen be Orphns, and his wife a wddow. Whereup∣on the King with all his Country remained for two yeares space & more, under the said excommunication: after which this King unable any longer to sustaine such a long lasting great excom∣munication, seeing the perdition of his owne soule, and damna∣tion of his kingdome, went to Landaffe, and craved pardon of Saint Oudotius, and powring out teares, with his head bowed downe, in the presence of three Abbots, this Bishop imposed the yoake of pennance upon him, according to the quality and quantity of his offence, commending to him, that hee should three manner of wayes amend his fault with God, and the Church of Landaffe; to wit, with fasting, Prayer, and Almes; where∣upon this King for the redemption of his owne Soule, and for the Soule of Synetu, gave foure Villages to the Church of Lan∣dffe, the names whereof are mentioned in that Synod. Not long after another Synod was assembled by the same Bishop for the pennance and absolution of Spelm. oncil. Tom. 1 p. 63. King Morant, who slew Frioc his Vncle, contrary to his oath, they two having solemnely vowed that if one them should either kill or deceive the other, that he would not redeeme himselfe, either with Lands or money, but would relinquish his Kingdome, & spen his whole life in pilgrimage. This K. confessing his fault before the Bishop and his Synod, and craving pardon both for his perjury and Homicide the whole Synod decreed, (least the Kingdome should be destitute of a King, and of the pote∣cting buckler of their naturall Lord) that he should redeeme his Pilgrimage, and xpite his homicide, and perjury with fastings prayers and Almes: which he swearing to doe, they injoyned pennance to him, according to his offence, and his quality greatnesse and power; whereupon he was restored to Christian Communion, of which hee was formerly deprived by the Bishp, and gave three Churches with other particulars to the Church of Lndffe. After this, a Spaelmann Concil. Tom. 1. p. 63.64. Godwins Catalogue. Edit. 2. p. 521. third Synod was held under the same
Bishop at Landff, wherein Guidneth who slew his brother Mer∣cion in a contestation for the kingdome, was excommunicated by this Bishop & Synod, with crosses laid downe to the ground, and Cymbals overturned under which excommunication he re∣mained three whole yeares without any Communion of Christi∣ans. Afer three yeares expired, he asked pardon of the Bish; who granting him remission, sent him in Pilgrimage to the Archbishop of Dole in Britany, where he promised to continue a yeares space in exile; but returning thence within the yeare this Bishop refused to absolve him, and put him under the first excommunication, because he performed not his first penance. But this Bishop dying within a yeare after, and Berthguin succee∣ding him, king Morcant and Guadnorh with many elders, went to Landaffe, and requested this new Bishop with one mouh, (see∣ing he crosses yet laid downe upon the ground, together with the reliques and Cymbals) that he would absolve Gudnorth from his excommunication, by lifting up the Croses, and Saints re∣liques from the earth. After which Guednorth promising yet more to amend his life with fasting, prayer, and Almes, and shedding teares with great devotion, was thereupon absolved by the Bishop, who enjoyned him plenary penance, according to the manner of his fault: he afterwards mindfull of the divine saying, as water extinguisheth fire, so alms doth sinne, gave three Manors with all their liberties & appurtenances to the Church of Landaffe. By this kind of indirect meanes, this Church got so much lands, that had it now but the tenth part thereof, Catalogue Edit. 2. p. 517.518.519.520 God∣win assures us, it would be one of the wealthiest Churches in Christen∣dome. Gurcan.Tudur King of Brechiniau (or Brecknck) sonne of Rese slew Elgistill,Godwins Cata∣logue Edit. 2 p. 320. Spelman∣ni Concil. Tom. 1. p, 381.382. another King of that Country treacherously, after  league solemnly sworne betweene them not to lye in waite one for another, and to maintaine a firme peace without deceit: hereupon Gurcan the tenth Bishop of Landaffe, with his Cleargy excommunicated him for his perjury and murther, by uncove∣ring the Altars of God, casting the crosses and reliques to the ground, and depriving him of all Christian communion: where∣upon Tedur unable to undergoe this malediction and rigour of justice, with a contrite heart, and teares powred out craved par∣don, and submitted himselfe to the penance imposed on him according to his quality and greatnesse, recompencing his
wickednesse with Almes, prayer, and fasting, and for his abso∣lution he gave this Bishop Lan. Michl, with all its lands, libr∣ties and Commons. Berthgwin. Splmann Con. Tom. 1. p. 382.383. King Clori and Lndguallaun made a solemne league, before Berthgwin the 14. Bishop of Landaffe, and sware to mainaine fime peace betweene them in all things, wthout fraud or dammge. And if either of them violated it, he was to leave his kingdome, and to goe on Plgrimage all his life neither should he redeeme himselfe, nor his kingdome with gold, nor silver; Ater which King Clotri breaking the league, slew the other treacherously, committing both homicide and prjury. Which his Bshop hearing of, assembled a Synode of his Clergy at Landaff, and in a full Synod, excommunicated the King with al his progeny and kingdome, by uncovering Gods Altars, and casting downe the crosses to the earth, and left the Country without Bptisme and the communion. Whereupon the K. unable to endure so great an excommunication, with great devotion submitted him∣selfe to the Bishop, left his Kingdome, went on Pilgrimage into forraigne parts; from whence returning into his County, after a long pace, by he intercession of King Morcant he obtained ab∣solution from the Bishop, to whose enjoyned penance he submit∣ted; & thereupon he gave Helic, with other lands to the Bshop and his successors in the Church of Landaffe. In this Bshops time Spelman. Ibid. & Godwins Ct. Edit. 2. p. 521. Gurcan the sonne of Guinn kept his owne Stepmother; for which the Bishop excommunicated him, in such manner a he did Clori, and upon his penance and absolution, the Bishop wrsted from him a pee of land called Marchinis. In the dayes of Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 523. Spelmanni Con. Tom. 1. p. 383.384. CercenhirCercenhir the 18. Bishp of Landff Houel King of Glevissig contrary to his solemne oath, circumvented, and slew Gallun the sonne of Cidrich, whereupon the Bshop sum∣moning a Synode excommunicated him (in such sort, as the for∣mer Kings were) almost a yeares space; at which time hee coming bare foot to the Bishop, implored absolution with many teares, which he obtaining after publike pennance enjoyned, gave three Mannors to the Bishop and his Church. After which this Bishop excommunicated Coubius for murthering Cmauc con∣trary to his solemne oath, and that in a publike Synode; who upon his pennance and absolution gave Guliple to his Church. Aquod the sonne of ouf falling out with this Bishop, drave him and his men into the Church of Landaffe: For which hee was
excommunicated by him, and to bee absolved was glad to give Pennoun, with the Church of Lantill and certaine other Lands. Gulfridus. Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 523. Spel∣manni Concil. p. 385. Loumarch the sonne of Carguocaun was excommunicated by Gulfridus the 20 Bishop of this See in a full Synod, for violating certaine priviledges, and invading the goods of his Church; but upon his humble submission on his knees to the Bishop with many teares, and his offer to acknowledge his offence, and to suffer any punishment the Bishop would impose upon him: The Bishop upon restitution of all the goods he had taken, and the gift of Treficarn pont, absolved him. Assac the sonne of Mrchiud having treacherously slaine one Gulayguni, being ex∣communicated for it by this Bishop, gave Segan to his Church, to expiate the murther, and for the soule of the slaine. Nudde.Slferth, Hegoi, and Arguistil, the sonnes of Belli, fell at va∣riance in words with Nudd the 21 Bishop of this See,Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 523. and pro∣ceeding at last from words to blowes, committed divers out∣rages upon his Land and Family; but quickly remembring themselves, fearing excommunication, they asked pardon, and submitted themselves to pennance. After which performed, they gave unto the Church for further confirmation of their unfeigned repentance, the territory of Iulius and Aaron. Civeilliauc.King Brochvaile the sonne of Mouric, and his Family fell at variance with Civeilliauc the 22 Bishop of Landaffe and his Fa∣mily,Spel. Concil. Tom. 1. p. 385.386. to whom they offered some injury, wherewith the Bi∣shop being moved, assembled all his Clergy together, even to the inferiour degrees, intending to excommunicate Brochvaile and all his family (as forfeited to him, and execrable to God) before all the people in a full Synod, for this injury: which Brochvaile hearing of, sought for pardon and remission, which he could not obtaine from the Bishop upon any termes, unlesse he would suffer a Canonicall judgement. The cause being dis∣cussed, the Bishop was adjudged to receive from him an Image of his face both in length and breadth in pure gold, and that amends should be made by him to the condigne honour of his Family and Nobility of his parentage which sentence Borch∣vaile was forced to redeeme, by giving the Towne of Tref-Peren, with six other pieces of Land to the Bishop and his Church. Pater.One Pater being the 25 Bishop of this See, Anno 955.Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 524.525. A cer∣taine Country fellow meeting a Deacon with a sword by his
side, asked him, what a Coward should doe with Weapons, and stri∣ving to take away the sword, cut the Deacons finger, whereupon the Deacon killed him; and when he had done, tooke Sanctuary in the Church of Saint Iarman and Saint Febrie. Thereby sixe of King Gurialls houshould (although there wanted not many that sought to defend the man, in regard of the place) he was slaine even at the very Altar of the Church. These sixe men were de∣livered at the City of Gwentonia (now Caerwent) into the hands of Pater the Bishop, who kept them in straight prison sixe moneths, and then forced them to give all their Lands and Livings to Landaffe, besides seven pound of silver to the Church, which they had polluted. Mouric King of Glamorgan was excommunicated by Ioseph the 28 Bishop of this Diocesse,Joseph. for putting out the eyes of Etgum in a time of truce;Godwin. Edit. 2. pag. 527. to have his absolution he gave to the Bishop Pani∣prise. Another time he was faine to give Gulich Fabrus and foure pound of silver unto the Bishop, beside other great gifts to the Canons upon this occasion: Hee had broken the Sanctuary of the Church of Landaffe, by taking away thence violently the wife of his enemy, and hurting some of the Bishops servants: For so doing he was publiquely excommunicated by the Bishop in a Synod, and by these gifts made way to obtaine his ab∣solution. Caratuc one of his company in the last recited action, was forced to give Henriu in Wencia. Riugallan the sonne of Rum being excommunicate for an as∣sault made upon the Bishop and his men, gave Riu Drein and the third part of the Wood of Yuisperthan, to be absolved. Cutguallam the sonne of Guriat strooke one in the Consistory in the presence of Ioseph the Bishop, who kept him the said Catguallam in prison till he had made amends for that fault, by giving the Church of Saint Brides. Calgucam the King of Morganuc and his family was solemnly excommunicated by Herewald the 29 Bishop of Landaffe,Herewald. in a Synod of all his Clergy;Spelmanni Concil. Tom. 1. pag. 625.626. Godwin. Edit. 2. pag. 528. who thereupon cast downe all the Crosses and Reliques to the ground, overturned their Bells, and stopped up all the doores of the Churches with thornes, so as they continued for a long time without divine service, and pastors day and night; the King and his Family in the meane time being sequestred from the society of all the faithfull, and
all, because one of the Kings followers being drunke, had laid violent hands upon Bathutis the Bishops Physitian and Kinsman on Christmas day, Anno 1056. Whereupon the King, though innocent, upon his submission to the Bishop, to obtaine his absolution, was enfrced to give Henringumna, in the presence of all the Clergy & people, to this Bishop and his successors, free from all secular & regal services. After which one Gistni excom∣municated for a rape committed by a Nephew and follower of his upon a Virgin, whom he tooke violently out of the Church of Landaffe, was forced to give Milne to the Bishop and his Successors to obtaine absolution. By these instances wee may partly discerne by what undue meanes Bishops at first obtained their large Temporalties and Revenues, even by enforcing Kings and great persons to buy out and expiate their offences by endowing their Sees with Lands and Manors, without which they could not purchase their absolution: and we likewise learn hence that Bishops in those dayes excommunicated none but in a Synod, with the suffrage of all their Clergy. Edmund de Bromfeild. Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 539. Edmund de Bromfeild the 48. Bishop of Landaffe, for pro∣curing and bringing in the Popes Bulls of Provision to make him Abbot of Bury, contrary to his owne expresse Oath, and the Statutes of the Realme, was for this his contempt and disobe∣dience committed to the Tower by King Richard the second, where he lay prisoner a long time; neither durst the Pope yeeld him any assistance, to justifie his owne Bull. The late Bishops of this See (as Feild and others) have beene so notoriously peccant, that I need not mention them, wherefore I shall passe on to the Bishops of Bangor. Bishops of Bangor. Mauritius. Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 536. MAuritius the third Bishop of Bangor most undutifully refused a long time to doe homage to the King of England for his Bishopricke held of him, but at last was perswa∣ded to doe it. Robert Shrewsbury.Robert of Shrewsbury joyning with Leolin Prince of Wales, a∣gainst King Iohn his Soveraigne, was taken prisoner by the King in his owne Cathedrall Church,Godw. Edit. 2. pag. 536. and ransomed for 200. hawkes; after this dying, he was buried, not in the Church-yard, but in the market place of Shrewsbury, by his owne appointment.
RichardRichard. the 10. Bishop of Bangor excommunicated David ap Lhewelin,Matth. Paris. p. 551.715. Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 537.547. Prince of Wales, for that contrary to his Oth he took his Brother Gryffith prisoner, who was content upon the Bi∣shops word to goe to his Brother: and when he saw that course would not reforme him, he never lin complaining, first to the King of England, then to the Pope, that he so incensed them, as the one excommunicated him, the other made warre upon him untill he delivered his said Brother into the Kings hands, who caused him to be kept in the Tower of London, till he endeavo∣ring there to escape, by misfortune brake his necke. The Prince hereupon so wasted the Bishopricke, that in the yeare 1248. this Bishop and the Bishop of Saint Asaph were forced to beg their bread. Whereupon this Bishop came to the Abbot of Saint Albanes, desiring that the Bosome of Mercy might be opened unto his poverty, and he abiding there untill his Bishopricke wasted and spoiled with continuall warre, should recover some better estate, might together with his Chaplaine there breath and rest themselves from those calamities wherewith they had beene long afflicted, in like sort as heretofore the Bishop of Hereford had done, who was honorably entertained there almost the space of twenty yeares. Godwin. Edit. 2. pag. 538.539. Richard Young the 22. Bishop of Bangor,Richard Young. for some contempt and disobedience against the King, and confederating (as is likely) with that Rebell Owen Glendor, was imprisoned two or three yeares, till the Pope, Anno 1404. translated him to Ro∣chester by his Bull. LewisLewis. the 23. Bishop of Bangor Anno. 1408. joyned with the Earle of Northumberland,Walsingham. Hist. Angl. Ann. 1408. pag. 419. Ypodigma Neust. Anno 1408. p. 172. Godw. Edit. 2. p. 539. Holinsh. pag. 1408. the Lord Bardolfe and others, in open Rebellion against King Henry the fourth. The Earle was slaine in battell in the field, the Lord Bardolfe mortally wounded, and their heads set upon London Bridge. The Bishop was likewise taken prisoner in the battell, but obtained pardon from the King, because he had no Armes upon him when he was taken, though the incendiary of the other two, and as great a Traytor as they; but the Abbot of Hayles was hanged, because hee had borne Armes in that Rebellion. So happy are Traytorly and Rebellious Bishops, as to scape scot free in their Treasons and Rebellions, when all other sorts of men have execution done upon them. Arthur Bulkly Bishop of Bangor,Arthur Bulkly. and Iohn Lewis Vicar of
Llain-geynwina,Trinity. 36. H. 8. Rt. 9. Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 540. were attainted in a Praemunire at the prosecution of William Whorewood the Kings Attorney, for suing for the right of Patronage and Tithes of the said Church, and for se∣verall summes of money due on bond for Tithes, in this Bi∣shops Ecclesiasticall Court, which had no cognisance of them being temporall, and belonging only to the Kings Civill Courts, to the derogation of the imperiall Jurisdiction of the King and his Crowne, and subversion of the Lawes and Statutes of the Realme. And hereupon judgement was given against them according to the Statute. This Bishop sold away five faire Bells out of the Steeple of his Cathedrall Church, which mad the Musicke there. Should I rip up the scandalous lives and Actions of some of the late Pilates of this See, one of whom published The Practise of Piety, (which some say he never writ) though neither he nor any of his successors, did ever much practice it in their lives, or should I recite the vile complaints of late against one of them in 2 or 3 late Parliaments, I should be over tedious, and pollute my paper with such beastly actions, as would cause chast eyes to blush, and turne their aspect from them: Wherefore I shall passe them over in silence, (he being gone to answer them before the supreame tribunall) informing you only, that he imposed Ar∣mies upon his Clergy, and provided an Armory for them to be kept in within his Cathedrall at Bango: And so I post on to Assaph Diocesse. Saint Assaph. ohn Trevaur. Wals. Hist. Angl. Anno 1399. 1404. p. 398.399.412.413. Ypodig. Neustriae Anno. 1404. p. 164. Godwin. Edit 2 pag. 554. Speed. Hist. pag. 758.763. Holinsh. p. 503.504.505.506.507.508.IOhn Trevaur Bishop of Saint Assaph pronounced the sen∣tence for deposing King Richard the second, in which in∣strument he is first named, as appeares by this ensuing Copy of it. In the Name of God, Amen. We Iohn Bishop of Saint Assaph, chosen and deputed speciall Commissaries by the three states of this pre∣sent Parliament representing the whole body of the Realme, for all such matters by the said estates to us committed; Wee understanding and considering the manifold crimes, hurts, and harmes done by Richard King of England, and misgovernance of the same by a long time, to the great decay of the said Land, and utter ruine of the same shortly to have beene, had not the speciall grace of our God thereto put the sooner remedy; And also further more adverting, that the said King Richard
by acknowledging his owne insufficiency, hath of his owne meere vo∣luntay and free will, renounced and given over the rule and governance of this Land, with all rights and hnours unto the same belonging, and utterly for his merits hath judged himselfe not unworthily to be de∣posed of all Kingly Majesty and Estate Royall: We, the Premisses well considering by good and diligent deliberation, by the power, name, and authority, to us (as aforesaid) committed, pronounce, decere, and de∣clare the same King Richard, before this to have beene, and so to be unprofitable, uale, unsuffiient, and unworhy of the Rule and Government of the foresaid Realmes and Lorships, and of all rights and other the appurtenances thereto belonging. And fr the same causes wee derive him of all Kingly dignity and worshp, and of all Kingly worship in himselfe. And we depose him by our sentence de∣finitive: forbidding expresly to all Archbishops and Bishops, and all other Prelates, Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Barons, and Knights, and all other men of the foresaid Kingdome and Lordships, Subjects and Leiges whatsoever they be, that none of them from this day forward, to the foresaid Richard, as King and Lord of the foresaid Realmes and Lordships, be neither obedient nor attendant. Immediatly as this sentence was in this wise passed, and that by reason thereof the Realme stood voyd without head or governour for the same, The Duke of Lancaster rising from the place where before hee sate, and standing where all the house might behold him, laid claime to the Crowne, to which the Lords assented. After which the Archbishop of Canterbury (Arundel) having no∣tice of the minds of the Lords, stood up and asked of the Com∣mons, if they would assent to the Lords, which in their minds thought the claime of the Duke made to be rightfull and neces∣sary for the wealth of the Realme and them all. Whereto the Commons with one voyce cryed, Yea, yea, yea: After which an∣swer, the said Archbishop going to the Duke, and kneeling downe before him on his knees, addressed to him all his purpose in a few words: which ended, he rose, and taking the Duke by the right hand, led him unto the Kings Seat, the Archbishop of Yorke assisting him; and with great reverence set him therein. When he was thus placed in his Throne, the Arch. of Canturbury began a briefe Collation, taking for his Theame these words written in the first Booke of Kings, the ninth Chapter, Vir dominabitur in ppulo, &c. handling the same, and the whole tenour of his tale to the praise of the King. Thus was this King deprived by the
Bishops meanes, who were chiefe actors in deposing him, and setting up King Henry; yet some of them (especially Yorke) were the authors of that evill counsell, which was the cause of his de∣privation. And no wonder, since in his reigne (as Holinshed writes) such were preferred to Holinshed. pag. 508. Bishopricks; and other Ecclesia∣sticall livings, as neither did, nor could teach, nor preach, nor know any thing of the Scripture of God, but onely to call for their tythes and duties; so as they were most unworthy of the name of Bishops, being lewd and most vaine persons disguised in Bishops apparrell. Furthermore, there reigned abundantly the filthy sinne of Lechey and Fornication, with abominable adul∣tery in the King, but chiefly in the Prelacy; whereby the whole Realme, by such their evill example, was so infected, that the wrath of God was daily provoked to vengeance for the sinnes of the Prince and people, and tooke so sharpe an edge, that it shred the King off from the Scepter of his Kingdome, and gave him a full cup of affliction to drinke. After which, this Bishop was sent Ambassador into Spaine, to shew the King the rightfulnesse of Henry the fourth his Tile to the Crown of England; and soone after his returne thence, Anno 1404. (as Thmas Walsingam re∣ports) perceiving Owen Glendor, that Welch Rbell, to prosper in his wares against King Hery the fourth; Conversus est in virum pravum factus transfuga ad Owenum, hee turned a lewd Traytour and Rebell, flying away from the King to Owen. What became of him upon Owens defeate, I find not. Thus this Bshop was a Traytor and Rebell to two severall Kings; and which was worst of all, to him whose title he thus tooke upon him publikely to defend but a little before. Such faith and loyalty is there in lord∣ly Prelates. I shall not trouble you any more with our Welch Bishops; only let me acquaint you for a farewell; that the present Bishops of A∣saph, Bangor, and Landaffe, are now complained against in Parlia∣ment, and impeached by the Commons House for the late Ca∣nons, Oath, malevolet benevolence, and other crimes; for which I suppose they will ere long receive their doome. The Bishops of Bath and Wels. Giso. Godwin. Edit. pag. 360, 361.GISO the fifteenth Bishop of Bath and Wels, had many conflicts with Harold, before and after hee came to the
Crowne; so that he was forced to fly the Land all his time. Math. Paris, pag. 217. Matth. West. Anno 1208. Godwi. Edit. 2. pag. 107.366. Ioseline the one and twentieth Bishop of this See,Joceline. joyned with Stephen Langhton, that Arch-rebell against King Iohn, and had an hand in interdicting the Realme, and excommunicating the King; for which he was glad to fly the Land for five yeares, the King seizing upon his goods and temporalties; whereupon the Monkes and Prelates raised many vile reports of the King, which you may reade in Anno 1208. pag. 86, 87. Matth. Westminster. Robert Stillington,Robert Stil∣lington. the nine and thirtieth Bishop of Bath and Wells, though highly advanced by Kng Edward the fourth, Speeds Hist. pag. 933. Hlls Chron. 2. R. 3. fol. 25. Godwin. Edit. 2. pag. 377, 378. sided with that Usurper Richard the third, and was a man specially employed in his Coronation; hee was a great enemy to King Henry the seventh, being sent Embassador to the Duke of Brit∣taine for apprehending him, whiles hee was Earle of Richmond, Anno 1487. He was accused of high Treason, for yeelding assi∣stance to Lambert the counterfeit Earle of Warwicke, and some such other treacheries; whereupon, having a guilty conscience, he fled to the Vniversity of Oxford, hoping that the priviledges of the same might be some shelter and defence unto him; whereof the King having advertisement, sent one Edward Willoughby, his Chaplaine, to the Chancellor of the University, to require the Bishop to bee delivered to his Officers, as being one to whom the Priviledges of the University could not extend (being at the time no Student there) so farre at least as to protect him in a matter of Treason, unto which no priviledge ought to yeeld any patrociny. After two or three refusals, at last by the connivence and permission of the Chancellour, hee was there arrested and committed prisoner to the Castle of Windsor, where hee lay priso∣ner foure yeares space, till his decease, 1491. Balaeus de vi∣tis Pontificum. Leo 10. Godwin. Edit 2. pag. 381, 382. Hadrian de Castello the two and fortieth Bishop of this See,Hadrian de Castello. though he conspired not against the King, yet being at Rome, and there made a Cardinall he entred into a conspiracy with Cardinal Alfonso Petruccio, and others to murther Pope Leo the tenth, out of an ambitious conceit that surely he should be elected Pope i Leo were once dead; a Witch having foretold him that a cer∣taine old man named Adrian, borne of meane parentage, as hee was, should be advanced to the Papacy: This conspiracy com∣ming to the Popes eares, Petruccio was thereupon apprehended and executed: The Pope comming into the Consistory, promi∣sed pardon to all the other Cardinalls, who should then and
there immediately confesse their faults: Hadrian hereupon, and some other, falling downe on their knees before him, acknow∣ledged what they had done, and humbly besought him of mer∣cy. He promised to bee as good as his word. Howbeit, Hadrian earing the worst, shortly after stole secretly away, and was nei∣ther seene or heard of ever afterward, and thereupon deprived of his Bihopricke. William Barlow.William Barlow, the six and fortieth Bishop of Bath and Wells, incurred a Praemunire, for presuming to visite the Deane and Chaper of Wells being a Donative, for which he was glad to buy his peace, as appeares by Brooke, Praemunire. Sect. 21. Guilbert Bourne.Guilbert Bourne the seven and fortieth Bishop of Bath and Wells, in the first yeare of Queene Elizabeth,Godwins Cata∣logue, pag. 311. Martins History, pag. 452, &c. was deprived of his Bi∣shoprick for refusing to subscribe and take the Oath of Alleage∣ance, and then committed to the custody of Master Cary, Deane of the Queenes Chappell. The Bishops since his time, I shall pretermit for brevity, and descend to William Pierce the present Bishop of this Diocesse.William Pierce. This man having been Vicechancellor in the University of Ox∣ford, wherein hee was over-busie and turbulent in persecuting good men, and in causing Pareus his Commentary on the Ro∣mans to be publikely burnt in an ignominious manner; was for his good service made Bishop of Peterborough, and from thence translated to Bath and Wells; where his tyranny, oppression, im∣piety, and practises have been so excessive, that the whole Coun∣ty of Somerset, with sundry particular persons, both Ministers and people there, weary of his insupportable government and vexa∣tious oppressions, have exhibited divers Petitions against him to the high Court of Parliament now assembled, upon the full hea∣ring whereof before a speciall Committee for that purpose; the Committees have drawn up this following Impeachment against him, reported to the Commons House, and now ready for a transmission to the Lords; by perusall whereof you may in part discerne what a good Prelate and carefull Bishop he hath been, or rather a Wolfe in a Bishops Rochet.
Articles of Accusation and impeachment by the Commons House of Parliament against William Pierce, Doctor of Divinity, and Bishop of Bath and Wells. THat he hath by his owne arbitrary power, against Law, since he was Bishop of Bath and Wells (being about ten  yeares space) of purpose to keep the people in ignorance and hinder the Salvation of their Soules which hee should pro∣mote; in and about the yeares of our Lord, 1633.1634.1635. and since, suppressed all Lectures within his Diocesse, both in Market Townes end elsewhere, aswell those that the ministers kept in their severall Cres, as others that were maintai∣ned by severall yearely stipends, given by the Founders, out of their piety and devotion, for such good uses, or by the vo∣lentary assistance of neighbour ministers, some of which Among these he hath suppres∣sed the Ancient weekely Lecture at the City of Bath, whither many Nobles, & other strangers resort, especially, in the spring and fall, who by rea∣son of their sick∣nesse, both desire and neede prea∣ching for the consolation and instruction of their soules, of which now they are there deti∣tute, to their great discomfort. Le∣ctures had continued for 50.40.30. and 20. yeares, without in∣terruption, and were countenanced by his predecessors, who used to preach at some of them in their turnes. That insteade of incouraging, he hath suspended, excommuni∣cated and otherwise vexed the sayd Lecturers; glorying in his so doing, and thanking God, that he had not a Lecture left in his Dio∣cesse; the very name whereof he sayd hee disliked, and affirmed unto Master Cunnant a minister who desired the continuance o a Lecture, that he would not leave one within his Diocesse; the Bishop alleadging, that though there was neede of preaching in the infancy of the Church in the Apostles time, yet now there was no such need; and thereupon required the said minister up∣on his Canonicall obedience, not to preach: and in like man∣ner he dealt with many other Godly Ministers within his Dio∣cesse. And in particular hee suspended Master Devenish the Mi∣nister of Bridgewater, for preaching a Lecture in his owne Church on the market day there, (which Lecture had conti∣nued from Queene Elizabeths time till then;) and refused to ab∣solve him, till he had promised never to preach it more; upon
which promise, the said Bishop absolved him with this admoni∣tion of our Saviour, most prophanely applyed, Joh. 5.14. I dare say no Com∣mentator what∣soever, ever made so ill an applica∣tion of this Text. Goe thy way, sin no more, lst a worse thing happen to thee. And not content to put downe Lectures in his owne Diocesse, he hath endeavoured the suppression of them in others, by conventing some ministers of his Diocese before him (as namely one Master Cunnant and Mr. Stricklad) and threating to suspend them, for preaching their turnes at Lectures in other Diocesses neere them. That in opposition to preaching, and the Spiritall good o the peoples Soules, he hath in and about the years aforesaid most impiously, and against Law, put downe all afternoone Sermons on he Lords day, throughout his Diocesse, and charged the Mi∣nisters both publikely in his visitations, & privatly, It appeares by Act. 20.20.31. Act. 2.46. c. 3. & 4 & 5. Luk. 21.37.38. Joh. 8.22.19.47. 2 Tim. 4.2. by Basil. Magnus. Hexaemeron. Hom. 2.7.8.9. & Hom. in Psal. 114. by S. Chrysost. Hom. 10.22. and 34. in Gen. ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 19.13. & 5. De sacerdotio. l. 6. Hom. de La∣zaro. by Augu∣stine Concio. 2 in Psal. 68. Tract. 16.18. & 21. in Joan. and other Fa∣thers, that Christ, his Apo∣stles and the Fa∣thers preached every day, and forenoone and afternoone on the Lords day how dare then this Prelate thus to affront their practise? no to preach at all on the Lords day on the afternoon, upon any occasion under paine of suspension:O Prophane impiety and injustice, to punish Ministers for preaching, Catechising, and doing that which God injoynes them! after which charge he suspended one Mr. Cornish a Mi∣nister, only for preaching a funrall Sermon on a Lords day E∣vening. That divers godly Ministers of his Diocesse, being restrained from preaching, did thereupon take great paines, to Catechis the people in the principles of Religion, on the Lords day in the afternoone, in larging themselves upon the questions and answers of the Catechisme in the Common prayer Booke, for the peoples better instruction, using some short prayers before or after that exercise: of which the sayd Bishop having intelli∣gence, in and about the yeares aforesayd, convented the sayd ministers before him, reproving them sharpely for the same, threatnng to punish them if they persisted in that way, which he sayd, was a Catechising Sermon-wise, and AS BAD as if they prea∣ched; charging them, that they should aske no questions, nor receive any other answeres from the people, but such as were contained in the Catechisme in the Service booke: which some not observing, were convented thereupon before th sayd Bishp, and punished, as namely Master Barret Rector of Barmicke, who was enjoyned penanc for transgressing the Bishop sayd order and likewise Humphry Blake, Church-warden of Bridgwater, was enjoyned penance by the Bishop, for not presenting Master Devenish Mi∣nister there, for that he expounded upon the Church Catechisme on the Lords day in the afternoon, and made a short prayer before he be∣gan
the same the Bishop alleaging, that it was against his order, and command, as is above sayd. That he hath in the yeares aforesayd both by precept and example, most prophanely opposed the due sanctification of the Lords day, by approving and allowing of prophane Wakes, and Revels on that day, contrary to the Lawes and Statues of this Realme: for which purpose he An Impiety & prophanenesse, which no age can patterne, many Ministers have beene suspended and censured for shortning the Service, that they might preach the longer, and yet they are comman∣ded to curtall it by this Bishop, that the people might have more time to play in Gods owne day. Commanded afternoone-Service on the Lords day not to be long, that so the people might not be hindred from their Recreations; pressed and injoyned al the Ministers in his Dio∣cesse in their proper persons, to read the book of sports, in their severall Parish Churches, in the midst of divine Service at mor∣ning prayer on the Lords day, contrary to the words, and pur∣port of the sayd booke, which some ministers (as Master Hmphry Chambers, and Master Thomas) refusing to doe, he thereupon sus∣pended them both from their office and Benefice, and kept them excommunicated for divers yeares, notwithstanding the sayd booke was by the Bishops Order published in their Churches by others, he convented the minister of Beerecrockeham before him, for having two Sermons on the sayd Parish Revell day, alleaging A pious Epis∣copall reason, fit∣ter for an Ale∣wife, than a Bi∣shop; an Athest than a Prelate. that it was a hinderance to the sayd Revell, and to the utterance of the Church Ale, provided to be spent on that day. He convented and pu∣nished one Master Thomas Elford a Minister, for preaching at the Parish of Mountague, upon the Revell day, upon the Prophet Ioels exhortation, to fsting, weeping, and mourning charging him, that not onely his Sermon, but his very Text was O blasphemy! why was not the Revell rather scandalous to the text? scandalous to the Revell, and gave offece to the meeting. And for the same reason, the sayd Bishop commanded the Church-warde of the Parish of Barecome, to blo out of the Church wall, this Text of Scrip∣ture therein written, taken out of Esay 58.13.14. O the desperate impiey and pro∣phanenesse of this Bishop, who might as well obliterate this Scripture out of the Bible, as out of the Church Wall! If thou turne away thy oo from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my Holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the Lord Honourable, and shal honour him, not doing thy owne wayes, nor finding thine own pleasre nor speaking thine owne words, then shalt thou delight thy selfe in the Lord and I will ause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feede the with the heritage of Jacob thy Father, for the mth of the Lord hath spoken it. And he likewise caued this clause in Doctor Bisse his monument in that Church, formerly Pastor there, to be rased out; He was an enemy to heeathenish Revels. To conntenance which Revels, the sayd Bishop (in opposition o the orders of the Judges of Assie, and Justices of Peace of So∣merset-shire,
for the suppressing of Sports and Revels, and their Petition to the King, to that purpose) did call before him di∣vers Ministers of his Diocesse, and presented unto them a wri∣ting  in approbation and commendations of the sayd sports and Revells: whereunto many of the sayd Ministers subscribed their names, by the Bishops perswasions: which writing the sayd Bi∣shop sent up to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, who after the re∣ceipt thereof suppressed the Justices Petition. And shortly after the book for sports and Revels on the Lords day was published. That he hath within the yeares forementioned both by his ex∣ample and command, contrary to the Lawes of the Land, intro∣duced into all or most Churches in his Diocesse sundry Innovati∣ons in the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, and other new inventions of his owne, tending to Popery and Superstition: as namely, setting up of Altars, and injoyning the seates about them to be taken away, saying, This speech he borrowed from Canterbury; who might doe well to prove, that God Almighty sits actually on the Lords Table, & that as well when there is no Communion there, as when there is. none shall sit equall with or above God Almighty: bowing and cringing to the Altars, and reading the second and third service at the Altar) and enjoyned the strict ob∣servation of them under the heaviest Censures of the Church; in so much that the Communion Table of Stretton in his Diocesse, which he had caused to be rayled in Altarwise, being rought downe againe to its former place, and not turned to the East, thereupon no Communion was there permitted to the Parishio∣ners on Palme-Sunday and Easter day 1637. the Minister having received an Order from the sayd Bishop, O monstrous superstition, Sa∣criledge, and impiety, to de∣prive the people of the Sacra∣ment, because the Table stood not after his new fancy! No age I am certaine yeelds such a president. not to administer the Communion untill the Table was againe set up Altarwise: and caused divers to be punished for not standing up at the Gospell and Gloria Patri. And he hath likewise forced divers Parishes, as Taunton, Shepton Mallet, and others, to their intollerable cost, to set up It seemes his Lordship deligh∣ted more in pi∣ping than prea¦ching, and will have men goe merrily dancing not mourning to heaven. Organs, where there were none at all, or not a long time before; causing the Church-wardens to levy money towards the buying of them, upon the Parishioners, against their wills, and punishing them in his Ecclesiasticall Court, that would not pay towards them, and that he hath put the Country of Sommerset to excessive expences, by reason of such Innovations as aforesayd. That he hath within the time fore-specified contrary to Law vexed and molested in his Ecclesiasticall Courts divers of the Clergie and Laity of his Diocesse for triviall and small matters; excommunicated and vexed divers Church-wardens, for not  rayling in the Communion Table, and placing it Altarwise a∣gainst
the East wall of the Chancell; and by name, the Church-wardens of Beckington; whom he not onely excommunicated, but likewise caused them and others to be unjustly indicted at the open Assizes held in the Country in Lent, 1636. as for a Ryot in hindring the removing of the Table in that Church, putting the sayd Parish to the expence of 180. pounds or more, and not absolving the Churchwardens from their excommunication, till they had done such open and ignominious penance, as the sayd Bishop enjoyned them, in three eminen Parish Churches within his Diocesse, as likewise at the Market Crosse at Wells. The performance of which pennance wrought so farre upon Iames Wheeler one of the sayd Church-wardens, that thereupon he fell into a Consumption through griefe, and so dyed, saying often before his death, that the performance of the sayd penance being so ignominious, and against his Conscience, was the cause of his death; and by his vexatious suits in his Ecclesiasticall Courts, hee hath raised his Registers office, in former Bishops time not worth above 0. pound per annum, to the value of 3. or 400. pounds or more by the yeare. That the sayd Bishop hath within the forenamed yeares un∣duely  and against Law, pressed the Oathes Ex officio upon divers inhabitants of Wells without complaint or accusation, and like∣wise the Oath of Deanes Rurall, with other unlawfull Oathes, both upon the Clergy and Laity within his Diocesse, and other places; and suspended and excommunicated divers of them that refused to take the sayd Oathes: and that not onely in his Consistory Court, but in his owne private Chambe, there be∣ing none but a Register with him. That he hath in or about the times fore-recited for his owne  Lucre and gaine extorted divers summes of money against Law, as of one Fort, one of the Churchwardens of South-Pederton 20. pound. And also of one Mr. Franklyn the sum of 3. pound (be∣sides the sum of 10. pounds given in Fees, and rewards to the Bishops servants) for instituting him into the Parsonage of Stan∣derweeke. And hath likewise in the yeares aforesayd, and in the yeare 1639. exacted the sum of 6. shillings 8. pence or more, of divers Church-wardens and Parishes within his Diocesse, and namely of the Church-wardens of Dunkerton, onely for not ring∣ring the Bells when he passed through the bounds of their seve∣all Parishes, in his Visitation, though privately without giving
them any notice of his comming that way. One Long his Surro∣gate openly averring in Court, that by the 16. Decreall, they might justly take 10. pound for this offence. That he hath within the years forenamed against Law deerred and denyed Institutions upon presentations to Benefices, pra∣ctising in the interim under hand to conferre the same upon his Sonne, Servants or other dependants, and to deprive the Pa∣trons of their Rights; and hath even by force, against all Law and equity, conerred some of the Benefices upon his Sonne, Servants and dependants, viz. upon his Sonne, the Parsonage of Buckland, and endeavoured by the like fore to confer the Parsonage of Standerweeke upon his sayd son, and other Parsona∣ges upon his Servants and allyes, & did against Law and by force confer the Vicaidge of Hynstridge upon his servant Flamsteed. That he hath in or about the foresayd yeares tampered with witnesses examined by and before him upon Oath, to make them testifie untruths, and hath falsified their depositions, setting down his owne words and what he would have them depose, inseede of what they testified; as namely in the Case of the Church-war∣dens of Beckington, and in that of Mr. Ieanes Minister of Beer∣crocombe. That hee is a Common vexer, persecuter and molester of worthy and painefull Ministers, and a countenancer of those who are negligent, scandalous, and prophane, as namely he hath within the yeares fore-mentioned, vexed and persecuted Mr. Chambers, Mr. Thomas, Mr. Croake, Mr. Newton, Mr. Barnard, Mr. Cunnant, Mr. Roswell, with many other godly and painefull Mi∣nisters of the Diocesse, & countenanced his Chaplaine Mr. Egles∣field, awler, Mr. Long, with other very vitious Ministers, and Mr. Huish and others superstitiously affected. That the said Bishop contrary to Law did in the yeare 1640. severely exact, and impose upon divers of the Clergie within his Diocesse, the new Oath perscribed by the sixth Canon of the late pretended Synod, and caused and enforced them to take the sayd illegall Oath, himselfe kissing the Seale of the Commis∣sion which authorized him to exact the sayd Oath of his Cler∣gie, and kneeling downe upon his knees tooke the sayd Oath first, and then administred it to others; saying, that he was glad in his heart that this Oath was imposed upon all the Clergie of England, for now the true Children of the Church would bee knowne from the
spurious and bastards. And further hee hath deyed to conferre Orders upon such who refused to take the said Oath, as namely, upon one Mr. Gibbon. And hath enforced the sayd Oath upon divers he hath ordained Ministers since the making thereof. That the sayd Bishop hath beene a great fomentor and incou∣rager  of the late divisions and wars betweene the Kingdomes of England and Scotland, conventing and urging the Clergie of his Diocesse in the yeares of our Lord 1638. & 1639. to contribute a liberall benevolence towards the maintenance of the sayd wars, using this speech as one motive to induce them to this contribu∣tion; that it was Bishop Hall labours to ex∣cuse it, in his Answer to the Vindication. p. 14.15. as if the Bishop meant it only in a lesse evill constructi∣on, as referring to the Northerne rise of that quar∣rell, not to our prosecution, when as it is most clear by the words and ircumstances, that he meant quite contrary. Bellum Episcopale, and saying, that what ever cause the King had expressed in hi Declaration, yet in truth this war was for Vs, meaning Vs the Bishops. And whereas some of the Clergie denyed the payment of so large a Benevolence s the sayd Bishop demanded, in regard of their poverty, and because they were still in their first fruites, when they were free from Subsidies, the sayd Bishop threatned by his power to put more Armes and horses upon them, saying, that if they would not serve the King with their purses, they should serve him with their Armes. And thereupon compelled them to pay the summes he demaunded of them a∣gainst all Law: as namely, Mr. Roswell, Mr. Ioanes, Mr. Abbot, and others. And not contented herewith, the sayd Bishop preten∣ding that there were divers poore Vicars and Ministers in his Diocesse that were no able to pay the Benevolence, o as hee could not raise the summe he expected, thereupon directed his Letters to divers of his wealthier Clegie causing some of them to pay a Which some of the County conceive hee hath pursed up or discharged his owne share in this contri∣bution there∣with. second contribution. 13. That the sayd Bishop not content with this first Bene∣volence, hath since that in the yeare of our Lord 1642. compel∣led divers of his Clergie to pay all or part of the sixe illegall sub∣sidies or Benevolences imposed by the late pretended Synod, without confirmation of Parliament, threatning to excommuni∣cae and deprive them ipso facto who fayled paymen of it at the dayes prefixed by the Synod, and sent out a processe to Master Newton Minister of Tauton (even whiles the sayd) Town was much visited by the Pestilence) long before the sayd Subsidy; or Benevolence was due, to enjoyne him to pay it punctually at the day, or else he would inflict on him the penalties prescribed by this Synod; and used these speeches, that if they did not pay the sayd Subsidie or Benevolence, they should be ground to powder. And the sayd Commons by proestaion sing to them∣selves the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter any other
accusation or impeachment against the sayd Bishop; And also of replying to the answeres that he the sayd Bishop shall make unto the sayd Articles, or to any of them, and of offering proofes also of the premisses or any of them, or any other impeachment or ac∣cusation that shall be exhibited by them (as the cause shall accor∣ding to the course of Parliaments require) doe pray that the sayd Bishop may be put to answere to all and every te premisses. And that such proceedings, examinations, tryalls, and judge∣ments may be upon every of them had and used, as is agreeable to Law and Justice. By these Articles of impeachment you may easily discover what a prophane, impious, turbulent Prelate this Bishop is, even such a one, whom no age (I thinke) in many particulars is able to parallell; whose prodigiously prophane speeches and acti∣ons proclaime to all the world, that our present Prelates impie∣ties have made them fit for judgement; yea to be castout and tram∣pled under feere of men, as the very excrements and off-scouring of all things. I have now runne through all our ancient Bishoprickes, with that of Chester lately revived, and given you a briefe account of the extravagant actions of some of those Lordly Prelates who possessed them; I shall now in the close of this Chapter give you but a touch of some of the late Bishops of Oxford, Bristoll, Peter∣borough and Glocester (which Bishopricks were erected out of dis∣solved Monasteries by King See 31. H. 8. c. 8.34. and 35. H. 8. c. 7. Godwins Ca∣talogue, p. 403. to 413. Henry the eight towards the end of his Reigne) and so conclude. Oxford. TO passe by the first Bishops of this See, none of the best, there have beene three successions of Bishops in Oxford, since I left the University; Houson, Corbet, and Bancroft; all of them Patriots of Innovations, Erronious, Popish, Arminian Doctrines, super∣stitious Ceremonies, prophane Sports, Revels, and Bacchanals on the Lords day, scandalous in their lives, notoriously given to the flesh, enemies to frequent preaching, and the true Practise of Piety. Of the two first of them I have given a touch in Durham, and Norwich, page 519. to which I shall referre you, and for the last of them, a Non-preaching Prelate, who (for ought I can learne) never preached above one or two Sermons (if so many) all his life time; he had a finger in the late Canons, Oath, lone, in pressing whereof he was not negligent; and had not death arre∣sted him (with the other two) I doubt not but the Parliament had bin troubled with many complaints against them all, which now being buryed together with them, I will not revive.
Bristoll. THE Bishopricke of Bristoll was first possessed by Paul Bush, who was deprived in Queen Maries dayes for being married.Godwin. Cat. p. 411.412 Iohn Holy-man a Papist succeeded him, after whose death the See continued voyd some foure yeares, Anno 1562. Richard Cheyny Bishop of Glocester, and Iohn Bullingham his successor, held Bri∣stoll in Commendam, so as it stood void o a Bishop (otherwise than as it was held by Commendam one and thirty yeares. Richard Flet∣cher next enjoyed it till he was translated to Worcester, Anno. 1593. After which it stood vacant ten yeares to 1603. and then Iohn Thorneborough Bishop of Limbrick in Ireland and Commendatory Deane of York was translated to it. This Bishop and some of his successors had great contests with the Major, Aldermen, and Citizens of Bistoll, whom he would force to come every Lords day morning, and solemne Holiday, to the Cathedrall Sermon, to dance attendance, and doe their homage to their Lordships; which they for some yeares refused, till at last after sundry complaints to the King and Councel, the Bishops and they according, the Major and Citizens yeelded to come to the Colledge, now and then on solemne days, if the weather were faire, and sometimes in the Som∣mer season. Robert Wright,Robert Wright. one of the late Bishops of this See, had a great contestation with the Deane and Chapter of Bristoll, and Master George Salterne, Steward of the City, for opposing him in setting up Images in the Cathedrall and other Churches, which gave great offence to the people: he was a great Innovator and maintainer of Superstitious Ceremonies at Bristoll to humor Canterbury, by whose meanes he was translated to Coventry and Litchfield, where you may reade more of him. Bishop Cooke who succeeded him,Cooke. was a more moderate and in∣genuous man at first, but became too obsequious to Canterburies wayes and Innovations afterward. Robert Skinner,Robert Skin∣ner. the present Bp of this See, promoted to it by Can∣rburies meanes, (whose great creature he is) hath bin very violent in railing in, and turning Communion Tables Altar-wise, (himself with his owne hands, and his men turning some:) in magnifying the booke for sports on the Lords-day (which he hath See a Loo∣king glasse for all Lordly Pre∣lates, p. 23, 24. used to give others good example) in bowing to Altars, to the Of wch o shed any on rum or drop, he holds is damnable and Sacrilegious. bread and wine at the administration, and at the naming of Jesus; hee threatned to punish a Church-warden for perjury in not presen∣ting the Minister for Preaching twice on the Lords day, comman∣ding some able ministers to Preach but once a fortnight, and not to preach on holy-dayes. He affirmed in his last Visitation, That conceived prayers before and after Sermons were never used till Cart∣wright, that factious fire-brand brought them up. Hee hath beene a
great Patriot of Arminianisme, and stiled the Doctrine of the Saints inall perseverance in grace, A Doctrine of Devills; enjoyning a minister to recant it, else he would vexe him in the high Commis∣sion, and running violently at him, sayd, He would have no such Vipers preach such Doctrine in his Diocesse: upon which ground he prohibited a Schoolemaster to teach children Mr. Perkins his Chatechisme; and sayd of his booke entituled, A golden Chaine, that he might stile it as one had done, A chaine of damnation. Hee hath reviled divers ministers calling them Vipers, Dunces, Devils, Traytors, Dogges, Scottish-hearted-Raskals, and the like, for tea∣ching Orthodox Doctrine, and preaching out of their Cures in his owne Diocesse; and commanded the ministers of Bristoll not to suffer any strangers to preach in their Churches, unlesse they first asked his leave, and shewed him the Notes of their Sermons. Hee caused the Kings Armes to be taken down in a Church in Bristoll, onely because it stood over the Altar. He tooke the late &c. Oath at his Visitation upon his knees, and imposed it upon others, as∣suring them, that if they did not take it, the Church would not suffer her selfe to be at a losse. He hath forced ministers to pay in the Be∣nevolence money granted by the late pretended Synod, and con∣straind them to pay for their very acquitances. He caused a mini∣ster to be brought up by a Pursevant before the Councel Table, for omitting some words of the prayer against the Scots, and praying God to discover more & more the Kings enemies in this Kingdom; he hath excommunicated divers for denying to take an Ex Officio Oath; threatned to pul down a house built by a Tenant of the Dean and Chapter, neare his Palace, in such furious manner, that the Tenants wife soone after with the feare fell distracted and dyed: Neither will he permit another of their Tenants who hath an house at the West end of the Cathedrall to place a Tenant in it, saying, He will not suffer so great a Prophanation; threatning to put the Deane and Chapter into the High Commission, and there to fine them more than they had for the house, if they admitted of a Tenant; alleadging he could not looke the Arch-Bishop in the face as long as hat house stood: he was an active instrument in com∣piling the late Canons, Oath and Benevolence, for which hee now stands impeached by the Commons. He hath much disaffe∣cted, and censured late Parliaments,See the Bistoll mens Petition to the Parliament against him, where much more is expres∣sed. and after the dissolution of the last Parliament, was so confident we should never see another, as he openly said, We should go whoop when he saw another and should say the King was brought to a very low ebbe. He threatned to interdict a Faire kept in the Parish of S. Iames in Bristoll, if they would not set up a pair of deayed Organs in that Church. But of him enough.
Peterborough. IOhn Chambers,John Cham∣bers. a Doctor of Physicke, and last Abbot of Peter∣borough, became the first Bishop of it. It seemes the office was not then thought very spirituall,Godw. Cat. Edit. 2. pag. 499. that a Doctor of Physicke and an Abbot could supply it. Godw. ibid. David Poole,David Poole. a Doctor of Law and Deane of the Arches, succeeded him, and was deprived the first yeare of Queene Eliza∣beth for Popery, and denying her Supremacy. Willam Pierce,William Perce one of the late Bishops of this Diocesse, was a very turbulent man both to Ministers and people, playing the same prankes there, as he hath since more plentifully exercised in his Diocesse of Bath and Wells, whither hee was translated; of his misdemeanors and impeachment for them by the Parliament, you have already heard. Doctor Lyndsie,Lyndsey. who succeded him (a great creature and servant of Lad and Neale) was an earnest promoter of the booke of pastimes on the Lords day, a great champion for the Armini∣ans, and all the late Innovations in doctrine, ceremony or wor∣ship introduced among us, a bitter enemy to preaching, Lectu∣rers, Lectures and godly people, whom he opposed all he might: Being translated to Hereford, hee would there needs visit the Ca∣thedrall, Deane and Chapter (being a donative) by his owne E∣piscopall power, and would turne the Communion Table there Altarwise; the Deane and Chapter in defence of their privi∣ledges with-stood him, and would neither turne their Table, nor suffer him to visite: whereupon he fell into such a raging choler and passion as presently put him into a fit of the stone, whereof he dyed within few dayes after. Iohn the present Bishop of this Se stands now impeached by the House of Commons,John. for the last Canons, Oath, and Bene∣volences made and granted in the late pretended Synode. Glocester. THe Bishoprick of Godwin. Cat. E∣dit. 2. pag. 495, 496. Glocester erected in King Henry the eight his reigne, wa first possessed by Iohn Wakeman, Abbot of Tukesbury, and by others since, some popish persecutors, as Iames Brookes in Queene Maries dayes, the Popes Commissioner who
passed sentence of condemnation against Cranmer, Ridley and La∣tymer at Oxford,See Fox Acts and Monu∣ments. vol. 3. p. 649. to 663. and represented the Popes person there; in which regard these eminent Mrtyrs would neither bend their knees, nor once move their caps unto him, whereat he was much offen∣ded. Cranmer taxeth this Bishop, for being perjured both to the King and Pope, and violating his oath to both. The succeeding Bishops of this See, I shall wholly pretermit, and give you onely a short account of Godfrey Goodman,Godfry Goodman. the present Bishop of this Diocesse. This Prelate hath beene ever eputed a Papist in opinion, if not in practise. In his booke intituled, The fall of man, he maintaines some Popish Errors, and in Parliament tie 3. Caoli, broached no lesse then five severall points of flat Popery in one Sermon preached at White-all before his Majesty, and that impertinently, neither of them falling within the compasse of his text: of which complaint being made in Parliament, the King enjoyned him publikely to recant those Errors in a Ser∣mon at White-hall; but he insteed of recanting, defended them a∣gaine; whereupon the King threatned to make him recant in another manner, and to turne him out of his Bishoprick: but the then Duke of Buckingham, and the other Prelates procured his peace, and translated him from Rochester (where he then sate Bishop) to Glocester. In which Diocesse proceeding in his for∣mer courses, he turned Communion Tables, rayled them Al∣tarwise, set up an Altar or two in his owne private Chappell with Tapers on them, (one of which Altars, many say, he de∣dicated to the Virgin Mary) besides he set up diverse Crucifixes and Images in the Cathedrall at Glocester and elsewhere; and af∣ter the Popish manner, consecrated diverse Altar-cloathes, pulpit Clothes, which other vestments for the Cathedrall, whereon Crucifixes were embroydred, to the great scandall of the people. And as if this were not sufficient to proclaime his Popery to the world; he hath bestowed much cost in repairing the High-crosse at Windsor, where he was a Prebend: On one side whereof there is a large statue of Christ in colours (after the Popish Garbs in forraigne parts hanging on the Crosse, with this Latine inscription over it, Iesus Nazarenus Rex Iu∣daeorum, in great guilded Letters; On the other side, the picture of Christ rising out of the Sepulcher, with his body halfe in, and halfe out of it. And to manifest that hee is not ashamed of this scandalous worke, it is thereupon ingraven, That this was
done at the cost of Godfry Bishop of Glocester, one of the Pbends there. Besides he suspended one Master Ridler minister of Little Deane, some 8 miles from Glocester, upon the complaint of some Papists (whom he favous) of which there are many in that parish, for preaching, Th a Ppist living and dying a papist in all points, could not be saved; enjying him to make a publike Recantation of this his scandalous and erroneous doctrine (as he termed it, though caught by all Orthodox Protestant Divines) in the Ca∣thedrall Church of Glcestr in a Sermon there to be preached Febr. 2. 1636. which this minister not retractig in his Ser∣mon, according to the Bshops expectation, he thereupon dre up a Recantation himselfe, enjoyning Master Ridler to pblish it in the open Cahedll on Mathias day following which hee refusing, was thereupon suspended, and his suspension openly read in the Cathedrall, March the 5. 1636. This strange Re∣cantation was marked in the front wth the Jesuits badge (HS) and began thus. In the name of God Amen. In which he stiles the Church of Rome, the Catholike Church: avers, that wee did separate from her only in point of policy (for which he cites a Staute in King Henry the 8. his raigne, as if there had beene no further separation from her sine) not in point of Dctrines, and in substance determines, that the Church of Rome and our Chrch are both one, for we have both the sam Hierarchy and governement, the same Liturgy, Holy dayes, Fasts, Ceremonies, Sacraments, &c. So as those who affim that Papists are damned, do but through the sides of the Church of Rome give a deadly blow to the Church of England, & de∣ny that we are saved. More such good Romish stuffe is expressed in this Rcanation, over-tedios to recite. Since this, when the New Canons were compiled in the late pretended Synod, this Bishop at first refsed to subscribe them only (as most conceive) be∣cause some of them made literally against Popery, whereupon he was suspended from his Bishoprick for a season; Since this, some Citizens and a Minister of Glocester have exhibited a Pe∣tition against him in Parliament to prove him (among other things) to be a Papist or popishly affected, he hath beene a great encouager of Revells, Mygames, Morrices, and daun∣cing meetings on the Lords day, both by his presence at, ex∣hortations to, and rewards for them, causing one Master Worke∣man, a Reverend minister of Glocester to be questioned, suspen∣ded and censured in the high Commission, only for preaching
against those prophane Sports, and Images, in the very words of our Homilies.Lords-day. He hath beene a great setter forwards of all late Popish Innovations and an open favourer of Papists; so that when the Petitions against him come to be fully heard, as they have beene in part, I doubt his name and person will but ill ac∣cord: However, if he prove himselfe a God man, at the best he will fall out to be like his brethren, an [Ill-Bshop:] I have now run cuorily over our Bishops disloyall seditions, extrava∣gant actions in particular, I shall give you but two instances more of their Acts in their Convocaion, in generall, in affront of our Parliaments and Lawes, the one ancient, the other mo∣derne, and so conclude with our English Prelates. The first is this. In King 1 Ed. 3. c. 1. Holins. p. 328.338. to 340. Walsingham. Hist. Angl. p. 91.92.95.106. Speed. p. 674. Edward the second his reigne Hugh Spencer the Fa∣ther and Son, who seduced and abused the King & Kingdome, were banished the Realme by Act of Parliament for ever, as Traytors and enemies of the King, and of his Realme: the Bishops consenting & peswading the K. to condescend thereunto. Yet after this An. 1319. Hugh Sencr the Younger and his Father, Petitioned the King against the award in Parliament, whereby they were formerly banished and disinherited without consent of the Prelates, de∣siring it might be reversed; the King delivered this Petition to the then Archbyshop of Canterbury, (Walter Raynolds) and his Suf∣fragans, assembled in their Provinciall Councell, requiing to have their advise and opinion herein. The Prelates upon delibera∣tion had (to humour the King) declared; that in their opinion the said award as touching the disinheriting and banshng he Spensers, Fahr and Son, was erroneous, and not rightly decreed; and for them∣selves they deemed that they neither did or could think it reason to consent thereto (though Walsingham writes expressely, that they perswadd the King to consent to this banishment) and theefore they required, that it might be repealed: whereupon the King disanulled the same, which afterwards occasioned much bloodshed, civill warres, and cost Hugh Spencer the Elder his head, and the King his Crowne and Life, in Conclusion. The later is yet Fesh in memory, to wit, the Canons, &c. Oath, and Subsidies lately made and granted by our Present Prelates An. 1640. in their pretended Synod, held and conti∣nued against Law, in affront of the Parliament then dissolved. What strange kind of mell these Canons and Oath &c. were
compounded of, appeares by the perusall of them in the prin∣ted Booke; and how culpable our Prelates were in casting, mounting, and discharging them upon the inferiour ministers and people in contempt of our Lawes and Liberties, their late impeachment at the Barre in the Lords house, by the house of Commons will best demonstrate, the true Copy whereof here ensueth.
August the 4. 1641. The Impeachment against the Bishops, sent up by Serjeant Wilde, & delivered at the Bar in the Lords house verbally, by Order of the House. MY Lords, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons house of Parliament, being sensible of the great Infelicities and Troubles which the Common-wealth hth sustained by the exorbitant courses of the Bishops, and know∣ing well what the wiseman saith, Eccles. 8.11. Tha i sennce be not speedily executed against n evill wrke, the harts f the sone of men are set upon further mischiefe:Eccles. 8 11. (he timely rdrsse wheeof doth better become the wisedome of Parliament then a too-late wofull rpentance;) have commanded me to represent unto your Lordships, That Walter Bishop of Winchester, Robert Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield. Godfry Bishop of Glocester. Joseph Bishop of Exester. John Bshop of Asaph. William Bishop of Bath and Wells. Geoge Bshop of Hereford. Matthew Bishop of Ely. William Bshop of Bangor. Robert Bishop of Brisoll. John Bshop of Rochster. John Bishp of Peterborough. Morgan Bishop of Landaffe.
Together with Willim Archbishop of Canterbury, and others of the Clergie of that Province, at a Convocation or Synod for the same Province begun at London, in the yeare 1640. did contrive, make, and promulg severall Constitutions and Ca∣nons Ecclesiasticall, containing in them divers matters contrary to the Kings Prerogative, to the fundamentall Lwes and Statutes of the Realme, to the Rights of Parliament, to the Propriety and Liberty of the Subjects, and matters tending to sedition, and of dangerous consequence. And to adde the more weigh and efficacie to this their mon∣strous designe, They did at the same Synod under a specious and faire Title, grant a Benvolnce or Contribution to his Maje∣sty, to be paid by the Clergy of that Province, contrary to Law: It rested not there, for though this had beene enough to have affrighted and terrfied the Kings people with strange apprehen∣sions and feares, yet that these might not seem to be contrivan∣cies of their brain or Fancies oly they were put in Execution and were executed upon divers with animosity and rigour, to the great oppression of the Clergy of this Realme, and other his Majesties subjects, and in contempt of the King, and of the Law. Whether these persons, my Lords, that are culpable of these Offences, shall be thought fit to have an Interest in the Legisla∣tive power, your Lordships Wisdome and Justice is able to judge. But for these matters nd things, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House in Parliament, in the name of themselves, and of all the Commons of England, doe impeach the said Bishops before-named of the Crimes and Misdemeanors before expressed, and do therefore pray that they may bee forth∣with put to their Answers in the Presence of the Commons, and that such further Proceedings may bee had against them, as to Law and Justice shall appertaine. Now that the world may take notice what Power the Clergy in their Conocation have to make Canons and Constitutions to bind the subjects, and of what validity their late Canons are; I shall avouch the Votes of the Commons House concerning them, as I find them printed at the end of this Impeachmet of Bishops.
The Votes concerning the Bishops late Booke of Ca∣nons, in the House of Commons. THat the Clergy of England convented in any Convocation or Synod, or otherwise, have no power to make any Consti∣tutions, Canons, or Acts whatsoever, in matter of doctrine, or otherwise, to binde the Clergy or Laity of this Land without the common consent of Parliament. That the severall Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiasticall, treated upon by the Archbishops of Canturbury and Yorke, Pre∣sidents of the Convocation, for the respective Provinces of Can∣terbury and Yorke, and the rest of the Bishops and Clergy of these Provinces, and agreed upon by the Kings Majesties licence, in their everall Synods, begun at London and Yorke, 1640. doe not bind the Clergy or Laity of this Land, or either of them. And thus I have don with our English Lordly Prelates, whose only study is and hath been to support their Lordly dignity, not true religion, devotion and piety I shall conclude with them in Saint De consider. ad Eugenium, lib. 4. Bernards words. Vides omnem Ecclesiasticum zelum fer∣vere sola pro dignitae tuenda: Honori totum datur, sanctitati nihil, aut parum. Nisi quod sublime est, hoc salutare dicamus; & quod gloriam redolet, id justum. Ita omne humile probro ducitur inter Palatinatos. Et tunc potissimum volunt dominari, cum professi fuerint servitutem. Fi∣deles se spondent, ut opportunius fidentibus noceant. Ante omnia sapien∣tes sunt ut faciat mala, bnum autem facere nesciunt. Hi invisi ter∣rae & coeo, utrique injecêre manus; impii in Deum, temerarii in san∣cta, seditiosi in invicem, aemuli in vicinos, inhumani in extraneos, quos neminem amantes, amat nemo. Hi sunt, qui subesse non sustinent, prae∣esse non norunt, superioribus infideles, inferioribus importabiles. Docu∣erunt linguam suam grandia loqui, cum operentur exigua, Blandissimi adulatores, & mordacissimi detractores, simplicissimi dissimulatores, & malignissimi Proditores. O miserandam Sponsam talibus creditam Para∣nymphis, qui assignata cultui ejus, proprio retinere quaestui non verentur. Non amici profectò Sponsi, sed aemuli sunt. Erunt inquam hujusmodi ma∣ximo studio corrigendi, ne pereant; aut ne perimant, coercendi.
CHAP. VII. Containing the severall Treasons, Rebellions, Seditions, Schismes, Contumacies, Warres, and disloyalties of the Bishops of France, Normandy, Scotland, and Ireland, with reference unto the Kings of England. HAving thus passed through the Treasons, Rebelli∣ons, Seditions, Warres, and disloyall practises of our English Lordly Prelates, I shall here in the next place give you a taste of the like crimes and practises of some French, Norman Prelates against our Kings, their Soveraignes, either here or in Normandy; and likewise of the Bishops of Scotland, and Ireland; which I thought meet to couple with our English Pre∣lates, these Kingdomes being now happily united under the Government of our gracious Soveraigne, and his deceased Fa∣ther. French and Norman Bishops Acts of this kind. I shall begin with Saint German Bishop of Axerre in France,St. GERMAN. of whom it is storyed, Polyh. l. 5. c. 1. Ribadenira ls flurs des vie des Saints. part 2 p. 71.72. Vincen∣tii speculum hist. l. 20. c. 11. Ant∣nii chron. Tit. 11. c. 18. sect. 3. f. 51. b. See part 1. before p. 224. that comming into England in King Vortigerns time, and repairing to his Court with his Compa∣nions in a cold frosty night, the King shut him out and would give him no lodging; which the Kings Herdsman seeing, taking pitty upon them, and commiserating their affliction, lodged them in his house, and killed a calfe, which they did eate at sup∣per: whose bones Saint German commanded to be brought to him when supper was ended, and putting them all into the Calves skin, he miraculously raisd up the Cale againe from
the dead, (whereas Christ and his Apostles never raised any dead beast, but dead men onely) and put him to his damme, where he sell a eating hay. And on the next day by command from God (as some writers affirme) German deposed Vortigerne from his Kingdome, and made the Herdsman King in his place, to the great admiration of all men: and from thence forth the King of the Britaines descended from the race of this Herds∣man. But Gildas in his History saith, that this happened not to Vortigerne, but to King Powes, named Beuly, whose successors in tat part of Wales issued from this Herdsmans race. Our lear∣ned MartyrSee his suppli∣cation to King Henry the 8. p. 190. Doctor Barnes reciting this story and Legend out of Petrus de Natalibus concludes thus. I thinke no man will binde me to prove this thing (of the Calfe) a lye, and yet it must be preached and taught in each Church, it must be writ∣ten in holy Saints lives, and he ust be a Saint that did it, and why? because hee deposed a King, and set in a Neaes∣herd. ODO Bishop of Bayeux.Odo Wlliemus Malmesb. De Gestis Regum Angl. l. 4. p, 120 121. Holinsherd. p. 17, 18, Henry Huntindon Hist. l. 7. p, 372, 373, &c. Bishop of Bayeux, was at first in great estimation with his Brother William the Conquerour, and bare great rule under him; till at last for envy that Lanfranke was preferred before him, he conspired against him: who understanding thereof com∣mitted him to Prison, where he remained, till the said Prince then lying on his death bed, released and restored him to his former liberty. When the King was dead, William Rufus took him backe into England, supposing no lesse than to have had a speciall friend, and a trusty Counsellour of him in all his af∣faires. But ere long after his comming thither, he fell againe into the same offence of ingratitude, whereof he became cul∣pable in the Conquerours dayes. For perceiving that Lanfranke Arch Bishop of Canterbury was so highly esteemed with the King, that he could beare no rule, and partly suspecting that Lanfrancke had beene chiefe cause of his former imprisonment, he suffered Duke Robert to bereave his Brother King William Rufus of the dominion of England all he might, and conspired with the rest, against his Nephew: and thereupon writ sundry Letters unto Duke Robert, counselling him to come over with an army in all hste, to take the rule upon him, which by his practise should easily be compassed; Duke Robert, thus anima∣ted, pawnes the County of Constance to his younger Brother Henry for a great summe of gold; and therewith returned an∣swer
to the said Bishop, that he should provide and looke for him upon the South coast of England, at a certane ime appoin∣ted. Hereupon Odo fortified the Castle of Rochester, and began to make sore warres against he Kings friends in Kent, and pro∣cured his other complices also to doe the like in other parts of the Realme. And first on the West part of England, Geoffrey Bishop of Constans, with his Nephew Robert de Mowbray Earle of Northumberland, setting forth from Bristow, tooke and sack∣ed Bath and Bekley, with a great part of Wiltshire, and brought the spoile to Bristow, where they fortified the Castle for their greater safety. Robert de Bygod over-rode and robbed all the Countries about Norwich, and Hugh de Grandwesuit spoyled and wasted all the Counries abou Leicester; And Robert Mountgo∣mery Earle of Shrewbury, with William Bishop of Durham, and others, wasted the Country with fire and sword, killing, and taking great numbers of people where they came. Afterwards comming to Worcester they assaulted the City, and burnt the Suburbs: But Bishop Wolstan being in the Towne, encouraged the Citizens to resist; who by his exhortation sallying out of the City, when the enemies waxed negligent, they slew and tooke above 5000. men of them in one day. Archbishop Lanfranke in the mean time, whilst the Realme was thus trou∣bled by Odoes meanes on each side, writeth to, and admonisheth all the Kings friends, to make themselves ready to defend their Prince. And when they were assembled with their forces, he counselled the King to march into the ield speedily with them, to represse his enemies The King following his counsell, com∣manding first all unjust Imposts, Taxes and Tallages to be laid downe, and promising to restore such favourable Lawes as the people should dsire, to ingratiate himsefe with hs Subjects; marcheth with a mighty army into Kent, where the sedition be∣gan takes Tunbridge and Horne-Castle, and afterward bseigeth Bishop Odo in the Castle of Pemsey which the Bshop had strong∣ly fortified. Robert landing with a great Army in England du∣ring this siege, Odo through want of victuall was glad to sub∣mit himselfe, and promised to cause the Castle of Rocheste, to be delivered, but at his comming thiher, they within the Ci∣ty suffred him to enter, and straightwayes laid him fast in Pson. Some judge that this was done under a colour by his owne con∣sent. But the King besieging the City, they within were glad
o deliver i up into his hand. Thus lost Bshop Odo all his Livings and dignities in England, and so returned into Noran∣dy; where under Duke Robert, he had the chiefe government of the Country committed to him. Anno Roger de H∣veden Annal. pars posterior, p. 768. to 778.795 Holinshed p. 150, 151. Neubrig. hist. l. 5. c. 22. Antiqu. ccles. Bri. p. 140. Mat. Westm. An. 1196 p. 71. Dom. 1196. Earle Iohn, King Richard the first his Brother, with his forces riding forth into the Country about Beauvois, made havocke in robbing and spoyling all aore him. Anon as Phillip the Bishop of Beauvois (a man more given to the Campe then to the Church) had knowledge hereof, think∣ing them to be a meee prize for him, with Sir William de Mer∣low and his Sonne, and a great number of other valiant men of warre, came forth into the fields, and encounring with the enemies, fought very stoutly; But yet in the end the Bishop, the Arch-deacon and all the chiefe Captaines were taken, the residue slaine and chased; After this Earle Iohn and Marchades presented the two Prelates with great triumph unto King Ri∣chard earely in the morning,The Bishop of Beauis aken Prisoner lying yet in his bed, as those that were knowne to be his great enemies, saying to him in French, Rise Richard, rise, we have gotten the great Chantor of Beauvois, and a good Quire man (as we take it) to answer him in the same note, and here we deliver them unto you to use at your discretion. The King seeing them smiled, and was very glad for the taking of this Bishop, for that he had ever found him his great adversary; And therefore being thus taken fighting in the field with armour on his backe, thought he might be bold in temporall wise to cha∣stise him, sith he (not regarding his calling) practised to mo∣lest him with temporall weapons. Whereupon he commit∣ted him to close Prison, all armed as he was. It chanced soone after, that two of his Chaplaines came unto the King to Roven where this Bishop was detained, beseeching the King of Li∣cense to attend upon their Master now in captivity; unto whom (as it is of some reported) the King made this answer: I am cn∣tent to make you Iudge in the cause betwixt me and your Master; as for the evills which he hath either done, or else gone about to doe unto me, let the same be forgotten. This is true, that I being taken as I returned from my journey made into the holy Land, and delivered into the Emperours hands, was in respect of my Kingly state, used according thereunto very friendly, and honorably, till your Master comming thither (for what purpose he himselfe best knoweth) had long conference with the Emperour. After which, I for my part,
in the next morning tasted the fruite of their over-nights talke, being then loaden with as many Irons as a good Asse might not very easily have borne. Iudge you therefore what manner of imprisonment your Master deserved at my hands, that procured such ease for me at the Emperours hands. These two Chaplaines had their mouthes stopped with these words thus by the King uttered, and so departed their wayes. The Bishop being still detained in Pri∣son, procured suite to be made to the Pope for his deliverance, writing a Letter to the Pope against the King for this hard u∣sage, recorded by Hoveden; whereupon the Pope writ a Letter to the King in his behalfe, to importune his release. But the Pope being truely informed of the matter, and wisely conside∣ring, that the King had not taken the Bishop Preaching but figh∣ting, and kept him prisoner rather as a rough enemy, then as a peaceable Prelate, would not be earnest with the King for his deliverance, but rather reproved the Bishop, In that hee had preferred secular warfare before the spirituall, and had taken upon him the use of a Speare, insteed of a Crosier, an Helmet, insteed of a Miter, an Herbergean, instead of a white Rocket, a Targe for a Stoale, and an iron Sword, in lieu of the spirituall Sword; and therefore he reused to use any Commandment to King Ricard for the setting o him at Liberty: But yet he promised to doe what he could, by way of intreating, that he might be released. It is reported by some Writers, that the Pope at first not un∣derstanding the truth of the whole circumstance, should send to King Richard, commanding him by force of the Canons of the Church, to deliver his Sonnes, the Bishop and Archdeacon, out of their captivity. To whom the King sent their Armour, with this message written in Latine, Vide an tunica filii tui si, an non: that is, See whether these are the garments of thy Sonnes or not: al∣luding to the saying of those that carryed Iosephs coae to Iacob: Which when the Pope saw, he said, Nay by Saint Peter, it is neither the apparell of my Sonnes, nor yet of my Brethren, but rather they are the vestures of the children of Mars; and so he left them still to be ransomed at the Kings pleasure. The Bishop thus seeing no hope to be delivered without some agreement had betwixt the two Kings, became now, through irkesomnesse of his bonds an earnest mediator for peace, whereas he had beene before an extreame stirrer up of warre. Such a Schoolemaster, is impri∣sonment, and plucker downe of lofty courages. But not pre∣vailing,
he plots how to make an escape. When Queene Elio∣nor ing Richards Mother came to Rhoane, she sent for this Bi∣shops keeprs, to permi the Bishop to cme to her lodging to spake with her; which although it were dangerous, yet they unwillng to resist the Queenes suie, pemited him to goe out of the Towe gaes feeed, with themselves accompanying him: As they passed b a Church, the Bishop ran to the doore thugh , as well as he coud, and laying hold on the Ring of the Churh cryed out with a loud voce saying, I demand the peace of God and the Church. At which speech his Keepers much troubled, laid hands on him, puled him from the Church doore, and brought him backe agane to the Tower, where they kept him more stricktly then before. Which he King hearing of, sent him to Chine, to be kept close Prisoner. After this he offered King Richard 10000 markes for his enlarge∣ment, which he refused. But Kng Iohn comming to the Crown, at the Popes request relased hm or 2000. He taking a so∣lemne Oath before the Cardinall and other Ecclesiastickes, that he would never all his life after, beare armes against Christians, as he had cause now no to doe. Walter Archbi∣shop of Rhoan Normandy inter∣dicted by the Arhbishop of Rven An Reg. 8. Hoveden Annal. pars. posterio, . 765; 76. Mat∣thew Paris, An. 1196. p. 175. Matthew Westm, An. 1196. p. 70, 71.About the same time Walter, Arch bishop of Roven, at the in∣stigation of the French King, pu all the Country of Normandy un∣der senence of inerdiction, because King Richard had begun to sort he a Cale at Lisse Dandely upon a peece of ground which the Archbishop caimd to appertaine unto hi See. The Arch∣bishop would y no meane release the interdict, So as the bo∣dies f dead men lay unbuyed through all the Villages and streetes of te Cties of Normandy. Hereupon, the King much troubled at the Achbshops dealing, whom he had advanced and much imployed, snds o Rome to the Pope to heare the cause be∣tweene them; The matter being brought before the Pope, he perceiving the intent of King Richard, was not otherwise grounded upon an covetous purpose, to defraud the Church o her right, but oney to buld a fortresse in such place as was mot expedient for defence of the Country about, to preserve it from invasion of the enemies, counselled the Archbishop, no to sand against the King in it, but to exchange with him for some other Lands, which was done, and the interdiction by the Pope released. This Archbishop was a great warriour, bore great sway in England, during King Richards absence and cap∣tivity,
and troubled the Realme very much with taxes and warres. Before I come to the Prelates of Scotland, I shall insert one story of a Patriarch of Hierusalem, who affronted our King Henry the second to his face, in a shamefull manner. The story is this. Heraclius Fabian Chron. part 7. p. 353, 354. c. 239. Po∣lychron l. 7. c. 24. Matthw Paris, Hist. Ang. p. 137 Hoved. fol. 358. Speeds Ht. p. 52. sect. 88. Patriarch of Ierusalem came into England in the thir∣tyeth yeare of King Henry the second, and made busy request to him against the Saracens, proffering him the keyes of Ierusa∣lem, and of our Lords grave, with Letters of Pope Lucius the third, charging him, that he should take upon him the King∣dome of Ierusalem, with the royall Standard of the Kingdome as due unto him, and likewise make a royall voyage thither in proper person with an army for the security thereof, and to have minde of the Oath that he before time had made. The King deferred his answer, and Baldwin the Arch bishop Preached, and exhorted men to take the Crosse, by whose meanes many there were that avowed that journey. The King at last, by the advise of his whole Councell and Parliament, gave this answer, that he might not leave his Land without keeping, nor yet leave it to the prey and robbery of the French men; but he would give largely of his owne to such as would take upon them that voyage. With this answer Heralius was discontented, and said, we seeke a man and not money, well neere every Christian Re∣gion sendeth to us money, but no Land sendeth to us a Prince. But the King laid for him such excuses, that the Patriarch de∣parted from him discontented and comfortlesse. Whereof the King being advertised, entending somewhat to recomfort hm with pleasant words followed him to the Sea side. But the more the King thought to satisfie him with his faire speech, the more the Patriarch was discontented, in so much, that at last he said unto him. Hitherto thou hast raigned gloriously, but here∣after thou shalt be forsaken of him that thou at this time forsa∣kest; thinke on him what he hath given to thee, and what thou hast yeelded to him againe; How first thou wert false to the King of France, and after slew Thomas Becket, and last of all, thou forsakest the Protection of Christs Faith. The King was mooved with these word and sayd unto the Patriarch. Though all the men of the Land were one body, and spake with one mouth, they durst not speake o me such words. No
wonder (said the Patriarch) for they love thine and not thee, That is to meane, they love thy goods temporall, and feare the losse of promotion, but they love not thy soule. And when he had so said, he offered his head to the King, saying; Doe by me right as thou didst by Thomas Becket, for I had rather be slaine of thee, then of the Sarasens, for thou art worse then any Sarasen, and they follow a prey and not a man. But the King kept his patience and said, I may not wend out of my Land, for my owne Sonnes will arise against me when I am absent. No wonder (said the Patriarch) for of the devill they came, and to the devill they shall, and so departed from the King in great ire. So rudely have Prelates dealt with the greatest Princes, as thus both in words and deeds, to revile and contemne them, as if they were their slaves to be at their command, though with the ha∣zard of their lives, Crownes and Kingdomes, upon every hu∣mour. I now passe on to the Scottish Prelates. The Bishops of Scotlands acts in this kinde. TO passe from Normandy to Scotland; before I enter into a Relation of any of the Scotish Prelates actions; I shall inform you what Holinshed his History of Scot∣land. p. 183. Holinshed writes of King Davids erection of Bisho∣prickes in Scotland, and his endowing of them with large tem∣porall possessions. This Church in the originall plantation of the Gospell having beene governed onely by Presbyters, and wanting Bishops for some hundred of yeares, following here∣in the custome of the Primitive Church, asScot. chron. l. 3, c. 8. Iohn Fordon,De Gestis Scot. l. 2. c. 3. Iohn Major,De Brit. Eccle. primordiis p. 800 Bishop Vsher, and Concil p. 342. Spelman testifie; David King of Scots erected foure Bishoprickes, within this Realme, Rosse, Brochin, Dunkeld and Dublaine, indowing them with rich Rents, faire Lands, and sundry right commodious possessions. Moreover, he translated the Bishops See of Murthlake unto Aberden, for sundry advised considerations, augmenting it with certaine re∣venues, as he thought expedient. He was admonished (as the report goeth) in his sleepe, that he should build an Abbey for a religious Order, to live in together;Holyrood house builded. Whereupon he sent for workemen into France, and Flanders, and set them in hand to build this Abbey of Canons regular, as he was admonish∣ed, dedicating it in the honour of a Crosse (whereunto he bare speciall devotion) for that very strangely it slipped into his
hands on a time, as he was pursuing and following of a Hart in the Chase: But enough of these Monkish devises. Many prudent men blame greatly the unmeasurable liberality of King David;Liberality in King David to∣ward the Church repro∣ved. which he used towards the Church, in diminishing so hugely the revenues of the Crowne, being the cause that many Noble Princes his Successors, have come to their finall ends, for that they have beene constrained through want of treasure to maintaine their royall estates, to procure the fall of sundry great Houses, to possesse their Lands and livings; also, to raise payments and exactions of the Common people, to the utter impoverishment of the Realme. And sometime they have beene constrained to invade England by warres, as desperate men not caring what came of their lives. Other whiles they have beene enforced to stampe naughty money to the great prejudice of the Common wealth. All which mischiefes have followed since the time that the Church hath beene thus enrich∣ed, and the Crowne impoverished.The Church en∣riched, and the Crowne impove∣rished. Therefore King Iames the first, when he came to King Davids Sepulcher at Dunfirm∣ling, he said;The saying of King Iames the first. that he was a sore Saint for the Crowne.A sore Saint. Iohn Major. Meaning that he left the Church over-rich, and the Crowne too poore. For he tooke from the Crowne (as Iohn Major writeth in his Chronicles) 60000. pound Scotish of yearely revenues;60000. pound in Lands given to the Church. Where∣with he endowed those Abbyes. But if King David had consi∣dered how to nourish true Religion, he had neither endowed Churches with such riches, nor built them with such royalty, for the superfluous possessions of the Church (as they are now used) are not onely occasion to evill Prelates to live in most in∣solent pompe and corrupt life,Superfluous pos∣sessions of the Church. but an assured Net to draw gold and silver out of Realmes. Thus Holinshed of the Bishops and Bishoprickes of Scotland in generall. In a Will. Harinson descrip. Eng. l. 2. c. 2. p. 140. Convocation at Fairefax under King Gregory, Anno, 875. It was decreed by the Bishops of Scotland, that Ordina∣ries and Bishops should have authority to order all men, both pub∣like and private (yea Kings themselves) as well for the keeping of Faith given, as to constraine them to confirme the same, and to punish such as should be found in the contrary. This was a high straine of insolency and treachery against the Prerogative of the King and Nobles priviledges, whom these Prelates endeavoured to en∣thrall to their Lordly pleasures; and perchance it was in affront of King Davids Law who ordained Anno 860. (but 15. yeares
before) that Priests should attend their Cures, and not intermed∣dle with secular businesses, or keepe Horses, Haukes, or Hounds. A very good Law, had it beene as well executed. Anno Walsigham hist. Angl. p. 28. Annals of Ire∣land in Master Cambden. p. 160, 161. 1294. the Scots conspiring together against their Soveraigne Lord and King, Iohn Bailiol, rose up in armes a∣gainst him, and inclosing him in a Castle, they elected to them∣selves twelve Peeres after the manner of France; whereof the foure first were Bishops, by whose will and direction all the af∣faires of the Kingdome should be managed. And this was done in despite to disgrace the King of England, who set the said Iohn over them against their wils. Whereupon the King of England brought an Army towards Scotland, in Lent following, to represse the rash arrogancy and presumption of the Scots against their owne Father and King; and miserably wasted the Country, over-running it quite, and making both them and their King whom he tooke Prisoner, to doe homage, and sweare fealy, and give pledges to him as Hist. Anglic p. 31, 32, 33, 34, 36 Walsingham recies more at large. Among these Bishops it seemes that the Bishop of lascow was one of the chiefe opposites against the King of Scotland and England, for Anno 1298. I finde this Bishop one of the chiefe Captaines of the Rebellious Scots, and leading an Army in the field; which being disbanded for feare of the Eng∣lish forces, upon promise of pardon, this Bishop Ne proditionis notam incurreret, lest he should incurre the brand of treason, rendred himselfe to Earle Warren sent into Scotland with an Army, who committed him prisoner to the Castle of Rokburrow, for a Rebell, where he was detained. Wimundus Bi∣shop of the IlesWilliam of Hist. l. 1. c. 23, 24. Neubery records; Tha David King of Scots was divinely chastised by one Wimundus, an English man of obscure parents, made Bishop of the Scottish Islands; who waxing proud of his Bishopricke, began to attempt great matters: Not con∣tent with the dignity of his Episcopall Office, he did now in his mind walke in great and wonderfull matters above himselfe, having a mouth speaking great things, with a most vaine heart. In conclusion, gathering together Poore and bold men, no fearing the judgement of verity, he gave out himselfe to be the Sonne of Count Murrey, spoyled of the inheritance of his Fa∣thers, by the King of Scots; that he had an intention no one∣ly to prosecute his right, but likewise o revenge his wrongs; that he desired to have them, the Consorts both of his danger
and fortune that i was a businesse verily of some labour and danger, but of great reputation, and much emolument. All of them therefore being animated by, and sworne to his words, he began cruelly to play Rex through the Neighbour Islands, and he was now like Nemroth, A mighty hunter before the Lord, dis∣daining according to the duty of his Episcopall Office, to be a Fisher of Men, like Peter, his Millitary troopes encreasing day∣ly, amongst whom, he being taller than the rest, almost by the head and shoulders, like a great Generall, inflamed the mindes of all the rest. He made excursions into the Provinces of Scot∣land, exterminating all things with rapines and murthers; and when as a royall Army was sent against him, retyring himselfe into remote Forrests, or lying backe into the Ocean, he elu∣ded all their warlike preparations; and the Army retyring, hee brake out againe out of his lurking places, to infest the Pro∣vinces. When therefore he prospered in all things, and be∣came now terrible, even to the King himselfe; a certaine Bishop a most simple man, miaculously repressed his violence for a time; to whom, when he denouncing warre, threatned utter devastation, unlesse he would pay him a tribute; He answe∣red, The will of the Lord be done, for by my example, never shall any Bishop be made the tributary to another Bishop. There∣fore, having exhorted his people, he meetes him comming with fury, onely greater than he in Faith, but farre unlike him in other things, and for the encouragement of his Souldiers, he himselfe giving the first stroke of the battle, casting a small Axe at him, by Gods good pleasure prostrated the enemy marching in the front: With whose fall the people being encouraged, rann violently upon the Robbers, and slaying a great part of them, compelled the most fierce captaine unmanfully to fly. This, hee himselfe was wont afterwards to relate among his friends with mirth, as glorying, That onely God could over come him by the Faith of a simple Bishop. After this, resuming his Forces, he wasted the Ilands and Provinces of Scotland, as at first: Whereupon the King was compelled to appease this Robber; to which end using better counsell than formerly, he esolved, to deale wisely with a proud and craty enemy, with whom he could not deale valiantly: Therefore granting to him a certaine Province, with the monastery of Fornace, he suspen∣ded his excursions for a time. But when as he gloriously pas∣sed
through the subdued Province like a King, with a power∣full army, and became exceeding troublesome to the Mona∣stery it selfe of which he had beene a Monke; by the consent of the Nobles (who hated either his power, or his insolence) some Inhabitants of the said Province laid waite for him: and having gotten a convenient time, when as hee followed the multitude he had sent before him to his lodging, with a slow pace, and a small guard, they apprehending him, bound him and put out both his eyes, because both were wicked: and cutting off the cause of a virulent race, they gelt him (writes my Author) for the peace of the Kingdome of Scotland, not for the Kingdome of Heaven: This Bishop, thus emasculated, af∣terwards came to Belleland, and there continued quiet many yeares till his death; Yet he is reported then to have said, that if he had the eye but of a Sparrow, his Enemyes should no way insult off their Acts against him. So Neubrigenss. If all our Lordly Bishops were gelt like this, for the peace of the Kingdome, both of Scotland and England, that we might be no more troubled with this their Lordly virulent generation in uture ages, I presume it would be as great a blessing, as could befall both Kingdomes and Churches. Holinshed Hist. of Scot. p. 196. Adam Bishop of Cathnes slaine by the people of hat Country. About the yeare 1230.Adam Bishop of Cathnes. the men of Cathnes, sore offended with their Bishop, named Adam, for that upon refusall to pay their Tithes, he had accursed and excommunicated them, fel up∣on him within his owne house; And first scourging him with Rods, at length set fire upon him, and burnt him within his owne kitchin: Which Act being reported to the Scotish King Alexander, as then sojourning at Edenburgh, he hasted forth with all speed to punish the offenders,Streight execu∣tion. not ceasing till he had taken 400. of them all which number he caused to be hang∣ed; and for that he would have no succession to come of such a wicked seed, he appointed all their Sons to lose their stones. The place where they were so gelded, is called even to this day the Stony-hill.The Stony-hill. The Eale of Cathnes, for that he neither suc∣coured the Bishop in time of need, nor yet sought to punish the offenders that did this cruell deed, was deprived of his Earledome,The Earle of Cathnes looseth his Lands. and the Lands belonging to the same. The Pope highly commended King Alexander,King Alexander commended of the Pop for this punishment taken of them that had so cruelly murthered their Bishop. Thus was one small cruelty occasioned by this Bishops covetousnesse, and
perversenesse, punished with a farre greater; yea, such a one as is hardly parralleld in story; and that by the instigation of the Prelates and Pope, who applauded this barbarous cruelty. Had all Lordly, Traytorly, Rebellious, and Seditious Prelates beene thus gelded, that no succession migh spring from their wicked seed, to infest both Chuch and State, it had beene a more profitable and commendable action, than the gelding of these poore Laymen. King Holinsh. Histo∣ry of Scotland, p. 291. Iames the fourth,Will. Elfingtone Bishop of Aberdin. Anno 1504. when he had formerly ministred justice so amongst his Subjects, that they lived in great peace and quietnesse, William Elfinstone Bishop of Aberdene, one of his Counsell, devised wayes to win the King great profit and gaine, by calling his Barons, and all those that held any Lands within this Realme, to shew their evidences by way of recognition; and if they had not sufficient writings to shew, warrantabl by the antecedent Lawes of the Kingdome, the Lands should remaine at the Kings pleasure. But when the King perceived his people to grudge herewith, and not with∣out case, as with a thing devised to disquiet his people and the whole Country; of his owne courteous nature he easily a∣greed with the possessors of such Lands: For the which he purchased great love amongst his people, and the Bishop, the deviser of this Ordinance, wanne passing great hatred and malice.Gawin Bishop of Dunkeld. Anno. 1521. Holish. History of Scotland, p. 307. A Parliament was summoned to be kept at E∣denburgh, the 26. of Ianuary, and a generall Sommons of for∣eiture proclaimed at the Market Crosse in Edenburgh, wherein divers were sommoned to make their appearance in the said Parliament, to be tryed for sundry great offences by them com∣mitted: Whereupon Gawin Dowglasse Bishop of Dunkeld hea∣ring of this Proclamation (though not named in it) conscious to himselfe of great offences, fled into England, and remained a London in the Savoy, where he dyed. Anno 1569. Martyns Hi∣story, p. 552. There was a great rebellion in the North by the Earles of Westmorland and Northumberland and others:Bishop of Rosse. Mur∣ray then Regent of Scotland, informed Queene Elizabeth, that the Bishop of Rosse, then in England was the Authour of that Rebellion, whereupon he was committed to the Bishop of Lon∣don, to remaine his Prisoner. As the Archbishops of Canterbury Primates of all England,
have beene the greatest Traytors and Incendiaries of all other our Prelates; so have the Bishops and Archbishops of Saint Andrewes, Primates of all Scotland, beene the like in that Realme, of which I shall give you a taste. Iohn Scot. Roger de Hoveden Annalium pars posterior, p. 597, 98, 599 614, to 617, 621.646, to 649. In the yeare of our Lord 1180. Richard Bishop of Saint An∣drews deceasing, there arose a great Schisme about the election of a new Bishop; for the canons of the Church of S. Andrews, elected Iohn Scot for their Bishop, and William King of Scots, made choyce of Hugh his Chaplaine, and caused him to be consecra∣ted by the Bishops of his Kingdome, notwithstanding the said Iohns appeale to the Pope. Whereupon Pope Alexander sent Alexis a sub-Deacon of the Church of Rome into Scotland, to heare and determine the controversie betweene these two com∣petitors: Who after a long debate, finding, that the said Iohn was Canonically elected, and that Hugh after the ap∣peale to the Pope, was violently intruded by the King into the Bishopricke of Saint Andrewes, immediately deposed him from his Bishopricke, and by his authority imposed perpetuall si∣lence on him; confirmed the election of Iohn, and caused him to be consecrated Bishop of Saint Andrewes, by the Bishops of Scotland, the King neither prohibiting nor contradicting it, yea, permitting it by the Counsell of the Bishops of his Realme. But immediately after his consecration, the King prohibited him to stay within his kingdome: and Hugh carryed himselfe as Bishop, no lesse than he did before his deprivation; and taking with him the Episcopall Chaplet, Staffe, and Ring, with o∣ther things, he unlawfully detaining them, and beginning his journey towards Rome, departed. And because he would not restore the things he carryed away, Allexis excommunica∣ted him, interdicted his Bishopricke, and the Pope confirmed that sentence. Hereupon the Pope writes three Letters; one to the Bishops, Abbots, and Prelates of all Scotland, the Prior of Saint Andrewes, and the Clergy and people of that Diocesse, honourably to receive Iohn as their Bishop, within 8 dayes af∣ter the receipt of this Letter, and to submit unto him as their Bishop; and putting on the spirit of fortitude to labour wisely and manfully for the preservation of Ecclesiasticall Justice, and to endeavour to appease the Kings displeasure; But if the King were averse, or inclining to the Counsell of wicked men, then they ought to obey God and the holy Church of Rome more than
men; otherwise he must and would ratifie the sentence which Hugh Bishop of Durham had pronounced against the contuma∣cious and rebellious. Another Letter to all the Bishops and Prelates of Scotland, to denounce Hugh excommunicated, and to avoyd his company as an excommunicate Person, till he re∣stored to Iohn, the goods of the Church he had taken away, and given him competent satisfaction for the things he had destroy∣ed. Moreover, the Pope granted to Roger Arch-bishop of Yorke, a power Legatine in Scotland, and commanded him that he, together wih Hugh, Bishop of Durham, should denounce a entence of excommunication against the King of Scotland, and in∣terdict his Kingdome, unlesse he would permit the said Iohn to hold his Bishopricke in peace, and give security to him to keepe the peace; And the same Pope strictly commanded Iohn, by vertue of his canonicall obedience, that neither act of love, nor feare o any man, nor through any mans suggestion or will, he should rashly presume to relinquish the Church of Saint Andrewes, to which he was consecrated, and in which he was confirmed by Apostolicall authority, nor presume to receive another Bi∣shopricke; adding, that if he should attempt it, he would take away both Bishopricks from him without exception. After which, Pope Alexander writ a Letter to King William himselfe, enjoyning him thereby within twenty dayes after the receipt thereof, to give peace and security to the Bishop: and to receive him unto his favour, so that he ought not to doubt the Kings indignation; Alioquin noveritis, &c. Else he should know, that he had commanded Roger Archbishop of Yorke, Legate of the Apostolicke See in Scotland, to put his Kingdome under inter∣dict, and to excommunicate his person notwithstanding any appeale. And that he should know for certaine, that if he persisted in his violence, as he had formerly laboured that his kingdome might have liberty, so he would thenceforth doe his endea∣vour, Vt in pristinam subjectionem revertatur, that it should re∣vert unto its Priestine subjection: (He meant, I take it, not to himselfe but to England;) But the King obeying in nothing, his Apostolicall mandates, expelled Iohn, Bishop of Saint An∣drewes, and Matthew, Bishop of Aberden, his Uncle, ot of his kingdome; Whereupon Roger Arch-bishop of Yorke, Hugh Bishop of Durham, and Alexis prosecuting the Popes command, Pronounced a Sentence of Excommunication against the Kings per∣son,
and a sentence of Interdict against his Kingdome. And Iohn on the other side, fulminated a sentence of excommunication against Richard de Mrtue Constable of Scotland, and other of the Kings familiars, who disturbed the peace betweene the King and him; And Roger of Yorke, and Hugh of Durham, like∣wise enjoyned the Prior of Saint Andrewes, and all Ecclesi∣asticall persons within the Diocesse, to come to Iohn their Bi∣shop, and yeeld due subjection to him; else they would pro∣nounce a sentence of suspention against them, as contumacious and rebellious. And when as certaine Ecclesiastickes of the Diocesse, for feare of the said suspension, came to the said Iohn, the King cast them all out of his kingdome, with their children and kindred, and with their very sucking children, yet lying in their swathing cloutes and hanging on their Mothers brests; Whose miserable proscription and exile, the foresaid Roger of Yorke, and Hugh of Durham beholding, Reiterated their former excommunication and interdiction; Commanding all Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and Ecclesiasticall persons, firmely, and unmoveably to observe the same, and very warily to shunne the King himselfe, as an excom∣municate Person. Not long after Roger of Yorke fell sicke and dyed, which the King of Scot hearing, rejoyced exceedingly thereat. And taking advise with the Bishops, Earles, and o∣ther wise men of his kingdome, he sent Ioceline Bishop of Gla∣scow, Arnulfe Abbot of Melros, and others to Pope Lucius to absolve him from the foresaid Excommunication and interdict; and if they might by any meanes, to procure Iohn to be depri∣ved: By whose solicitation the Pope released the Excommu∣nication and interdict, as appeares by his Letter to the King, recorded at large by Hoveden. After which the Pope sent one Rolland Elect Bishop of Dole into Scotland, to make peace be∣tweene the King and Iohn; who after long debate made this accord; that Hugh should abjure the Bishopricke of Saint An∣drewe; and that Iohn should also release all his claimes there∣to, and in leiu thereof should have the Bishopricke of Dun∣kelden, and all the rents he had before the election, and the Chancery of the King, and forty markes rent out of the Bi∣shopricke of Saint Andrewes. But Hugh, when the King requi∣red him to renounce his Bishopricke, answered, That he would rather receive his judgement in the Court of Rome, than thus ab∣jure his Bishopricke, to which he had beene consecrated. And forth∣with
he reproved the Letters which Iohn had impetrated from Rome against him of falsehood, and appealed to the Pope: Whereupon Rolland not able to proceed, certified the Pope at large of the agreement and proceedings. After this Iohn and Hugh appearing before the Pope and Cardinals at Velletris, their cause was fully heard and debated in their audience; whereupon, by the common Counsell of his Brethren, he de∣prived both of them, and caused them to resigne the Bishoprick into his hands, freely and absolutely; And within ew dayes after, by the advise of all the Cardinalls, the Pope restored and confirmed the Bishopricke of Saint Andrewes to Hugh, and gave the Bishopricke of Dunkelden, with what ever the King formerly offered, to Iohn. Both the Bishops returning home, received these severall Bishoprickes; but because the King would not restore to Iohn the things taken from him; he questioned Hugh againe for the Bishopricke of Saint Andrewes: For which purpose he went to Rome, where he procured Hugh to be deposed, (though but newly setled there before) and brought with him five severall Letters from Pope Clement, tou∣ching this businesse: The first to Iocelin Bishop of Glascow, Matthew Bishop of Aberden, and others, declaring the deposi∣tion of Hugh, and absolving all within his Diocesse from his subjection and obedience; and enjoyning them to elect Iohn, and receive him for their Bishop: The second to William King of Scots, to receive Iohn into favour, to remove Hugh, and in∣vest Iohn in this Bishopricke: The third to Henry the second, King of England, beseeching, admonishing, and enjoyning him as he tendred the remission of his sinnes, and out of his reve∣rence of Saint Peter, and him, diligently to admonish and per∣swade the King of Scots, Et si necesse fuerit, districtione regali, qua ei praemines, & concessa tuae regiae celsitudini potestate com∣pellas, &c. And if need were, To compell him by his royall distresse, whereby he was above him, and by the power granted to his royall Highnesse, to lay aside all his rancor against this Bishop, conceived by the malice of some whisperers, and removing all excuses to pardon him, and to permit him quietly to enjoy the Diocesse of Saint Andrewes, without any further trouble or suite, seeing he was ready, and prepared to be obedient to the King in all things: The fourth to all the Clergy, and of the Diocesse of Saint Andrewes, enjoyning them humbly and devoutly to re∣ceive
Iohn as their proper Father and Pastor, and fromthence∣forth to give all due reverence and obedience to his wholesome admonitions, and mandates wihout any diimulation: decla∣ring all elections of any other to the Bishopricke, voyd, and threatning to put all the Diocesse under interdict, if they pre∣sumed to conspire against Iohn, untill they should acknowledge their offence, and submit unto him. The fifth to three Scot∣tish Bishops, and sundry Abbots, reciting how great persecu∣tions, calamities, and pressures the Church of Saint Andrewes had suffered under the shadow of the Kings indignation; and what great dangers and labours Iohn had sustained or the pre∣servation of the liberties of the Church committed to him, con∣firmed by two Popes his predecessours; and requiring them after the receipt of this Letter, to meete together like wise and provident men, and to goe to the Kings presence, and diligently to admonish, and induce him to remit the rancor of his indignation against the said Bishop, and not to contemne the Church of Rome herein, but without delay wholesomely to obey, and humbly to submit to her, and to their admonitions, as it was agreeable to his Kingly glory and salvation, and qui∣etly to permit the Bishop to enjoy the Bishopricke of Saint An∣drewes. And that i (which God forbid) he should resist these Apostolicall monitions to the perill of his owne salvation, then they should promulgate an iterdict against his highnesse Kingdome, his Person, and all his Favorites and Abettors, within twenty dayes, notwithstanding any appeale, by his Apostolicall authority: And hould strike those with the like sentence, who were obedient to Hugh, and fomented him in his obstinacy (seeing the See Aposto∣licke had perpetually removed from Saint Andrewes, and excommu∣nicated him) and should publickely pronounce them to be excommu∣nicated as long as they did thus; and should be carefully avoyded by others, untill they should returne to the Churches obedience, and de∣maund the benefit of absolution from Iohn as their Bishop. En∣joyning them farther, to purifie and sanctifie according to the custome of the Church, all the Altars, and Chali∣ces, in which Hugh had celebrated, during his excommuni∣cation; and to suspend all the Clerkes of Saint Andrewes, both from their office and benefice, and knit them fast in the bond of excommunication, who should be contumacious and rebelli∣ous against Iohn, untill they submitted to him. The King
hearing these things, being at last overcome by the perswasion and intreaty of his friends, received Ion into his favour; and granted him peaceably to enjoy the Bshopricke of Dunkelden, and all the Rents he formerly had before his consecration; up∣on condition, that Iohn should quite claime from all suite the Bishopricke of Saint Andrewes; which notwithstanding the Popes Letters wherewith he was furnished, he was content to doe, and to submit to the Kings mercy; knowing, That a mor∣sell of bread is better with joy, than an house full of sacrifice with con∣tention. Hugh being degraded from Saint Andrewes, and ex∣communicated goes to Rome, and giving caution to stand to the judgement of the Church, he was mercifully absolved by the Pope, and within few dayes after dyed at Rome of the plague with most of his family; Whereupon the King of Scotland gave the Bishoprick of Saint Andrews to Roger the Earle of Leicestors Sonne, then his Chancellour, Iohn being present, and not con∣tradicting it. The same Hedn Annalium pars posteri, p. 6512 714. yeare 1188. King William sent Mes∣sengers to Pope Clement, and obtained of him Letters of Pro∣tection in this forme, touching the exemption of the Churches of his Kingdome. Clemens Episcopus, servus servorum Dei, cha∣rissimo in Christo filio, Willielmo illustri Scotorum Regi, salu∣tem & Apostolicam benedictionem. Cum universi Christi jugo subjecti ad sedem Apostolicam patrocinium invenire debeant & favo∣rem, illos tamen specialius convnit munimne protectionis confove∣ri, quorum fidem ac devotionem in pluribus est experta, ut ad ip∣sius electionis favorem tanto amplius provocetur, & ejus reverentiae devotiori affectione subdantur, quanto benevolentiae ipsius & gratiae pignus se noverint certius assecutos. E propter (O charissime in Christo fili) reverentiam, ac devotionem, quam ad Romanam te habuisse a longis retro temporibus Ecclesiam novimus, attendentes, praesentis scripti pagina duximus statuendum, ut Scoticana Ec∣clesia Apostolicae sedi, cujus filia specialis existit, nullo mediante debeat subjacere. In qua hae sedes Episcopales esse noscuntur, Eccle∣siae videlicet, S. Andreae, Glascuensis, Dunkeldensis, Dum∣blinensis, Brehinensis, Aberdonensis, Moraviensis, Rosensen∣sis, Katinensis, & nemini liceat nisi Romano Pontifici, vel le∣gato ab ipsius latere destinato, in regnum Scotiae interdicti, vel ex∣communicationis sententiam promulgare, & si promulgata fuerit, de∣cernimus non valere, adjicimus, ut nulli de caetero, qui de regno Scoiae non fuerit, nisi quem Apostolica sedes propter hoc de corpore
suo specialiter destinaverit, licitum sit in eo ligationis officium ex∣ercere. Prohibemus autem ut controversiae, quae fuerint in regno illo de possessionibus ejus exortae, ad examen extra regnum positorum ju∣dicum non trabantur, nisi ad Romanam Ecclesiam fuerit appellatum. Si qua vero scripta contra hujus libertatis statuta apparuerint im∣petrata, vel in posterum, istius concessionis mentione non habita, con∣tigerit impetrari, nullum tibi, vel ipsi regno circa hujus praerogati∣vae concessionem, praejudicium generetur praeterea libertates, & im∣munitates tibi, vel eidem regno, vel Ecclesiis in eo constitutis a prae∣decessoribus nostris Romanis pontificibus indultas, & hactenus ob∣servatas, ratas habemus, & illibatas futuris temporibus statuimus permanere. Nulli ergo hominum liceat paginam nostrae constitutio∣nis, & prohibitionis infringere, vel ei aliquatenus contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare praesumpserit, indignationem omnipotentis Dei, & beatorum Petri & Pauli Apostolorum ejus se noverit incursurum. Datum Laterani tertia Idus Martii pontificatus nostri anno primo. Not long after the same King procured the same Letter verba∣tim from Pope Coelestine,Hveden ibid. p. 714. in the first yeare of his Papacy. But to returne to our Bishops of this See. Robert de Bruse.In the yeare of Grace 1306. Robert de Bruse, invader of an∣others kingdome,Math. Westm. An. 1306. p. 456, &c. and a paricide, like Adonias, caused himselfe to be Crowned King of Scotland, in the Abbey of Schone, after the manner of his Country, by the Bishops of Saint Andrewes, and Glascow, the Abbot of Schone, and other conspirators, contrary to the Oath they and he had taken to King Edward the first: Which was the occasion of a bloody warre, as you may read more at large in our Historians. Anno 1445. The Earle ofHlinshed Hist. of Scot. p. 271.276, 277, 279. Iames Kedie. Dowglas who ruled wholly a∣bout King Iames the second, set the Earle of Crawford against the Bishop of Saint Andrewes called Iames Kenedy, Sisters sonne to King Iames the first, who tooke a great prey out of the Bi∣shops Lands in Fiffe. Whereupon the Earle of Crawford on the one part, and the Earle of Huntly with the Ogilinde on the other, met at Arbroth in set battle, where the Earle of Craw∣ford, and 600. more on both sides were slaine: King Iames the second, Anno 1454. by the advise of this Bishop, dispatch∣ed out of the way, such as he any wayes mistrusted, of which number was the Dowglasses, whose puissance and authority, not without cause, he evermore suspected; he turned the Earle of Angus, and divers of the Dowglasses blood that were of their fa∣ction
from them, and made them to revolt from the other confederates, so as in the end he had them all at his pleasure Anno 1462. All things at that season were ordered by the ad∣vice and Counsell of this Bishop, who governed the Realme of Scotland, as well during the minority of Iames the third, as also in the dayes of his Father, King Iames the second. And was the occasion of many tumults and warres therein.Graham. The Francis Thi. his continuation of Hlinsheds hi∣story of Scot∣land, p. 454, 455 Scots eeking meanes to rid thmselves from subjecti∣on of the Bishop of Yorke, who was anciently the Metropoli∣tane of Scotland, did in the yeare of Christ 1474. obtaine of the Pope, that they might have a Metropolitane See within themselves, by reason of the continuall warres which were be∣tweene the two Nations,Hlinsh. Histo∣ry of Scotland, London, 1585. p. 282. Mr. Cambdens Scotia. p. 32, 33. during which they could neither use appellations to their Metropolitane, nor have other Bishops consecraed. Whereupon the Pope erected the Church of Saint Andrewes into an Arch-Bishopricke in the time of King Iames the third, touching which, thus writeth Lesleus, li. 8. p. 317. Hoc anno (which was the yeare of Christ 1474) Patri∣cius Grahamus sedis Andreapolitanae Ecclesiae Episcopus crebris li∣teris ac nuntiis a Papa efflagitavit, ut Metropolitana potestas in divi Andreae civitate figeretur; iniquum esse enim contendit, ut Scoti ab Eboracensi Episcopo tanquam primate penderent, cum propter crebra bella (quibus se Scoti & Angli mutuo lacessunt) Scotis ad illum non pateretur tutus accessus, nec liberum jus, praesertim in ap∣pellationibus. Annuit summus Pontifex, ut Andreapolitano dein∣ceps Episcopo potestas Metropolitana incumbat; dies indulto Pontifici promulgandi mense Septembri dicta est, atque maxima populi no∣biliumque laetitia celebrata. Episcopi reliqui Grahami odio flagrantes illius authoritatem repudiant, Regisque animum ingenti pecunia (which was as other Authours say eleven thousand Markes) occupant, ne Grahami partibus studeret. Interea praesules Romam mittunt qui sui defensionem contra Grahamum suscipiunt. But in the end they did not prevaile. Graham was made Arch bi∣shop. Patricke Graham being Bishop of Saint Andrewes, and the first Archbishop of that See,Thin. ibidem. was after his advancement to that title deprived in this sort. Hlin. History of Scotland, p. 282, 283. Leus lib. 8. p. 3.18. In the yeare of Christ 1477 Pope Xistus, the fourth of that name, sent a Legate called Hus∣man, into Scotland, which should displace this Patricke the Archbishop of Saint Andrewes, condemned by the sentence of the Pope and the Cardinals, for an Heretique, Schismaticke,
Simonicke; Whereupon he was deprived of all Ecclesiasti∣call dignity, and commanded to perpetuall Prison. In whose place was William Schewes chosen, to whose custody and dis∣position this Patricke was committed, after which Graham be∣ing removed for his safe imprisonment first to Saint Colmes Isle, then to Dumfermling, and lastly to Lochelevine, there in the end he dyed, and was buryed in Saint Sarffis, or Servimanus Isle in Lochelevine, after that he had beene three yeares Arch Bi∣shop. William SchewesWilliam Francis Thin. Ibid. Schewes being created Archbishop of Saint An∣drewes, in the yeare of Christ, 1478. as some have, or 1479 as others have it, in the Holy-Rood House in Edenburgh, in the presence of King Iames, and many of the Nobility received the Pall, as the ensigne of his Metropolitane power, being decla∣red Legate and Primate of Scoland; at what time he was not withstood by any of the oher Bishops, who being estranged from shewing any favour to Graham, did often inringe his au∣thority, and in the end expelled the same Graham from his Archiepiscopall See. After which in the yeare of Christ 1482. This Archbishop Schewes, fled into his owne Country, and after at the request of the King, resigned his Archbishopricke, contenting himselfe with the Bishopricke of Murry. Andrew Steward.AndrewFrancis Thin. Ibid. Steward Uncle to King Iames the third, was up∣on the resignation of William Schews made Archbishop of Saint Andrewes; after which in the yeare of Christ 1484. the King sent this Archbishop Embassadour to Rome for the obtaining of certaine priviledges, which he brought to effect. In the Holinshed History of Scot∣land, p. 288. yeare of Christ 1491. in the time of King Iames the fourth, about the third yeare of his Raigne was great contenti∣on betweene the Archbishops of Saint Andrewes and Glascow touching both their Authorities Which when it had drawne many of the Nobility into divers factions, it was ceased by the King for a certaine time, untill all doubt thereof might be ta∣ken away by deciding the same by the Canon Law, before Ec∣clesiasticall Judges. Then in the yeare of Christ 1507. being about the nineteenth yeare of Iames the fourth, the Bishop of Saint Andrewes with the Earle of Arrane were sent Embassadors into France. Alexa. Steward,Alexander Francis Thin. ibid. Steward, Bastard Sonne to King Iames the fourth was made Archbishop of Saint Andrewes in the yeare of Christ
1510. About the 22. yeare of the Raigne of the same Iames the fourth. This man having long studyed with Erasmus in Germany, and in the Low Countries, was advanced to this See of the Arch bishopricke, when he was yet in Flaunders; who having intelligence thereof by his friends, came forthwith into Scotland, where he was joyfully received by the King, the No∣bility and his kindred: He was slaine together with his Fa∣ther King Iames the fourth, and a Scottish Bishop more, at Plo∣den field in the yeare of Christ 1513. Speeds history p. 1002. Hall chron. 36, H. 8. f. 255. The Cardinall of Scot∣land promised the Scots Heaven, for the destruction of England Perhaps they might obtaine it by their deaths, but they got no more English earth then would interre their slaine bodies. After which Iohn Hepburne Prior of Saint Andrewes strongly be∣sieged the Castle of Saint Andrewes, and forced the same to be yeelded unto him; the cause of whih besiege grew, that Hep∣burne being chosen Bishop of Saint Andrewes, by his Canons of that Church (whereunto the whole Nobility were helpers) was hindered to possesse that Archbishopricke by such stipen∣dary people of Gawine Dowglasse, as kept the Castle, Less. pag. 375. Holinsh. history of Scot. p. 303, 304. where∣upon the Queene, and the Earle of Angus, after that they un∣derstood how the Castle was by force come into the hands of Hepburne, did take in evill part, that he who was so trouble∣some unto them, should ascend to so high a dignity, and that Gwine Dowglasse, so deerely to them beloved, and to whom they had given that Bishopricke, should be helplesse of the re∣covery thereof. Whereupon the Queene, and the Duke of Albany, diligently laboured by Embassadours sent to Rome, that a third person (sith Gawin Dowglasse could not obtaine it) might be advanced thereunto; which third man was Andrew Forman Bishop of Murry, further requiring therewithall; that he might be Abbot of Dumfermling and Aberbroth, which in the end with much intreaty they obtained of the Pope. Fran. Thin Ibid. Andrew Forman Bishop of Murry,Andr. Formam was at Edenburgh by the Popes Bulls on the eighth of the Kalends of Ianuary in the yeare of Christ 1515. being about the second yeare of the Raigne of Iames the fifth, declared Archbishop of Saint Andrewes, and Abbot of Dumfermeling, and Aberbroth. Whereupon the Pri∣or of Sain Andrewes before named, still contending that he was Archbishop, both in respect of the election of the Coven, and the consent of the Nobility, did labour all he could against For∣man,
appealing him to Rome; for which cause he with the Lord Hales and other his friends come to Edenburgh to defend the matter, at what time the Lord Hume Chamberlaine of Scotland, and such others as openly assisted Forman, did oppose them∣selves against the Prior; which Nobility because they were great in the Court, did the more molest and hinder Hepburne; shortly after by publike Edict, and Proclamation of the King, banishing the Prior and his followers, proclaiming them Re∣bels, and putting them to the home. Hepburne being stricken with the sharpenesse of that Precept, did privily depart the Towne, and the Prior went to Rome, hoping by the Popes au∣thority to wrest from Forman the Archbishopricke, which he could not obtaine by violence. But how he sped at Rome I doe not know, for I onely finde this, that in the yeare follow∣ing, being the yeare of Christ, 1516. about the third yeare of the same Iames the fifth, that the Governour perceiving, that all these contentions, hatreds and divisions of the Nobility did arise by these bralls, which were betweene Forman and Hep∣burne for the See of Saint Andrewes to the great diquieting of the Realme, by such part-takings as chanced thereabouts among the Lords, desired to cure this grievous wound made in the Common-wealth. Wherefore he perswaded Andrew Forman, that he should resigne all his Ecclesiasticall Benefices into his hands in an open assembly at Edenburgh, for by that meanes, the Governour thought that he might pacifie the minds of the No∣bility, and utterly rout out those branches of dissention. Where∣upon there was a day appointed to the Nobility to assemble, at what time Andrew Forman freely resigned to the Governour the Duke of Albanie, all his Ecclesiasticall promotions to be disposed at the Dukes pleasure. In consideration thereof the Duke bestowed the Archbishopricke of Saint Andrewes, and the Abbey of Dumfermling upon the same Andrew Forman, and gave the Bishopricke of Murry to Iames Hepburne, (greatly fa∣voured of the Earle Bothwell, and the Competitor of Forman) being thereunto substitute by Iohn Hepburne Pior of Saint An∣drewes in the place of the said Iohn, to whom moreover the Duke appointed a yeerely pension of 1000. markes to be paid by the same Forman out of the Abbey of Dumfermling; After which about sixe yeares or somewhat lee, this Forman departed this Life, being in the yeare of Christ 1522. and the ninth yeare
of King Iames the fifth, to whom succeeded Iames Beton. IamesFrancis Thin his continuation o Holin. history of Scot. p. 451. Beton Archbishop of Glascow,Iames Beton. was Chancellor in the yeare of Christ, 1513. being the first yeare of King Iames the fifth. This man being of great wisedome was appointed a∣mongst others to assist the Queene in the government of the Realme, whereunto she was for a time advanced;Holinshed History of Scot∣land, p. 302.308 but the wo∣man not induring to be directed by others, taking quarrell a∣gainst the Bishop, did immediately after the marriage perfor∣med, the sixth of August, in the yeare of Christ 1514. betweene her and Archibald Dowglasse Earle of Angus (which this Bishop incountred as much as he could) take the great Seal from the said Bishop of Glascow, at Saint Iohns Towne; whereupon the Bishop got him to Edenburgh, and assisted with many Lords, kept the Queene and her husband out of that Towne; where∣by great dissention and part-taking was raised amongst the No∣bility of the Realme. But as I gather, peace being made be∣tweene them, he was againe made Chancellor. After this, in the yeare of Christ, 1515. he commeth with the Earle of Arrane, who submitteth himselfe to the Governour; Shortly following, the Governour gave to this Archbishop of Glascow, the Abbey of Arbroth, assigning to the Earle of Murrey, a large pension out of the same; which Bishop being thus in favour with the Governour, was (in the yeare of Christ 1517. in May, when the Governour went into France) appointed amongst others, to have the Rule of the Realme, untill his returne. Two yeares after which, the Nobility being divided about the quar∣rell of the Earle of Angus and Arrane, this Bishop in the yeare of Christ 1519. being then also Chancellor, with other No∣blemen of the Realme, kept the Towne of Glascow; but after that, this Chancellour, who would not come to Edenburgh, the King of England and of France, their Embassadors came to Ster∣ling, where a peace was proclaimed amongst the Nobility. But what can long continue in one stay, or what peace will be long embraced amongst ambitious mindes, sith in the yeare following, being the yeare of Christ 120. the Noblemen ell againe to factions; For when divers of the Peeres were come to Edenburgh to aide the Earle of Angus against the Earle of Arrane (this Chancellor remaining then in the Towne) they pursued the Earle and Chancellour so hotly, that they were both constrained to forsake the Towne and to fly through the
North locke, about the thirteenth day of Aprill. But as the e∣vents of quarrels be doubtfull, now up, now downe, so this Archbishop, not long ater this disgrace, recovered breath, and in November following, did accompany the Regent come out of France to Edenburgh, where was a Parliament holden to sum∣mon the Earle of Angus to appeare; but he refusing, it was agreed, that the Earle should passe into England, there to re∣maine. The Bishop thus having the better of his enemies, An∣drew Forman Bishop of Saint Andrewes dyed in the yeare 1522 being about the ninth yeare of Iames the first, by occasion whereof this Chancellor Iames Beton Bishop of Glascow, was advanced to that See, and urther made Abbot of Dumfermling. Upon which new honour in the yeare of Christ 1524. He was appointed one of the Governours of the Realme by Parlia∣ment, but he not possessing this honour any long time, the Earle of Angus (who had gotten the King into his usurped government, and denyed the delivery of the King: being sent for by this Bishop, and the other Nobility) sent to the Chan∣cellor for the grea Seale, which was delivered to the Messen∣gers; upon which this Bishop not forgetting the same, hasten∣ed the sentence of divorce, sued before him between the Queen and the Earle of Angus. Whereof the Earle to revenge the same, did with the King, in the yeare of Christ 1526. seeke for the Queene and the Bishop of Saint Andrewes; but because they were kept secretly in their friends houses, so that they could not be heard of; He spoyled the Abbey of Dumferm∣ling, and the Castle of Saint Andrewes, taking away all that the Archbishop had. Notwithstanding which, the Archbishop keeping in favour with the old Queene, and the young King, did in the yeare of Christ 1529, and in the sixteenth yeare o James the fifth, Christen James the King Sonne bone at Saint Andrewes, and not long after surrendred his Soule to God. David Btn.Anno 1542. Holinsheds hi∣story of Scot∣land, p. 330. to 340. Francis Thin his continuation of th History of Scotland p. 452. Immediately after the death of James the fifh of Scotland, David Beton Cardinall, and Archbishop of Saint Andrewes, the speciall Minister and factor of the French causes to the advancement and continuance threof, orged a Will of the late King departed, in which, amongst other things, he established himselfe chiefe Regent. The Protestants to whom this Cardinall was ever a cruell enemy and sharp scourge, e∣spyed
forth his unjust dealing in this behalfe, and thereupon set the Earle of Arran against him, who by the helpe of his owne and heir friends he removed the Cardinall and his ad∣herents from their usurped roome and Authority; and there∣with was the said Earle proclaymed Protector and Governour of the Realme. The next yeare at a Convention of the Lords at Edenburgh,Bishop of Re author of the Northerne, re∣bellion. an. 1569 Martin p. 552. Hlinsh. p. 959. this Archbishop was put in ward in the Castle of Dalkish, lest he should goe about to perswade the Nobility, not to consent to the Governours desires, and the King of Englands match propounded to the Scottish Queene: Which match of Prince Edward, with Queene Mary of Scotland, though conclu∣ded on by a Parliament in Scotland, this Archishop Beton hin∣dred, faring lest Scotland should change the Church Orders, and reforme Religion, as England had begun to doe. Where∣upon ensued divers Commotions in Scotland, and a bloody Ware, King Henry the eighth sending an Army into Scotland upon this breach and occasion on the one side, and the Pope and French King sending aide to this Cardinall Archbishop and his faction on the other side. After this, this Archbishop he was removed to his owne Castle of Saint Andrewes, with War∣ders about him, to see him safely kept. Anno 144.Speed 1049, &c. The Patriarch of Hierusalem arriving in Scot∣land, he was honorably received by this Cardinall Arch Pre∣late, and the Bishops of Scotland, into the City of Glascow, during whose abode there, great contentions arose betweene this Arch Prelate, and the Archbishop of Glascow, who should in that City be of greatest authority and honour? Which in the end came to this issue, that both families fell together by the ares, which of them should goe before, with his Crosse borne upright. For the Cardinall Archbishop of Saint Andrewes, and Primate of the Kingdome, did affirme, that the Archbishop of Glascow should not have his Crosse borne in his owne Church so long as he was present: Which the servants of the Arch∣bishop of Glascow tooke so in disdaine, that they plucked downe the Cardinals Crosse, and threw it to the ground, Whereupon the Governour (understanding the whole matter, and that it was now come from words to swords) made haste to appease the factious commotion, and caused the Patriarch therewith to be brought to Edenburgh, accompanyed with the Clergy, and so appeased the controversie. That done; the
Patriarch, the Popes Legate comming to Rome, procured the egantine power to be granted to the Cardinall, which he long enjoyed not; For being greatly envyed by reason of these honours and some grievous facts, by meanes where∣of there fell continuall dissentions betweene the Nobili∣ty, which ended not till this Cardinall was slaine, who cor∣rupting his Keepers, whiles he was imprisoned in Saint An∣drewes Castle, he found meanes to escape thence; and in the yeare 1543. he came to the Coronation of the young Queene, and shortly after perswaded the Earle of Arrane the Governour to leave the part of he King of England, and wholly to be∣come French. At the Coronation, the Cardinall ordered all things, appointed every Officer, and growing into credit, did in like sort at other times dispose of the Common wealth, and Bishoprickes, as seemed best liking unto him. Where∣upon the Earle of Leneux, taking part with the English, oppo∣sed himselfe against the Cardinall, whereby ensued sharpe wars, the Cardinall still supporting and counselling the Governour. Which troubles somewhat abated, when the Earle of Leneux went into England. The Cardinall led the Governour to Saint Andrewes, to the end (if it were possible) to binde the Go∣vernour more firmely to him; During the time they were there, the Cardinall caused in the Lent season all the Bishops and Prelates of the Realme, to assemble at Saint Andrewes where a learned man named Master George Wiscart,George Wischart, a learned man burnt. that had beene in the Schooles of Germany, was accused of Heresie, which he had (as was alledged against him) publikely Preached, and privately taught in Dundee, Brechin, and divers other parts of Scotland since his returne home. This matter was so urged a∣gainst him, that he was convict, and burnt there in the Towne of Saint Andrewes during the time of that convention or assem∣bly. When these things were thus done, the Cardinall, al∣though he greatly trusted to his riches, yet because he was not ignorant what were the mindes of men, and what speeches the Common people had of him, determined to increase his pow∣er with new devices; Wherefore he goeth into Angus, and marryeth his eldest Daughter (as saith Bucanan) to the Earle of Crawfords Sonne; Which marriage was solemnized with great preparation, almost answerable to Kingly magnificence; During which time the Cardinall understanding by his Spies,
that the English did prepare to invade the Scottish borders on the Sea (and specially did threaten those of Fife therewith) returned to Saint Andrewes, and appointed a day to the Nobi∣lity, and such as dwelled about the Sea Coasts, to assemble to∣gether to provide in common for the defence thereof, and to prepare remedy for that hastened evill; for the easier and bet∣ter performance whereof he had determined, together with the Lords of that Country, to have sayled himselfe about the Coasts and to have defended such places as were most convenient: A∣mongst others, that came unto him, there was a noble young Gentleman called Norman Lesle, Sonne to the Earle of Rothseie. This man (after that he had many times imployed his valiant and faithfull diligence in the behalfe of the Cardinall) grew to some contention with the said Cardinall for a private cause, which for a time did estrange both their mindes the one from the other; this same contention did Norman (being thereto induced with many faire promises) afterwards let fall; But certaine monthes afterward when he returned to demand the performance of such liberall promises, they began to grow from common speech to bralings, and from thence to bitter tants and reproaches, not fit to be used by any of them both; Whereupon they departed with the grieved mindes of every of them; for the Cardinall being intreaed more unreverently than he would or looked for; and the other threatning that being ovetaken by deceite, he would revenge it, they boh returned discontented to their owne people. Whereupon Norman, declaring to his partakers the intol∣lerable arrogancy of the Cardinall, they easily agreed all to con∣spire his death wherefore to the end that the same might bee lesse suspected, they departed in sunder afterward. This No∣man accompanied onely with five of his owne traine, entred the towne of Saint Andrewes, and went into his accstomed Inne and lodging, trusting that by such a small traine hee might cunningly dissemble the determination of the Cardinalls death; but there were in that towne, ten of those which had consen∣ted to his conspiracy, which closed in secret corners, som in one place, and some in another, did onely expect the signe which was to be given uno them to execute this devise, with which small company this Norman feaed not to adventure the death of the Cardinall in the same towne, furnished in every
place with the servants and friends of the Cardinall. Whereup∣on the 13. of May the Cardinall being within his Castle of Saint Andrewes, certaine of his owne friends (as hee tooke them) that is to say, the sayd Norman, Lord Lesleie, William Kirkandie the young Lord of Grange, and Kirkmichell with sixteene cho∣sen men, entred the Castle very secretly in the morning, tooke the Porter and all the Cardinalls Servants, thrusting them out of the place by a Posterne gate, and that done passing to his Chamber where he lay in bed, as he got up, and was opening his Chamber doore, they slue him, and seized upon the Artille∣ry and Munition, where with that Fortresse was plentifully fur∣nished, and likewise with rich hangings, houshold-stuffe of all sorts, Apparell, Copes, Jewels, Ornaments of Churches, great store of gold and silver plate, besides no small quantity of trea∣sure in ready coyne. Sir Iames Leirmouth Provost of Saint An∣drewes assembled all the people of that Towne for the rescue of the Cardinall after he had heard that the Conspirators were en∣tred the Cale; but they shewed the dead body of the Cardi∣nall over the walls as a spectacle to the people, and so they made no further attempt, sith they saw no meanes how to re∣medy or revenge the matter at that present. The cause that moved the Conspirators thus to kill the Cardinall, was thought to be partly in revenge of the burning of Mr. George Wischart, aring to be served with the same sawce, and in the end to bee made to drinke of the same Cup. Partly it was thought they attempted it through counsell of some great men of the Realme that had conceived some deadly hatred against him. His body after he was slaine, was buried in the Castle in a dung-hill. The governour considering that his deere Coze the Cardinall was thus made away, assembled the great Lords of the Realme by whose advice he called a Parliament, and orfeited them who had slaine the Cardinall and kept the Castle of Saint Andrewes: And withall he beseiged those that murthered him in the sayd Castle three moneths space; but it was so strongly furnished with all manner of Artillery and Munition by the Cardinall in his life time, that they within cared little for all the inforce∣ments that their Adversaries without could enforce against them. Iohn Hamilton.After his death the Governour, Anno. 1546. promoted Holinshed Hist. of Scot. d. 340.355. Leslaus l. 10. p. 513. Iohn Hamilton the Abbot of Parslew his Brother to the Bi∣shopricke
of Saint Andrewe, and gave the Abby of Arbroth (granted before to Iames Beton the slaine Cardinals Kinsman) to George Dowglasse bastard sonne to the Earle of Angus, which things were afterwards occasions of great troubles in the Realme. To appease which Anno 1550. the Queene by the advice of her Counsell to stop all occasion of publicke dissen∣tion, ended the controversies moved about the Archbisho∣prickes of Saint Andrewes and Glascow, and the Bishoprickes of Dunkeld and Brechine, by bestowing them upon Noblemens children, and upon such persons as worthily deserved them. This Arch-bishop 1543. comming out of France passed through England, and having other learned men in his com∣pany, did visite the King of England, of whom hee was most honourably and courteously received: from whence going into Scotland, he was made Treasrer; which Office hee kept as long as his Brother was Governour, whom he did further in all good Counsells at home, and save and defend in the wares abroade. Anno 1598. Holinshed Hist. of Scotland. p. 366.367. Le∣slaeus, l. 10. p. 538. In Iuly, August, and March, there was an as∣sembly of the Prelates and Clergie of Scotland held at Eden∣burgh, in which certaine men and women of Edenburgh, were accused of Heresie, and burned at the towne crosse with aggots on their backes, whereupon great tumults were raysed there: for appeasing whereof, the Lord Seton was made Governour of the Towne. In this Councell of all the Prelates and Clergie of Scotland, the Temporalty proponed divers Articles of re∣ormation; as to have the Prayers, and administration of the Sa∣crament in the Scottish tongue, the Election of Bishops and all bene∣ficed men to passe by the voyces of the Temporall Lords and people and Parishes, &c. All which the Bishops refused to grant, where through there arose shortly afer great troubles in Scotland. For they perswading the Queene Regent to sommon Master Iohn Knox and others to appeare before them at Striveling; for lacke of appearance they were denounced Rebels, and put to the home: Whereupon they and the Burgesses of Perth, with o∣thers, pulled downe the Images and Altars in all Churches, and suppressed the houses of Priors, and other Religious places and Abbies, both in Perth, S. Andrewes, Edenburgh, and other places: whereupon the Queene-Regent, with the Arch-bi∣shops of Saint Andrewes and Glascow, the Bishops of Dulken∣den,
Dublane, with many other chiefe of the Clergie, came to Perth, and raised an Army against the Reformers; who there∣upon gathered an Army to resist them; which being ready to meee on Couper More in battle, by the labour of some Noble men the battle was stayed, and Articles of agreement drawne betweene the Regent and the Lords of the reformed Religion, the contents whereof you may reade in Lib. 10. p. 553.574. Lese, Lib. 16. Buchanan, and Hist. of Scot∣land. 567.368.376. Holinshed. Anno 1559. A Parliament was holden, and a disputation appointed betweene the Protestant Divines, and Popish Pre∣lates, at what time the Roman Prelates behaved themselves so well, that they were commanded not to depart the Towne, but to be present at the Sermons of the Ministers. In the winter the Lords of the Counsell gave faculties of Benefices to divers of their friends, who put forth the Prelates and received the fruites; The Earle of Argile disposed Dunkeld and Dublane; The Earle of Arran had the ordering of the Bishoprickes of Saint Andrewes, and divers Abbies: the like was used by other Noblemen through all parts of the Kingdome. In the same yeare, being the 17. of Queene Mary, he was with the Queene beseiged in Leith. Anno 1560. superintendents serving for the election of o∣ther Ministers were chosen at Edenburgh, whereof Iohn Spurs∣word was one, chosen by the suffrage of all the people. Holinshed 380 6.410.511. See Anno 1562. this Arch-bishop of Saint Andrewes, because after an Edict made thereof, hee did no abstaine from hearing and saying Masse, was commited prisoner to Edenburgh Castle, This Arch-Bishop still following the Queenes part, he with others meeteth her in the yeare of Christ 1566. at Muskle∣burow, and so attendeth on her, who no long after in the yeare of Christ 1571. being about the fourth yeare of Iames the sixth, was taken in the Castle of Dunbritaine, and sent Prisoner into Sterling, where being examined by the Regent, Matthew Earle of Lenox, about the murher of Henry King of Scot, sonne to the sayd Matthew, Rem Scot. l. 17 & 18. he was there drawne, hanged, and quarte∣red being the first Arch-bishop that I have yet heard of (writes Thin) that suffered so ignominous a death; the manner whereof Holinshed and Chytraeus doth thus more largely relate. Holinshed Hist. of Scot. p. 402. Chytraus Chrn. Saxni. l. 21.641. The Regent comming to Striveling, caused the Arch-bishop of S. Andrewes, to be examined upon certaine Articles, as well ou∣ching
the murther of the lae King Henry, as also for the death of the Earle of Murrey the late Regent, at what time there came in a Priest without compulsion of any, and before the Regent declared, that one Iohn Hamilton being in extreame sicknesse, under confession told him, that the Bishop did send him with three others to the murther of the King: and as touching the murther of the Earle of Murrey, the Bishops flat answere was, He might have letted it, if he would. Therewith the people that heard him cryed, Away with him, hang him: And so for these and other offences for the which he had been foresalted before that time, he was now executed on a Gibbet set up in the Market place of Striveling. Patricke Adamson Francis Thin his continuation of Holinshed Hist. of Scot. p. 434.435.282 Lond∣on, 1585. alias Constance next succeeded in the Archbishopricke of Saint Andrewes;Patricke Adam∣son. in his time Anno 1573. there was a Parliament in Edenburgh, wherein divers were made, and Articles agreed upon touching Religion and against Popery: he third whereof was, That none of the adversaries and enemies of Gods truth, shall enjoy the patrimony of the Kirke. Afterwards Anno. 1578. the question touching the Bishops power was disputed in many assemblies, and a length, Anno. 1580. in an Assembly holden at Dudie, their office was found to be unlawfull, not grounded on Gods Word, but intro∣duced by the folly and corruptions of mens inventions, and thereupon una voce condemned, and abjured. Anno 1581. and 1582. there were many contentions betweene the Prelates and Presbyters of Scotland touching the Jurisdiction of Bishops,Holinshed and Thin, Hist. of Scotland p. 438. to 44.455.456. which the assembly condemned, and the setling and confirming of Religion, to the great disturbance of the Realme, which I pretermit for brevity sake. The next yeare 1583. the Presbytery (as they had many times done before) did excommunicate their Metropolitane the Archbishop of Saint Andrewes and the rest of the Bishops also, because they would not in all their actions support and confirme the Doctrine which the Presbytery had established, and maintaine the use of their Episcopacy, which they had ordered to be simply abjured and relinquished, as an office to which they were not called by God; which Excom∣munication the Presbytery did the more boldly pronounce, be∣cause they were supported by the assistance of Master Lindseie, a great enemy to this Patrick Adamson Bishop of Saint An∣drews. But the King in the beginning did assist him against them,
and the Arch-bishop did in like sort thunder an Excomunication against them, which division (writes Thin) not being meete to be in the Clergie, who ought to be as the Apostles were, Of one heart and of one minde, will in the end (as Christ saith) bring that Realme to confusion; for, Omne regnum in se divisum desolabitur. At last this Bishop excommunicated by the Assembly at E∣denburgh, was enforced to renounce his Archiepiscopall jurisdi∣ction, and to make this publike recantation (which quite sub∣verts the pretended Ius Divinum of the Prelacy) in the Synod of Fiffe, Aprill the 8. 1591. See Andrew Melvin his Pa∣trici Adamsoni Palinodia p. 49.55 And Celsae Commissionis Ana∣omia. I confesse with a sincere minde without colour or fraud, that I have formerly erred in this, that I thought the government of the Church to be like the regiment of ter∣rene Kingdomes, expresly against the precept of Christ our Lord; and that the Monarchy whereby the Church is governed did not rest in the person of Christ our Saviour alone (as it doth in truth) but likewise in the Ministers, who yet are nothing else but vassalls and Clarks under Christ, Et aequales inter se, and equall among them∣selves, &c. Lastly, I confesse that the Office of a Bishop, (as now it is used and claimed) omni authoritate verbi Dei destituitur, & solo politico hominum commento fundatur, is destitute  all authority from Gods Word, and founded onely upon the politicke de∣vice of men; out of which the Primacy of the Pope or Antichrist hath sprung. Et merito damnandum est, and it is deservedly to be con∣demned; because the assembly of the Presbytery, who have the power of Iurisdiction and Inspection, both in Visitations and in Ordinations performeth all these things with greater authority, piety, and zeale than any one Bishop, whose care for the most part is intent, not upon God, or their function, but the world, which he principally ordereth. Consider after what sort it hath beene usurped these 506. yeares last past,Note this. with how great cruelty and tyranny they have exercised it, and thou shalt finde, that it hath beene the Principall Originall of sup∣pressing the Word of God in every kingdome, which will evidently appeare to any one who shall survey the Ecclesiasticall History. This Arch-Prelate held correspondency with our English Bi∣shops from whom (asking leave of the generall Assembly to goe into England about his Civill affaires onely, as he preten∣ted) he received his consecration to this Arch-bishopricke in a secret manner, Anno. 1589. and then returned into Scotland where he durst nor exercise his Archiepiscopall authority o∣penly for a space. King Iames after he was made Archbishop
brought him from Saint Andrewes to Edenburgh, that he might preach there openly in the great Church; the King himselfe accompanying him with his Guard to secure him from the peo∣ple brought him into the Church, sending halfe of his Guard to convey the Bishop to the Pulpit doore, which Master Iohn Coo∣per (one of the ordinary Ministers of Edinburgh) had prepos∣sessed, who standing up to say prayer and preach assoone as he perceived the King in his seate, the King perceiving it sayd, Master Iohn Cooper, I will not have you preach this day, I command you to goe downe out of the Pulpit, and let the Bishop of Saint An∣drewes come up and preach to me: to the which the ordinary Minister replyed, Please your Majesty this is the day appointed to me to preach, and if it were your Majesties pleasure, I would faine supply the place my selfe. But the King replyed againe, I will not heare you at this time, I command you to goe downe, and let Master Patricke Adamson come up and Preach this day; and beside, the King had remembred that he should not have stiled him a Bi∣shop by reason there were so strait Acts against them; Then Master John Cooper sayd, I shall obey Sir, and came downe from the Pulpit, yet the rest of the Ministers that were there sitting with him at the entry of the Pulpit did not open the doore to the Bishop, while the King commanded him, and then so soone as the Bishop was entred into the Pulpit and began with low becke to doe reverence to the King and to other inferiour Magistrates, the whole people rose out of their places with a great out-cry and lamentation, and ranne out of the Church, especially the women, and when the Guard thought to have kept them in, they ran over the Guard, and Master Iohn Cooper going also out of the Church went to Mr. Robert Bruce his house, the women all going with him, and many men, and there heard his Sermon, which he should have Preached in the Church; the fearefull noyse yet continuing in the Church many running out of the Church and some comming in againe to see whereto the matter would returne, made the King to cry out and say, What a devill ayles the people that they may not heare a man Preach? but cry what he would cry for the space of a long time, not any audience could be given; so with what feare the Bishop Preacht that day, and with how little audience, they can best tell that considered the matter rightly: alwayes the King set the Bishop in the midst of the Guard, and so tooke
him downe to the Abbey with him; but so soone as he came to Saint Andrewes againe, the Presbytery entred in Proces against him, for taking upon him to be a Bishop, which they proved by many reasons; but chiefely for that the King called him so; and albeit they had many hinderances, and the King caused a great delay to be made, devising meanes to save him from excommu∣nication; yet in the end he was excommunicated by the Pro∣vinciall Assembly, albeit by the Kings earnest dealing his ex∣communication was not published in all Churches, as it should have beene, upon some promises which he made, and yet never performed them. This Arch-bishop by the instigation of our English Prelates writ and Preached in defence of Episcopacy, as he afterwards confessed in the Synod of Fiffe, where he retra∣cted this his Doctrine as erronious, and being put from his Bi∣shopricke, excommunicated and hated of the people, who put him to the horne for his debts, he fell into a great sicknesse, cal∣led a Dogges appetite, and wanting meate to satisfie his hunger he was in manner starved to death, confessing in his sickenesse, that his sentence of excommunication was justly pronounced, and desired the Assembly to release him from it for Christs sake; whereupon he was afterwards absolved, after his forementio∣ned recantation. After this the very calling of Bishops having beene condemned and abjured in the Assembly at Dundy as un∣lawfull, Anno. 1580. the Church of Scotland, upon this Adamsons death continued free from the government and tyran∣ny of Bishops till King Iames was possessed of the Crowne of England, and some yeares after: at which time some ambitious Scottish Ministers stealing secretly into England, procured them∣selves to be consecrated Bishops by our English Prelates, and by certaine insensible degrees, by the helpe of our English Bishops, by perjury, forgery, and other indirect meanes, with much difficulty and opposition, set up Episcopacy againe in the Church of Scotland, to the great disturbance of that Church and State: whereupon, after the assembly at Glascow An. 1610. (where Episcopacy was againe revived, by admitting Ministers to have Vote in Parliament, though with many a limitation, which they afterwards frustrated and eluded by degrees) one Gladstaine was ordained Arch-bishop of Saint Andrewes, who is credibly reported to have made a solemne recantation at his death for his acceptance of such an unlawfull office, which re∣cantation
was suppressed. After him one Sprotswood succeeded, a very vicious, false and crafty Machiavilian, who confederating with Laud, now Arch-bishop of Canterbury, by his meanes pro∣cured himselfe to be made Chancellor of Scotland, who by rea∣son of this great temporall office, was the better able to intro∣duce all Canterburies Innovations into that Church with more facility. This Arch-Prelate with the other Prelates of Scotland conederating with Canterbury, who had usurped a kinde of generall and Papall Superintendency over all his Majesties three Kingdomes, in the yeare 1636. framed a booke of Ca∣nons and Constitutions for the government of he Scotland, tending to the utter subversion of the established Discipline of that Church, and opening a doore for many doctrinall and disci∣plinary errours, and Innovations. And to prevent all obloquy against them, they enjoyne none to speake either against these Canons, or the booke of Common prayer which was to be set forth, under heavie censures. The next yeare following in Iune 1637. the sayd Arch-bishop and Bishops by Canterburies dire∣ction caused a New booke of Common prayer to be Prined for the use of the Church of Scotland, which was appointed by his Majesties letters to be received as the onely forme of Gods Worship; whereunto all subjects of that Realme civill or Ec∣clesiasticall ought to conforme, and the contraveners to be con∣dignely punished. To set on this designe the better, every Mi∣nister was by Proclamation enjoyned, and some charged with letters of horning to buy two of the sayd Bookes for the use of the Parish; and to scare all men from opposing it, Canterbury in the very same month of June caused Doctor Bastwicke, Mr. Burton, and Mr. Prynne to be severely censured in the Starcham∣ber, for opposing his Innovations here in England, which hee then intended to introduce into the Church of Scotland, and to be set in the Pillory at Westminster, where all o them had their eares close cut off; one of them his cheekes eared; & this barba∣rous execution finished, even before their wounds were cured he then sent them away close Prisoners to three remote Castles, Dr. Bastwick to Lanceston Castle in Conewall; Mr. Burton to Lancaster; and Mr. Prynne to Carnarvan Castle in North-Wales, where they were shut up close Prisoners, so that neither their Wives, Children, nor any of their friends, could have accesse to speake with them; nor they so much as enjoy the liberty
of Pen, Inke, or Paper to write for necessaries, or the liberty of any licensed Books, except the Bible, and some few other Bookes for private devotion. And not content herewith by an extrajudiciall order o the Lords, he soone after caused them to be conveyed close Prisoners into the Isle of Iersie, Garnsey, and Silly, there to be close imprisoned in three Castles, giving strict order that no man should be admitted to speake with them there; nor Dr. Bastwickes, and Mr. Burtons wives, permit∣ted so much as once to come into the Islands where they were, and that all letters to them should be intercepted, and no pen, inke, or Paper allowed them to write upon any occasion. This transcendent new kinde of Prelaticall tyranny wherewith Canterbury imagined to terrifie and appale the Scots, comming to their eares, wrought quite contrary effects, stirring them up with greater animosity to resist the Prelates encroachments both upon their consciences, Lawes, liberties, and established Discipline. Whereupon when the Bishop of Edenburgh accom∣panied with the two Arch-bishops and some other Prelates of Scotland, began the use of their new service booke in the chiefe Church of Edenburgh the 23. of Iuly next after this sentence and execution, the most part of the people (much discontented with such a great and sudden alteration, as imported a change, both of the externall forme and nature of the former publicke wor∣hip) did at one instant rise and hinder the new Service, cal∣ling it superstitious and Idolatrous, and the same was also stop∣ped in another Church of Edenburgh, where it was to be reade by the Bishop of Arguile. This notwithstanding, the Prelates procured by Act of Councell, the paine of death without all fa∣vour or mercy to be denounced against all those who should any wayes raie or speake against the Bishops, or any of the in∣ferior Clergie, or against the service Booke. They discharged the ministers and Readers of Edenburgh (who refused the Book) their wonted service, and interdicted the publicke Evening and Morning Prayer, reading of Scriptures, singing of Psalmes, for a long time, still pressing the buying and practising of the sayd booke by all Ministers; which mooved the Ministers first to petition, and next many of the Nobility, Gentry, Burgesses, and Ministers to meete and to supplicate the Lords of the Privie Counsell against the sayd Bookes of Canons and Common Prayers, and the illegall way of introducing the same; till at last the Bi∣shops
violence and practises forced the whole kingdome into a combustion against them, and caused them in their generall as∣sembly at Ednburgh, Anno 1639. not onely to abjure, but to extirpate Episcopacy and banish all their Bishops as Incendia∣ries out of their Realme, except the Bishops of Dunkeld and of Orcanies, who recanted and abjured their Episcopacy. Canterbury and the Prelates of Scotland and England storming at these pro∣ceedings, take occasion from thence to raise up a civill warre betweene England, Ireland, and Scotland, thinking to restore Episcopacy againe in that Kingdome by force of Armes. And when as this warre was happily pacified and all differences fully accorded, Canterbury with his agents caused the former pacifica∣tion o be annulled, new Armes to be raised, and a fresh warre to be undertaken to the unsupportable expence and great dan∣ger of all his Majesties three Kingdomes, which by the Prelates practises are at this day still enforced to maintaine three Armies in the field; and had the Prelates bu their wish, we had long ere this embrued our hands deepely in one anothers blood, and made our Kingdomes so many Aceldamaes to maintaine their Antichristian pompe and Lordlinesse. But blessed and for ever honoured and praysed be our gracious God, who hath miracu∣lously continued and preserved our peace in the midst of war, and rustrated the designes of our blood-thirsty Prelates; turning their Bellum Episcopale (as themselves termed it) into a warre not for, but against themselves, to a probable extirpation of them for ever out of all three Kingdomes, which have a long time groaned under their tyranny; England, and Ireland now desiring and petitioning earnestly to the Parliament to be eased of their inolerable yoake of bondage, as Scotland hath already exonerated themselves thereof. Now to manifest that this present warre Originally sprung from the Scottish Prelates, and from Canterbury, (the very foun∣taine of all late mischiefes in all three Kingdomes) I shall neede no further evidence than the charge of the Scottish Commis∣sioners against Canterbury, presented to our present Parliament, the Coppie whereof (though already in Print) I shall here in∣sert as pertinent to my intend Theame.
The Charge of the Scottish Commissioners against the Prelate of Canterbury. NOvations in Religion, which are Universally acknow∣ledged to be the maine cause of commotions in King∣domes and states, and are knowne to be the true cause of our present troubles, were many and great, beside the bookes of Ordination, and Homilis, 1. Some particular al∣terations in matters of Religion, pressed upon us without order and against Law, contrary to the forme established in our Kirk. 2. A new booke of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiasticall. 3. A Liturgie or booke of Commonprayer, which did also car∣ry with them many dangerous errours in mattes of Doctrine. Of all which we challenge the relate of Canterbury, as the prime cause on earth. And first, that this Prelate wes the Author and urger of some particular changes, which made great disturbance amongst us, we make manifest 1 by fourteene letters subscribed, W. Cant. in the space of two yeares, to one of our pretended Bishops, Bannatine, wherein he often enjoyneth him, and other pretend∣ed Bishops, to appeare in the Chappell in their whies, conna∣ry to the custome of our Kirk, and to his promise made to the pretended Bishop of Edenburgh, at the Coronaon, that none of them after that time, should be pressed to weare these gar∣ments, thereby moving him against his will to put them on for that time, wherein he directeth him to give order for saying the English Service in the Chappell twice a day, for his neglect shewing him that he wes disappointed o the Bishopricke o Edenburgh, promising him upon the greater care of these nova∣tions, advancement to a better Bishopricke, taxing him for his boldnesse in praching the sound Doctrine of the reformed Kirkes, against Master Mitchell, who had taught the errours of Arminius in the point of the extent of the merit of Christ, bidding him send up a list of the names of Counsellours and Senatours of the Colledge of Justice, who did not communi∣cate in the Chappell in a forme which was not received in our Kirke, commending him when he found him obsequious to these his commands, telling him that he had moved the King the second time for the punishment of such as had not received
in the Chappell: and wherein he upbraideth him bitterly, that in his first Synod at Aberdein, he had onely disputed against our custome of Scotland, of fasting sometimes on the Lords day, and presumptuously censuring our Kirke, that in this we were opposite to Christianity it selfe; and that amongst us here were no Canons at all. More of this stuffe may be seene in the letters themselves. Secondly, by two papers of memoirs and instructions from the pretended Bishop of Saint Androis, to the pretended Bi∣shop of Rosse, comming to this Prelate, for ordering the affaires of the Kirke and Kingdome of Scotland, as not onely to ob∣taine warrants, to order the Exchequer, the Privy Counsell, the great Commission of Surrenders, the matter of Balmerino's processe, as might please our Prelates, but warrants also for sitting of the High Commission Court once a weeke in Eden∣burgh, and to gaine from the Noblemen, for the benefit of Pre∣lates, and their adherents, the Abbacies of Kelso, Arbroith, S. Androis, and Lindors, and in the smallest matters to receive his commands, as for taking downe Galleries, and stone-walls, in the Kirkes of Edenburgh, and Saint Androis, for no other end but to make way for Altars, and adoration towards the East: which besides other evills, made no small noyse, and disturbance amongst the people, deprived hereby, of their ordinary accom∣modation for publique worship. The second Novation which troubled our peace, wes a Book of Canons, and constitutions Ecclesiasticall, obtruded upon our Kirke, found by our generall Assembly to be devised or establishing a tyrannicall power, in the persons of our Pre∣lates, over the worship of God, over the consciences, liberties, and goods of the people, and for abolishing the whole disci∣pline and government of our Kirke, by generall and provinci∣all assemblies, Presbyteries, and Kirke sessions, which was setled by Law, and in continuall practise since the time of Re∣formation; that Canterbury wes Master of this Worke is ma∣nifest. By a Booke of Canons sent to him, written upon the one side only, with the other side blank, for corrections, additions, & put∣ting all in better Order, at his pleasure, which accordingly wes done, as may appeare by interlinings, marginalls, and filling up of he blanke page with directions sent to our Prelates; and that it
wes done by no other than Canterbury, is evident by his Ma∣gisteriall way of prescribing, and by a new copy of these Ca∣nons, all written with Saint Androis owne hand, precisely to a Letter, according to the former castigations, sent backe for procuring the Kings warrant unto it, which accordingly wes obtained; but with an addition of some other Canons, and a Paper of some other corrections: According to which the Book of Canons hus composed, wes published in Print, the inspecti∣on of the Bookes, Instructions, and his Letters of joy, for the successe of the worke, and of others Letters of the Prelate of London, and the Lord Sterling, to the same purpose, all which we are ready to exhibite, will put the matter out of all de∣bate. Besides this generall, there be some things more speciall wor∣thy to be adverted unto, for discovering his Spirit. 1. The fourth Canon of Cap. 8. forasmuch as no Reformation in Do∣ctrine or Discipline can be made perfect at once in any Church; therefore it shall, and may be lawfull for the Church of Scotland at any time to make remonstrance to his Majesty, or his successors, &c. Because this Canon holdeth the doore open to more In∣novations, he writeth to the Prelate of Rosse his privy Agent in all this Worke, of his great gladnesse, that this Canon did stand behind the Curtaine, and his great desire that this Canon may be Printed fully, as one that was to be most usefull. Secondly, the title prefixed to these Canons by our Prelates. Canons agreed upon to be proponed to the severall Synods of the Kirke of Scotland, is thus changed by Canterbury; Canons and Constitutions Ec∣clesiasticall, &c. Ordained to be observed by the Clergy. He will not have Canons come from the Authority of Synods, but from the power of Prelates, or from the Kings Prerogative. Thirdly, the formidable Canon, Cap. 1.3. threatning no lesse than Excommunication agaist all such persons whosoever shall open their mouthes against any of these Bookes, procee∣ded not from our Prelates, nor is to be found in the Copy sent from them, but is a thunder-bolt forged in Canterburies owne fire. 4. Our Prelates in divers places witnesse their dislike of Papists. A Minister sall be deposed if he be found negligent to convert Papists. Chap. 18.15. The adoration f the bread is a superstition to be condemned, Cap. 6.6. They call the absolute necessity of Baptisme an errour of Popery. Cap. 6.2.
But in Canterburies Edition, the name of Papists and Popery is not so much as mentioned. 5. Our Prelates have not the boldnesse to trouble us in their Canons, with Altars, Fonts, Chancels, reading of a long Liturgy before Sermon, &c. But Canterbury is punctuall, and peremptory in all these. Although the words of the tenth Canon Cap. 3. be faire, yet the wicked intentions of Canterbury and Rosse, may be seene in the poynt of justification of a sinner before God, by comparing the Canon as it came from our Prelates, and as it wes returned from Can∣terbury, and Printed; our Prelates say thus; It is manifest that the superstition of former ages, hath turned into a great prophanenesse, and that people are growne cold for the most part in doing any good, thinking there is no place to good workes, because they are excluded from justification. Therefore shall all Ministers, as their Text gi∣veth occasion, urge the necessity of good workes, as they would be saved, and remember that they are Via Regni, the way to the king∣dome of Heaven, though not causa regnandi, howbeit they be not the cause of Salvation. Here Rosse giveth his judgement, That he would have this Canon simply commanding good workes to be reach∣ed, and no mention made what place they have or have not in justi∣fication. Upon this motion, so agreeable to Canterburies mind, the Canon is set downe as it standeth, without the distinction of via regni, or causa regnandi, or any word sounding that way, urging onely the necessiy of good workes. 7. By comparing Can. 9. Cap. 18. As it was sent in writing from our Prelates, and as it is Printed at Canterburies command, may be also manifest, that he went about to establish auricular confession, and Po∣pish absolution. 8. Our Prelates were not acquainted with Canons for afflicting of arbitrary penalties: But in Canterburies Booke, wheresoever there is no penalty expresly set downe, it is provided that it shall be arbitrary, as the Ordinary shall thinke fttest. By these and many other the like, it is apparent, what tyrannicall power he went about to establish in the hands of our Prelates, over the worship, and the soules and goods of men, overturning from the foundation, the whole order of our Kirke, what seeds of Poperie he did sow in our Kirke, and how large an entry he did make for the grossest novations after∣ward, which hath beene a maine cause of all their combu∣stion. The third and great novation wes the Booke of Common
Prayer, Administration of the Sacraments, and other parts of Divine Service, brought in without warrant from our Kirke, to be universally received as the onely forme of divine Service, under all highest paines both civill and Ecclesiasticall; which is found by our nationall assembly, besides the Popish frame, & formes in divine worship, to containe many Popish errors, & ce∣remonies, and he seeds of manifold and grosse superstitions, and idolatries and to be repugnant to the Doctrine, Discipline, and order of our Reformation, to the confession of Faith, consti∣tutions of generall Assemblies, and Acts of Parliament, esta∣blishing the true Religion: that this also wes Canterburies worke we make manifest. By the memoirs, and instructions sent unto him from our Prelates; wherein they gave a speciall account of the diligence they had used, to doe all which herein they were enjoyned, by th approbation of the Service Booke sent to them; and of all the marginall corrections, wherein it varyeth from the English Booke, shewing their desire to have some few things changed in it, which notwithstanding wes not granted: This we finde written by Saint Androis owne hand, and subscribed by him, and nine other of our Prelates. By Canterburies owne Letters, witnesses of his joy, when the Booke wes ready for the presse, of his prayers that God would speed the worke, of the hope to see that service set up in Scot∣land, of his diligence to send for the Printer, and diecting him to prepare a blacke letter, and to send it to his servants a Edenburgh, for Printing this booke. Of his approbation of his proofes sent from the Presse. Of his feare of delay, in bring∣ing the worke speedily to an end, for the great good, (not of that Church, but) of the Church. Of his encouraging Rosse, who wes entrusted with the Presse, to goe on in this peece of Service without feare of enemies. All which may be seene in the Autographs and by Letters sent from the Prelate of London, to Rosse, wherein, as he rejoyceth at the sight of the Scottish Canons; which although they should make some noyse at the beginning, yet they would be more for the good of the Kirke, than the Canons of Edenburgh, for the good of the Kingdome. So concerning the Leiturgy he sheweth, that Rosse had sent to him, to have an explanation from Canterbury, of some passage of the Service Booke, and that the Presse behoved to stand till
the explanation come to Edenburgh, which theefore he had in haste obtained from his Grace, and sent the dispatch away by Canterburies owne conveyance. But the Booke it selfe, as it standeth interlined, margined, and patcht up, is much more than all that is expressed in his Letters, and the change and supplements themselves, taken from the Masse Booke, and other Romish Ritualls, by which he maketh it to vary from the Booke of England, are more preg∣nant testimonies of his Popish spirit, and wicked intenions which he would have put in execution upon us, then can be denyed. The large declaration professeth, that all the varia∣tion of our Booke, from the Booke of England, that ever the King understood, wes in such things as the Scottish humour would better comply with, than with that which stood in the English service. These Popish innovations therefore have been surreptitiously inserted by him, without the Kings knowledge, and against his purpose. Our Scottish Prelates doe petition that something may be abated of the English ceremonies, as the Crosse in Baptisme, the Ring in marriage, and some other things. But Canterbury will not onely have these kept, but a great many more, and worse superadded, which wes nothing else, but the adding of ewell to the fire. To expresse and discover all, would require a whole booke, we sall onely touch some few in the matter of the Communion. This Booke inverteth the order of the Communion in the Booke of England, as may be seene by the numbers, setting downe the orders of this new Communion, 1.5.2.6.7.3.4.8.9.10.15. Of the divers secret reasons of this change, we men∣tion one onely; In joyning the spirituall praise and thanksgi∣ving, which is in the Booke of England, pertinently after the Communion, with the Prayer of Consecration before the Com∣munion, and that under the name of Memoriall, or Oblation, for no other end, but that the memoriall and Sacrifice of Praise, mentioned in it, may be understood according to the Popish meaning. Bellar. de Missa, lib. 2. cap. 21. Not of the spirituall sacrifice, but of the oblation of the body of the Lord. It seemeth to be no great matter, that without warrand of the Booke of England, the Presbyter going from the North end of the Table, shall stand during the time of consecration, at such a part of the Table, where he may with the more ease and de∣cency
use both hands; yet being ryed, it importeth much, as, that he must stand with his hinder parts to the People, repre∣senting (saith Durand) that which the Lord said of Moses, Tho shalt see my hinder parts. He must have the use of both his hands, not for any thing he hath to doe about the Bread and Wine, for that may be done at the North end of the Table, and be better seene of the people: but (as we are taught by the Rationalists) that he may be stretching forth his armes, to represent the ex∣tension of Christ on the Crosse, and that he may the more con∣veniently lift up the Bread and Wine above his head to be seen and adored of the people, who in the Rubricke of the gene∣rall Confession, a little before, are directed to kneele humbly on their knees, that the Priests elevation so magnified in the Masse, and the peoples adoration may goe together. That in this posture, speaking with a low voyce, and muttering (for sometimes he is commanded to speake with a loud voyce, and distinctly) he be no heard by th people, which is no lesse a mocking of God, and his people, then if the words were spo∣ken in an unknowne language. As there is no word of all this in the English Service; so doth the Booke in King Edwards time, give to every Presbyter his liberty of gesture, which yet gave such offence to Bucer, (the censurer of the Booke: and even in Cassanders owne judgement, a man of great moderation in matters of this kind) that he calleth them, Nunquam satis ex∣randos Miss gestus, and would have them to be abhorred, be∣cause they confirme to the simple and superstitious ter impiam & exitialem Missae fiduciam. The corporall presence of Christs body in the Sacrament, is also to be found here: for the words of the Masse-booke ser∣ving to this purpose, which are sharpely censured by Bucer, in King Edwards Liturgy, and are not to be ound in the Booke of England, are taken in here; Almighty God is in called, that of his Almighty Goodnesse he may vouchsafe so to blesse and sanctifie with his Word and Spirit, these gifts of Bread and Wine, that they may bee unto us the body and blood of Christ. The change here is made a worke of Gods Omnipotency: the words of the Masse, ut fiant nobis, are translated in King Ed∣wards Booke, That they be unto us, which are againe turned in∣to Latine by Alesius, Vt fiant nobis. On the other part, the ex∣pressions
of the Booke of England, at the delivery of the Ele∣ments of feeding on Christ by Faith, and of Eating and drinking in remembrance that Christ dyed for thee, are utterly deleated. Ma∣ny evidences there be in this part of the Communion, of the bodily Presence of Christ, very agreeable to the Doctrines taught by his Secretaries, which this paper cannot containe. They teach us that Christ is received in the Sacrament, Corpo∣ralier, both objective and subjective. Corpus Christi est objectum quod recipitur, & corpus nostrum subjectum quo recipitur. The Booke of England abolisheh all that may import the oblation of any unbloody Sacrifice, but here we have besides the Preparatory oblation of the Elements, which is neither to be found in the Booke of England now, nor in King Edwards Booke of old, the oblation of the body and blood of Christ, which Bellarmine calleth, Sacrificium Laudis, quia Deus per il∣lud magnopere laudatur. This also agreeth well with their late doctrine. We are ready when it shall be judged convenient, and we shall be desired, to discover much more matters of this kinde, as grounds laid for missa sicca, or the halfe Messe, the private Messe without the people, of communicating in one kinde, of the consumption by the Priest, and consummation of the Sacrifice, of receiving the Sacrament in the mouth, and not in the hand, &c. Our supplications were many against these Bookes, but Canterbury procured them to be answered with terrible Procla∣mations. We were constrained to use the remedy of Protesta∣tion; but for our Proestations, and other lawfull meanes, which we used for our deliverance, Canterbury procured us to be de∣clared Rebels and Traitors, in all the Parish Kirkes of England: when we were seeking to possesse our Religion in peace, against these devices, and novations, Canterbury kindleth warre against us. In all these it is knowne that he was, although not the sole, yet the principall Agent and adviser. When by the Pacification at Berwicke, both Kingdomes loo∣ked for peace and quietnesse, he spared not openly in the hear∣ring of many, often before the King, and privately at the Coun∣sell-Table, and the privy Iointo, to speake of us as Rebels and Traitors, and to speake against the Pacification as dishonoura∣ble, and meee to be broken. Neither did his malignancy and bitteree ever suffer him to rest, till a new warre was entred
upon, and all things prepared for our destruction. By him was it that our Covenant, approven by Nationall Assemblies, subscribed by his Majesties Commissioner, and by the Lords of his Majesties Counsell, and by them commanded to be subscribed by all the Subjects of the Kingdome, as a Testi∣mony of our duty to God, and the King, by him was it still cal∣led ungodly, damnable, Treasonable; by him were Oaths in∣vented, and pressed upon divers of our poore Countrey men, upon the paine of imprisonment, and many miseries, which were unwarrantable by Law, and contrary to their Nationall Oath. When our Commissioners did appeare to render the reasons of our demands, he spared not in the presence of the King, and Committee, to raile against our Nationall Assembly, as not da∣ring to appeare before the World, and Kirkes abroad; where himselfe and his Actions were able to endure tryall, and against our just and necessary defence, as the most malicious and Trea∣sonable Contempt of Monarchicall Government that any by∣gone age hath heard of: His hand also was at the Warrant for the restraint and imprisonment of our Commissioners, sent from the Parliament, warranted by the King, and seeking the peace of the Kingdomes. When we had by our Declarations, Remonstrances, and Representations, manifested the truth of our intenions, and lawfulnesse of our Actions, to all the good subjects of the King∣dome of England, when the late Parliament could not be mo∣ved to assst, or enter in warre against us, maintaining our Re∣ligion, and Liberties, Canterbury did not onely advise the breaking up of that high and honourable Court, to the grea griee and hazard of the Kingdome, but (which is without example) did sit still in the Convocation, and make Canons and constitutions against us, and our just and necessary defence, ordaining under all highest paines, that hereafter the Clergy shall Preach foure times in the yeare, such doctrine as is contra∣ry not onely to our proceedings, but to the doctrine and pro∣ceedings of other Reformed Kirkes, to the judgement of all sound Divines, and politiques, and tending to the utter sla∣very and ruining of all Estates and Kingdomes, and to the di∣shonour of Kings and Monarches. And as if this had not been sufficient, he procured sixe Subsidies to be lifted of the Clergy,
under paine of deprivation to all that should refuse. And which is yet worse, and above which Malice it selfe cannot ascend, by his meanes a Prayer is framed, Printed, and sent through all the Paroches of England, to be said in all Churches in time of Divine Service, next after the Prayer for the Queene, and Royall Progeny, against our Nation by name of Trayterous Subjects, having cast off all obedience to our annoynted So∣veraigne, and comming in a rebellious manner to invade Eng∣land, that shame may cover our faces, as Enemies to God and the King. Whosoever shall impartially examine what hath proceeded from himselfe, in these two Bookes of Canons and Common Prayer, what Doctrine hath beene published and Printed these yeares by-past in England, by his Disciples and Emissaries, what grosse Popery in the most materiall points we have found, and are ready to shew in the posthume writings of the Prelate of Edenburgh, and Dumblane, his owne creatures, his neerest familiars, and most willing instruments to advance his coun∣sels, and projects, all perceive that his intentions were deepe and large against all the reformed Kirkes, and Reformation of Religion, which in his Majesties dominions wes panting, and by this time had rendred up the Ghost, if God had not in a won∣derfull way of mercy prevented us; And that if the Pope him∣selfe had beene in his place, he could not have beene more Popish, nor could he more zealously have negotiated for Rome, against the Reformed Kirkes, to reduce them to the Heresies in Doctrine; the Superstitions and Idolatry in worship, and the Tyranny in Government, whch are in that See, and for which the Reformed Kirkes did separate from it, and come furth of Babell. From him certainely hath issued all this deluge, which almost hah overturned all. We are therefore confident that your Lordships will by your meanes deale effectually wih the Parliament, that this great firebrand be presently removed from his Majesties presence, and that he may be put to tryall, and put to his deserved censure, according to the Lawes of the Kingdome; which fall be good service to God, honour to the King and Parliament, terrour to the wicked, and comfort to all good men, and to us in speciall, who by his meanes prin∣cipally have beene put to so many and grievous afflictions, wherein we had perished, if God had not beene with us.
We doe indeed confesse that the Prelates of England have beene of very different humours, some of them of a more hot, and others of them, men of a more moderate temper, some of them more, and some of them lesse inclinable to Popery, yet what knowne truth, and constant experience hath made un∣denyable, we must at this opportunity professe, that from the first time of Reformation of the Kirke of Scotland, not onely after the comming of King Iames of happy memory into Eng∣land, but before, the Prelates of England have beene by all meanes uncessantly working the overthrow of our discipline and government. And it hath come to passe of late, that the Prelates of England having prevailed, and brought us to sub∣jection in the point of Governement, and finding their long waited for opportunity, and a rare congruity of many spirits and powers, ready to cooperate for their ends, have made a strong assault upon the whole externall worship, and doctrine of our Kirke. By which their doing they did not aime to make us conforme to England, but to make Scotland first (whose weaknesse in rsisting they had before experienced, in the No∣vations of government, and of some poynts of Worship) and thereafter England conforme to Rome, even in these matters, wherein England had separated from Rome, ever since the time of Reformation. And evill therefore which hath issued, not so much from the personall disposition of the Prelates themselves, as from the innate quality and nature of their office, and Prela∣ticall Hierarchy, which did bring furth the Pope in ancient times, and never ceaseth till it bringeth furth Popish Doctrine and worship, where it is once rooed, and the Principles there∣of fomented and constantly followed. And from that antipa∣thy and inconsistency of the two formes of Ecclesiasticall Go∣vernment, which they conceived, and not without cause, that one Island united also under one head, and Monarch, wes no able to beare: the one being the same in all the parts and powers, which it wes in the times of Popery, and now is in the Roman Church: The other being the forme of Govern∣ment, received, maintained, and practised by all the Refor∣med Kirks, wherein by their owne testimonies, and confessi∣ons, the Kirke of Scotland had amongst them no small eminen∣cy. This also we represent to your Lordships most serious consideration, that not onely the firebrands may be removed,
but that the fire may be provided against, that there be no more combustion after this. I shall close up all touching the Prelates of Scotland, with the late Act of their generall Assembly at Edenburgh, for their utter extirpation out of that Church; and the Recantation, and abjuration of two of their late Bishops, to wit, the Bishop of Dunkelden, and of the Orcanies. The Generall Act for abolishing of Episcopacy, and all Innovation lately intended in the Church of Scotland. THe Kings Majesty having graciously declared, that it is his Royall will and pleasure that all questions about Religion, and matters Ecclesiasticall, be determined by Assemblies of the Kirke, having also by publique Proclamation indicted this fre National Assembly, for setling the present distraction of this Kirke; and for establishing a perfect peace against such divi∣sions and disorders as hath beene sore displeasing to his Maje∣sty, and grievous to all his good Subjects; and now his Maje∣sies Commissioner Iohn, Earle of Traquaire, instructed and au∣thorized with a full Commission, being present, and sitting in this Assembly, now fully conveened and orderly constitute in all the members thereof, according to the Order of this Kirke, having at large declared his Majesties good will to the reformed Religion, and his Royall care and tender affection to this Kirke where his Majesty had both his birth and Baptisme, his great displeasure at the manifold distractions and division of this Kirk and Kingdome, and his desires to have all our wounds per∣fectly cured with a free and fatherly hand: And although in the way approved by the Kirke tryall hath beene taken in former assemblies before, from the Kirke Registers to our full satis∣faction, yet the Commissioners grace making particular en∣quiry from the members of the Assembly, now solemnely con∣veened, concerning the reall, and true causes of so many and great evills at this time past, had so fore troubled the peace of this Kirke and Kingdome, it was presented to his Majesties Commissioner by this Assembly, that beside many other, the maine and most materiall causes was:
First, the pressing of this Kirke by the Prelates with a Ser∣vice Booke, or Booke of Common Prayer, without direction or warrant from the Kirke, and containing (beside the Popish forme thereof) diverse Popish errours and Ceremonies, and the seds of manifold grosse superstitions and Idolatry, with a Booke of Canons without warrant or direction from the Ge∣nerall Assembly, establishing a Tyrannicall power over the Kirke in the person of Bishops, and overthrowing the whole discipline and Acts of our Kirke; And with the High-Commi∣on erected without the consent of the Kirke, subverting the jurisdiction and Ordinary Judicatories of this Kirke, and gi∣ving to persons meerely Ecclesiasticall power of both swords, and to persons meerely Civill, the power of the keyes and Kirke censures. A Second cause was the Articles of Perth, viz. Observa∣tion of festivall dayes, kneeling at the Communion, Confir∣mation, Administration of the Sacraments in private places, which was brought in by a Civill Assembly, and are contrary to the confession of Faith, as it was meant and subscribed An∣no. 1580. And diverse times since to the order and constitu∣tion of this Kirke. Thirdly, the change of the government of the Kirke, from the Assembly of the Kirke, to the persons of some Kirkemen u∣surping the priority and power over their Brethren, by the way and under the name of Episcopall government against the Con∣fession of Faith 1580. Against the Order set downe in the booke of Policy, and against the intentions and Constitutions of this Kirke from the beginning. Fourthly, the Civill places and power of Kirkemen, their sitting and voycing in Parliament, and their sitting on the Bench as Justices of Peace, which according to the constitu∣ons of this Kirke, are incompatible with their spirituall functi∣ons, lifting them up above the Brethren in worldly Pompe, tending to the hinderance of the Ministery. Fifthly, the keeping and authorizing of corrupt assemblies at Linlithgrow, 1606. and 1608. and at Glascow. 1610. at Aber∣din 1616 at Saint Andrewes. 1617. at Perth, 618. which are null and unlawfull, as being called and constitue quite contra∣ry to the Order and constitutions of this kirke, received and
practized ever since the reformation o Religion, and withall labouring to introduce Novation within this Kike against the Order and Religion established. A sixth cause is the want of the lawfull and free generall As∣semblies  rightly constitute, of Pastors, Doctors, and Elders, yeare∣ly or oftner pro re nata, according to the liberty of this Kirke, expressed in the Booke of Policy, and acknowledged in the Act of Parliament, 1592. After which his Majesties Commissi∣oner having heard patiently and examined particularly, and all objections to the contrary, being answered to the full: The whole Assembly with expresse consent of his Majesties Com∣missioner in one heart and voyce did declare, that these and such other, proceeding from the neglect and breach of the Na∣tionall Covenant of this Kirke and kingdome, made in Anno 1588. have beene indeed the true and maine Cause of all our evils and distractions. And therefore ordaines, according to the Constitutions of generall Asemblies of this Kirke, and upon the grounds respective above specified, That the foresaid Service Booke, Bookes of Canon and Ordnation, and the High-Commission be still rejected. That the Articles of Perth, be no more practised. That Episcopall government, and the Civill places and power of Kirkemen, be holden still as unlaw∣ull in this Kirke. That the above named pretended Assem∣blies at Linlithgrow, 1606. and 1608. at Glascow, 1610. at Aber∣dene, 1616. at Saint Andrewes, 1617, at Perth 1618. be here∣after accounted of, as null, and of none effect. And that for preservation of Religion, and prevenng of all such evils in time comming, Generall Assemblies rightly Constitute, as the perfit and competent Judge of all matters Ecclesiasticall, hereafter be kept yearely, and oftner, as occasion and necessity shall require. The necessity being first remonstrate to his Majesty by humble supplication, as also of these occasionall Assemblies. That Kirke Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synodall Assemblies be constitute, and observed according to the Booke of Policy, and Order o this Kirke. The Bishop of Dunkell his Recantation. BE it knowne to all men, me Master Alexander Lindsay, Mini∣ster of Sinadois; for so much as I, by my missive Letter sent
by me to the Generall Assembly of the Kirke of Scotland, hol∣den at Glascow the 21. of November last past, did freely submit my selfe, demit and lay downe at the foot of the Assembly, my pretended Office of Episcopacy, as pretended Bishop of Dun∣kell, and by my Letter promised to subscribe what ample forme of Commission, there anent the said Assembly should prescribe, and now the said reverent Assembly hath found, and declared the said office of Episcopacy, as it hath beene temed and used within the said Kirke of Scotland, to be abjured by the comes∣sion of Faith, 1580. and 1581, and 1590. And therefore hath decerner the said Office to be removed out of the said Kirke of Scotland, as also seeing the said reverent Assembly hath decer∣net me according to my said Letter, to subscribe a more ample forme of demission, of the said pretended office in presence of Sir Iohn Montcrieff, of that Ilke Knight Baronet, Master Robert Murrey, Minister at Methuen, Master Iohn Roberton, Minister at Perth, Master Alexander Petrie, Minister at Rinde, and Thomas Durham, Burgesse of Perth, Commissioners appointed by them for that effect. Therefore, and for performance of my said Let∣ter, and in obedience to the Ordinance of the said reverent. As∣sembly; Wit ye me to have demitted quite, claim'd and sim∣pliciter overgeven, like as I now in presence of the said Com∣missioners, freely demits, quite claimes and simpliciter overgists the oresaid pretended Office of Episcopacy of Dunkell, with the whole Title, stile, name, and dignity thereof, power of Or∣dination, Jurisdiction thereof, voyce in Parliament, and all u∣surpation of the same in time comming, and faithfully promises, and by these presents binds and obliges me never to exercise nor use the said pretended Office in the said kirke of Scotland, nor no power of Ordination, Jurisdiction, voyce in Parliament, neither any other power Ecclesiasticall belonging, usurped, and acclaimed to belong to the said pretended Office, like as according to the Act of the said reverent Assembly, I acknow∣ledge the said Office of Episcopacy to be abjured in the fore∣said confession of Faith, and therefore most justly ought to be removed out of this said kirke of Scotland, and the whole pre∣mises, I heartily acknowledge, as I will answer to God: in te∣stimony hereof, I have subscribed these presents with my hand. Like as for further security hereof, I am content, and consent, that these presents be insert and Registrate in the generall
Bookes of Assembly, therein to remaine Ad futuram rei memori∣am. And to that effect constitute—my lawfull procutors, promittendo de rato. In witnesse whereof, written by Robert Readhench serviteur to Patricke Rosse, Notaire in Perth. I have subscribed the same with my hand, as said is, at Saint Andrewes, the 24. of Ianuary, 1639. before these witnesses, Master Iohn Paterson, Master Alexander Dundie, Student in Perth, and George Boswell serviteur to the said Sir George Montrieff. The Bishop of Orkneyes Recantation. TO all and sundry whom it concernes, to whose knowledge these presents shall come, especially to the Reverent and Honorable Members of the future Assembly, to be holden at Edenburgh, the 12. day of August, 1639. I Master George Gryame, sometime pretended Bishop of Orkney, being sorry, and grieved at my heart, that I should ever for my worldly respect imbraced the Order of Episcopacy, the same having no warrant from the Word of God, and being such an Order as hath had sensi∣bly many fearefull and evill consequences in many parts of Christendome, and particularly, within the Kirke of Scotland, (as by dolefull and deplorable experience this day is manifest) to have disclaimed, like as I by the tenour hereof, doe altoge∣ther disclaime and abjure all Episcopall power and Jurisdiction with the whole corruptions thereof, condemned by lawfull As∣semblies, within the said Kirke of Scotland, in regard the same is such an Order, as is also abjured within the said Kirke, by vertue of that Nationall Oath, which was made in the yeare 1580, and 1581. Promising, and swearing by the great name of the Lord our God, that I shall never while I live, directly, nor undirectly exercise any such power within the Kirke, nei∣ther yet shall I ever approve or allow the same, not so much as in my private or publike discourse. But on the contrary shall stand and adhere to all the Acts and Constitutions of the late Assembly holden at Glascow, the 21. of November, last by-past in Anno 1638; And shall concurre to the uttermost of my power sincerely, and faithfully, as occasion shall offer, in executing the said Acts, and in advancing the worke of Reformation with∣in this Land to the glory of God, the peace of the Country, and the comfort and contentment of all good Christians, as God
shall be my helpe. In testimony of the which premises, I have subscribed these presents with my hand, in Bricknes in Straines, the second of February, Anno Dom. 1639. Before these wit∣nesses: Master ter Stewart, Minister at Sou randsley, Master Iames Cheynie Minister at Buckwall. Master Robert Peesone, Minister at Firs, and Master Patricke Gryame Minister a Holme My Sonne. Before I passe to the Irish Prelates, I shall close up this of the Scottish Prelates, with this merry story out of the Booke of Martyrs. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 2. p. 614. Not long after the burning of David Stratton, and Master Gurlay, in the dayes of David Beaton, Bishop, and Cardinall of Saint Andrewes, and George Trechton, Bishop of Dunkelden, a Canon of Sain Colmes Inche, and Vicar of Delene, called Deane Thomas Forret, Preached every Sunday to his Parishioners out of the Epistle or Gospell, as it fell for the time, which then was a great novelty in Scotland, to see any man Preach, except a blacke Fryer, or a gray Fryer; and therefoe he Fryers envyed him, and accused him to the Bishop of Dunkelden, (in whose Diocesse he remained) as an Heretique, and one that shewed the mysteries of the Scriptues to he vulgar people in English, to make the Clergy detestable in the sight of the people. The Bishop of Dunkelden, moved by the Fryers instigation, called the said Deane Tomas, and said to him. My Joy Deane Thomas, I love you well, (and herefore I must give you my counsell, how you shall rule and guide your selfe. To whom Thomas said, I thanke your Lordship heartily. Then the Bishop be∣gan his Counsell on this manner. My Joy Deane Thomas, I am enformed that you Preach he Epistle or Gospell every Sunday to your Parishioners, and that you take not the Cow, nor the uppermost cloath from your Parishioners, which thing is very prejudiciall to the Church men, and therefore my Joy Deane Thomas, I would you tooke your Cow, and your uppermost cloath, as other Church men doe, or else it is too much to Preach every Sunday; for in so doing you may make the peo∣ple thinke that we should Preach likewise. But it is enough for you, when you find any good Epistle, or any good Gospel, that setteth forth the Liberty of the holy Church, to Preach that, and let the rest be. Thomas answered, my Lord, I thinke that none of my Parishioners will complaine that I take not the
Cow, nor the uppermost cloath, but will gladly give me the same, together with any other thing that they have, and I will give and communicate with them any thing that I have, and so my Lord we agree right well, and there is no discord among us. And where your Lordship saith, It is too much to preach every Sunday; indeede I thinke it is too little, and also would wish that your lordship did the like. Nay, nay, Dean Thomas (saith my Lord) let that be, for we are not ordained to preach. Then sayd Thomas, where your Lordship biddeth me preach, when I finde any good Epistle, or any good Gospell, truely my Lord I have read the New Testament and the old, and all the Epi∣stles and Gospells, and among them all I could never finde any evill Epistle, or any evill Gospell, but if your Lordship will shew me the good Epistle, and the good Gospell, and the evill Epistle, and the evill Gospell, then I shall preach the good, and omit the evill. Then spake my Lord stoutly and sayd, I thanke God that I never knew what the old and New Testament was, (and of these words rose a Proverbe which is common in Scotland, ye are like the Bishop of Dunkelden that knew nei∣ther new nor old Law) therefore Deane Thomas, I will know nothing but my Portuise and my Pontificall. Goe your way, and let be all these fantasies, for if you persevere in thes erro∣nious opinions ye will repet it, when you may not mend it Thomas sayd, I trust my cause be just in the presence of God, and therefore I passe not much what doth follow thereupon: and so my Lord and he departed at that time. And soone after a Summons was directed from the Cardinall of Saint Andrewes, and the sayd Bishop of Dunkelden upon the sayd Deane Thomas Forret, upon two blacke Fryers, called Fryer Iohn Kelow, and another called Benarage, and upon one Priest of Striveling cal∣led Duncane Sympson, and one Gentleman called Robert Foster in Striveling, with other three or foure with them of the towne of Striveling, who at the day of their appearance after their summoning were condemned to the death, without any place for recantation, because (as was alleadged) they were Heresi∣arches, or chiefe Heretiques and reachers of heresies, and espe∣cially because many of them were at the bridall and marriage of a Priest, who was Vicar of Twybody beside Stiveling, and did eate flesh in Lent at the sayd Bridall, and so they were all to∣gether burnt upon the Castle hill at Edenburgh, where they
that were first bound to the stake, godly and marvellously did comfort them which came behind. This Bishop of Dunkeld and David Beton Arch-bishop of Saint Andrewes, were very great persecutors of the true professors of the Gospell whom they burnt and put to death; the story of whose persecutions he that list may reade in Master Fox his Act and Monuments, Edit. ult. vol. 2. p. 605. to 626. to which I shall referre the Reader. And thus much briefely touching the disloyall, seditios and Schismaticall acts of the Scottish Prelates, I now proceed to those of Ireland, in whom I shall be briefe. The Irish Bishops. JOHN CVMIN Arch-bishop of Dublin.IN the yeare of Grace 1197. Hoveden Annal. pars posteror p. 773. Hamo de Wais, with the other Gardians of Ireland, and Earle Iohns men, offered some inju∣ry to Iohn Cumin, Arch-bishop of Dublin, whereupon the Arch∣bishop willing rather to be banished, then to suffer such great injuries to himselfe and his Church to goe unpunished, ex∣communicated the foresayd presumers and passed a sentence of interdict against his Arch-bishopricke and departed, comman∣ding the Crosses and images of the Cathedall Church to bee taken downe and hedged about with thornes, that so those ma∣lefactors might be terrified, and recalled from their will of prey∣ing upon the goods of the Church. But they still persisting in their maligne purpose, there happened a miracle not head of in our times. There was a Crucifix in the Cathedrall Church of Dublin, wherein the image of Christ was more exactly carved, than in all others in Ireland or elsewhere, which they had in most veneration.Anno. 1313. This Image being layd prostrate on the ground and hedged about with thornes, on the sixt weeke fell into a trance, and his face (I doubt if true by the Arch-bishops or Priests Legerdemaine) appeared overspread with a vehe∣ment rednesse, as if it had beene in a fiery furnace, and a great sweate issued out of its face, and little drops fell down from its eyes, as if it wept, and on the sixth houre of that day blood and water issued out of its left side, and on the right side of its brest, which the ministers of that Church diligently gathering up, sent an Ambassie after their Arch-bishop Iohn Cmin comman∣ding him to certifie the Pope the event hereof, under the Te∣stimony
and Seales of venerable men. Yet the other Bishops of Ireland albeit they had often read En tua res agitur paries cum proximus arde, notwithstanding passed by the dammages and injuries which the servants of Iohn Earle of Morton had done to their fellow Bi∣shop, with closed eyes, and become like rammes not having hornes, they retired from the face of the pursuer. But Iohn Bi∣shop of Dublin, being in Exile came to Richard the first, King of England, and Iohn Earle of Morton his brother, but could have no justice, nor restitution of the things taken from him. It seemes his cause therefore was not good. After which hee continued long in England, leaving both his Churh and Dio∣cesse still under interdiction, and the others under the sentence of Excommunication. O what impiety and malice is there in Prelates who for a meere supposed injury from one or two, will interdict an whole Kingdome or Diocese, and wil rob God of his publicke service (as they account it) and mes soules of all spirituall food and exercises of Religion, to wrecke their malice upon an enemie or two? But this hath beene their com∣mon Atheisticall practise: God and men mst suffer in the high∣est degree, rather than they lose their wills or the smallest pun∣ctilio of their usurped Antichristian honour. Anno. 1212. this Arch-bishop dying, Henry Condies succee∣ded him,HENRY SCORCH VILLEIN. who was called The Annals of Ireland, in Mr. Cambden, p. 154.155. Scorch Villeyn, by occasion of a cer∣taine treacherous act of his; for one day calling his Tenants be∣fore him to answere by what tenure they held of him, those Te∣nants shewing him their Deedes and Charters, he commanded their Deedes and Charters to be burned (of purpose to dis∣inherit them of their rights) for which most unjust act, the Free∣holders ever called him Henry Scorch-Villein: he was Justice of Ireland, and built Dublin Castle, bu of his preaching to build men up in grace, I finde not one syllable. Anno 1313. The Annals of Ireland. p. 168. Fryer Roland Ioce Primate of Armach arrived at the Isle of Houth the morrow after the Annunciation of the blesed Virgin Mary,Iohn Leekes. and rising in the night by stealth, tooke up his Crosier, and advanced it as arre as the Priory of Gace Dieu; whom there encountred certaine of the Arch bishop of Dublins servants (Iohn Leekes was then Arch-bishop of this See) debasing and putting downe that Crosier; and the Primate himselfe o Armach they chased with disgrace and confusion out of Lemter.
Anno. 1324. Alexander de Bickner, Arch-bishop of Dublin being in England, joyned with th Arch-bishops and Bishops of England in Alexander de Bickner Arch-bishop of Du∣blin. rescuing Adam de Arlton Bishop of Hereford even when he was openly arraigned for high Treason against King Edward the second at the Parliament barre: the highest affront that ever I read offered to publicke Justice; the story whereof is formerly recited at large, p. 54.55. & Anno 1326. he Wlsingham Hit. Angl. p. 98.99. Holins. p. 335. Ant. Eccles. Brit. p. 227. sided with the Queene and other Prelates against King Edward the second his Soveraigne, to his deposall and destruction, in which he was very active. Anno. 1331. on the Walsingh. Hist. Angl. p. 101. vigill of Saint Marke the Evangelist, the O-Tothely came to Tavelagh, and rob∣bed this Alexander Arch-bishop of Dublin,The Annals of Ireland. fol. 184. tooke away three hundred sheepe, and slew Bichard White, and other men of his company, the retinue of the Lord Archbishop of Dublin, were by a traine or ambush slaine by David O-Tothill in Culiagh. David O-Hir∣raghey.Anno. 1337. whiles Iohn Charlton was Lord Justice and held a Parliament at Dublin,Annals of Ire∣land. fol 187. Doctor David O-Hirraghey Arch-bishop of Armach being called to the Parliament made his provision for house-keeping in the Monastery of Saint Ma∣ry neere unto Dublin; but because he would have had his Cro∣sier carried before him, he was impeached by Alexander Arch-bishop of Dublin and his Clerkes, and permit him they would not. Archbihop of Casels.Anno. 1379. The Walsingh. Hist. Ang. p. 224.255. Arch-bishop of Cassel in Ireland, came from Rome, sent thither for certaine urgent causes, bringing backe with him a great power of binding and loosing from the Pope; when he came to London, preaching to the People, he denounced the King of Franc, and as many as adhered to the Anti-Pope, to be involved in the sentence of Excommunica∣tion, affirming that even now it would be an acceptable time to England, as well in the cause of the King of England as of the Pope, to invade the Kingdome of France, especially since it was probable, that a King Excommunicated would not have any confidence of resisting. Thus this Messenger of Peace proves a publicke Herald to proclaime warre. The King of France on the other side, makes Proclamation through all his Kingdome, that none should obey Pope Vrban, and if any did ee should be beheaded, and all his goods should be confiscated to the Kings use: after which the confederates of Pope Clement and Vrban, meeting in the field, above 5000. were slaine on Cle∣ments
part in one battle, with Bernard Decksale their Generall, and many more afterwards. Anno. 1420. there was a Parliament, held at Dublin, at which time Anals of Ire∣land p. 200. in Mr. Cambden. Chron. of Ireland in Holinshed p. 77 Richard O-HedianRichard O-bedi∣an. Bishop of Cassell was accused by Iohn Gese Bishop of Lismore and Waterford, upon 30. Ar∣ticles layd to his charge. After all that, he charged him that he made very much of the Irish, and loved none of the English; that he bestowed no benefice upon any English man, and gave order likewise unto other Bishops that they should not conferre the least living tha was pon them. That he counterfeited the King of Englands seale, and the Kings Letters Patents, that he went about to make himselfe king of Mounster; also that he tooke a Ring away from the Image of Saint Patricke, which the Earle of Desmund had offered, and bestowed it upon an Harlot of his, beside many other enormities, which he exhibi∣ted in writing: And the Lords and Commons were much trou∣bled betweene these twaine. Now in the same Parliament there was debate betweene Adam Pay Bishop of Clon, and another Prelate, or that he sayd Adam went about to unite the others Church unto his, but the other would not; and so they were ent and referred unto the Court of Rome, and this Parliament lasted 18. dayes. Anno 1532. Iohn Allen Arch-bishop of Dublin,Iohn Allen Chaplaine to Cardinal Wolsie and his Creature, put the Earle of Stainurst his continuation of the Chronicles of Ireland p. 88.92. Kildare to great trouble wrongfully, to take away his life, and that out of affection to his Lord and Master the Cardinall. This Arch-bishop, Anno. 22. H. 8 was specially and by name excepted out of the Kings generall pardon of the Premunire and other offences, granted to all the Clergie that yeare, as appeares by the Act it sele. 22. H. 8. c. 15. No doubt it was because the King tooke speciall notice of some great injuries and mis-de∣meanors by him committed, which he meant to question him for. After this, meaning to sayle into England, Anno. 1534. and that secretly lurking as Tartajus, Thomas Fitzgerald and others apprehended and haled him out of his Bed, brought him naked in his hirt, bare footed and bare headed to their Cap∣taine, whom when the Archbishop espied, incontinently hee kneeled, and with a pitifull countenance and lamentable voyce he besought him for the love of God, not to remember former injuries, but to weigh his present calamity, and what malice so
ever he bare his person, yet to respect his calling and voca∣tion, in that his enemy was a Christian, and he among Christi∣ans an Arch-bishop. As he spake thus, bequeathing his soule to God, his body to his enemies merc, Thomas Stibon with∣out compassion, and withall inflamed wih desire of revenge, turned his horse aside, saying in Irish, Away with the Churle, mea∣ning the Arch-bishop should be detained as Prisoner But the Caitifes present, misonstring his words, murthered the Arch-bishop without further delay, brained and hackt him in gob∣bets, his blood withall crying to God for revenge; the place ever since hath beene hedged and imbarred on every side, un∣growne and unfrequented for the deestation of the fact; rough and igorous Justice, deadly hatred of the Giraldins for his Masters Wolsies sake, and his owne, as he had much crossed and bridled them in their governments, promoted their accusati∣ons, and forged a Letter against them to their prejudice and danger as was likely, was the cause of his ruine. Anno. 1567. Marice a runne gate Priest going to Rome was consecrated Arch-bishop of Cashell by the Pope:Stainhurst, Ibid p. 118. arriving in Ireland, he made challenge to the same See; which being deny∣ed to him by the Arch-bishop placed there by the Queene, the sayd supposed Bishop sudainely with an Irish scaine, wounded the Bishop, and put him in danger of his life. Sainurst, Ibid. p. 166. Anno 1579. The Lord chiefe Justice of Ireland upon suspition of Treason, committed the Chauncellor of Liviricke to Prison, for which he was indicted and found guilty; and the Bishop likewise upon the same supition was committed Prisoner to his owne houe. Anno. 1600. Mr. Cambden in his description of Ireland. p. 135. The Rebells of Mounster by their Agents, a certaine Spaniard elect Arch-bishop of Dublin, the Bishop of Clonfort, the Bishop of Killaloe, and Archer a Jesuite, had ob∣tained at lengh with praying, intreating and earnest beseech∣ing at the King of Spaines hands, that succour should be sent in∣to Mounster to the Rebels, under the conduct of Don Iohn D' Aquila, upon assured hope conceived, that all Mounster would shortly revolt, and the titular Earle of Desmond, and Floren Mac-Carti joyne great aydes unto them; but Sir George Carew the Lord President of Mounster, had providently before inter∣cepted them, and sent them over into England. Whereupon D' Aquila arrived at Kinsale in Mounster with two thousand
Spaniards, old Souldiers, and certaine Irish Fugitives, the last day of October, and straight wayes having published a writing wherein he gloriously stiled himselfe with this Title (Master Generall and Captaine of the Catholike King in the warre of God, for holding and keeping the faith in Ireland) endeavoureth to make the world beleeve, that Queene Elizabeth by the definitive sentences of the Pope, was deprived of her Kingdomes, and her Subjects absolved and freed from their Oath of Allegiance, and that he and his men were come to deliver them out of the Devills clawes and the English tyranny. And verily with th goodly pretence, he drew a number of lewd and wicked persons to band and side with him through these Prelates meanes. I have now given a short account of some of he Irish Pre∣lates disloyall and seditious Actions in ormer ages; which I shall close up with the accusations and proceedings against some of them within the limits of this last yeare. On the fourth of March last the whole house of Commons in Ireland, sent up these Articles of High Treason against Iohn Bramham Bishop of Derry and others, to the Upper House of Parliament there, which I finde Printed with Captaine Audey Mermin his speech, who presented them, at the time of their transmission. Articles of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in the Parliament Assembled, against Sir Richard Bolton Knight, Lord Chan∣cellour of Ireland, Iohn Lord Bishop of Derry, and Sir Gerard Lowther Knight, Lord Chiefe Iustice of the Common Pleas, and Sir George Ratcliffe Knight in maintenance of the accusation, whereby they and every of them stand charged with High Trea∣son. FIrst, that they the sayd Iohn Lord Bishop of Derry, &c. in∣tending the destruction of the Common-wealth of this Realme, have trayterously confederated and conspired toge∣ther, to subvert the fundamentall Laws and government of this Kingdome, and in pursuance thereof, they and every of them, have trayterously contrived, introduced, and exercised an ar∣bitrary and tyrannicall government against Law, throughout this Kingdome by the countenance and assistance of Tomas
Earle of Strafford, then chiefe Governour of this King∣dome. That they and every of them, the sayd Iohn Lord Bishop of Derry, &c. have trayterously assumed to themselves, and every of them regall power over the goods, persons, Lands, and li∣berties of his Majesties subjects of this Realme, and likewise have maliciously, perfidiously and trayterously given, de∣clared, pronounced, and published many false, unjust, and erronious opinions, Judgements, Senences, and Decrees, in extra judiciall manner against Law, and have perpetrated, pra∣ctised, and done many other trayterous and unlawfull acts and things, whereby as well divers mutinies, seditions and rebel∣lions have beene raised, as also many thousands of his Maje∣sties Liege people of this Kingdome, have beene ruined in their goods, Lands, Liberties, and Lives, and many of them being of good quality and reputation have beene utterly defamed by Pillory, mutilation of members and other infamous punish∣ments: By meanes whereof his Majesty and the Kingdome have beene deprived of their service in Juries, and other pub∣lique imployments, and the generall trade and traffique of this Island for the most part destroyed, and his Majesty highly dam∣nified in his customes and other Revenues. That they the sayd Iohn Lord Bishop of Derry, &c. and eve∣ry  of them the better to preserve themselves, and the sayd Earle of Strafford, in these and other trayterous courses, have laboured to subvort the rights of Parliament and the ancient course of Parliamentary proceedings: all which offences were contrived, committed, perpetrated, and done at such time as the sayd Sir Richard Bolton, Sir Gerard Lowther, and Sir George Radcliffe Knights, were Privie Counsellours of State within this Kingdome, and against their and every of their Oathes of the same, at such times as the sayd Sir Richard Bolton Knight, was Lord Chancellour of Ireland, or chiefe Baron of his Ma∣jesties Exchequer within this kingdome, and Sir Gerard Low∣ther Knight, was Lord chiefe Justice of the sayd Court of Common Pleas, and against their Oathes of the same, and at uch time as the sayd Iohn Lord Bishop of Derry, was actuall Bi∣shop of Derry within this Kingdome, and were done and spe∣ciated contrary to their and every of their allegiance, severall and respective Oathes taken in that behalfe.
For which the sayd Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses doe impeach he sad Iohn Lord Bishop of Dery, &c. and every of them of high Treason againt our Soveraigne Lord the King his Crowne and dignity What proceedings will insue upon this accusation against this Prelae, time will discover. Not to mention he lewd, beastly, Sodomiticall life and most detestable Actions of Aderton Bishop of Waeford n Ireland, for which he was lately aaigned, condemned and hanged as a Bishop without any preceding degradation, to the great dis∣honour of his Rochet; I shall close up this Historicall Epitome of the Irish Bishops, with a Petition and Remonstrance of ma∣ny thousand Protestan Inhabitants in severall Counties of Ire∣land, against Episcopacy, presented lately to the High Court of Parliament here in England; wheein the evill ruites, and se∣ditious, oppressive ungodly practises of the present Irish Pre∣lates, are fully anatomized. To the Honourable Assembly of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in this present Parliament. The Humble Petition of some of the Protestant Inha∣bitants of the Counties of Antrim, Downe, Tyrone, &c. part of the Province of Ulster, in the Kingdome of Ireland; Humbly REpresenteth unto your grave Wisedomes, and judi∣cious considerations, That your Petitioners having translated themselves out of the severall parts of his Majesties Kingdomes of England and Scotland to promote the Infant Plantation of Ireland, wherein your Petitioners by their great labour and industry so much contributed to the settle∣ment of that Kingdome, as they were in a most hopefull way of a comfortable abode, and when they expected to reape the uite of their great and long labour, partly by the cruell seve∣rity
and abitary proceedings of the Civill Magistrate, but principally through th nblest way of the Prelacy with their faction, ou Soules are starved, our estates undone, out fami∣les impoverished, and many lives among us, cut off and de∣stroed. Te Prelates (whose pretended Authority, though by some pubshed to be by divin Right, as we humbly conceive is directly against the same) have by their Canons of late, their Fines, Fees, and imprisonments at their pleasure, their silen∣cing, suspending, banishing and excommunicating of our learned and conscionable Ministers, their obtruding upon us ignorant, erronious and prophane persons to be our teachers, their censuring of many hundreds even to excommunication, for matters acknowledged by all, to be indifferent, and not necessary, their favouring Popery, (in this Kingdome a double ault) their persecuting purity, and indeavouring to bring all to a livelesse formality, divers of them being notorious in∣cendiaries of the unquietnesse and unsetled estate betweene these Kingdomes with many the like too tedious to relate, as more fully in our ensuing grievances doth appeare. These our cruell Taske-masters have made of us who were once a people, to become as it were no people, an astonishment to our selves, the object of piety and amazement to others, and hopelesse of remedy, unlesse hee with whom are bowels of compassion, worke in you an heart to interpose for your Peti∣tioners reliefe. They therefore most humbly pray that this unlawfull Hie∣rarchicall government with all their appendices may be utterly extirpated, such course layd downe, as to your great wisedomes shall eeme meete for reparation in some measure of our un-utterable dammages, ustained by the parties thus injuriously grieved, your Petitioners setled in a way whereby their persecuted Ministers may have leave to returne from exile, and be freed from the unjust censures imposed on them, d an open doore continued unto us for provision of a powerfull and able ministry, the onely best way to promote Plantation, and settle the Kingdome in the profession and practise of true Religion. Which as it is the earnest expectation, so it shall be the
dayly prayer of many thousands besides your Petitioners who will ever enteate the Lord for your direction herein, and in all other your waighty, and important affaires, as becommeth your poore Petitioners, &c. A Particular of manifold evills and heavie pressures, caused and occasioned by the Prelacy, and their depen∣dants. BEfore they had so much as a pretended Canon for their  warrant the Prelates urged their Ceremonies with such vehemency, that divers of our most learned and paine∣full Ministers for not obeying them were slenced, and many of us for the like oppressed in their Courts. In the yeare 634. they made such Canons and Constituti∣ons  Ecclesiasticall as enjoyned many corruptions in the worship of God and government of the Church, which exceedingly re∣tarded the worke of reformation, animated Papists, and made way for divers Popish Superstitions. Our most painefull, godly and learned Ministers were by the  Bishops and their Commissaries, silenced and deprived, for not subscribing and conforming to the sayd unlawull Canons, yea through the hotnesse of their persecution orced to flee the Land, and afterward excommunicated, to the danger of all, and losse of some of their lives. In their places others were obtruded, not onely ignorant  lazie, and lukewarme, but many of them unsound in doctrine, prophane in life, and cruell in persecution. Many, though sufficiently furnished, were not admitted to the  Ministry, onely for not swallowing downe their groundlesse In∣novations, yea some though conforme, yet for appearing strict in Life, were likewise kept out. Good and painefull Ministers are not suffered to exercise  the function which God hath called them unto, nor suffeed to enjoy any living, whereas the Bishop, doe hold by Commen∣dam many livings, besides those proper to their Bishorickes, and doe confere livings upon ir Childen  studendi gratia (as is preended) and diver  five, sixe, or more upon their Favorites.
Hence the care of soules are committed to Hirelings, who eceive 5.6.810. l. by yeare for their cures, divers of which are put together, to the charge of some illiterate Curate, by which meanes the people perish for want of food, though the Parson or Vicar through connivence of the Bishop, is utterly non-resident, and by each one of the many benefices he enjoy∣eth and hath a competent allowance for a moderate minded man to maintaine himselfe and family upon. Whereas the Bishops should give all good example by pain∣full preaching and holy conversation, hey preach very rarely themselves, and like those in the Gospell who will neither en∣ter hemselves nor suffer others to enter, they have supprest divers others from preaching both on the afternoone on the Lords day, and in many places where weekely Lectures were maintained either by the free will of the Mnister, or cost of the people, they have utterly forbidden the same, and showne all manner of discountenane to those who were forward therein, so that a Lecturing Minister appeared before them un∣der more prejudice rhan a Popish Priest or undermining Je∣suite. Lest those who could not be admitted into the Ministry, undertaking to teach Schoole should there lay impressions of Piety and good learning, they urge on the very Schoole-ma∣sters a Subscription beyond what is injoyned by their owne Canon, and punish by Excommunication and otherwise the refusers thereof: So as the Schooles formerly much frequen∣ted, are now utterly desolate, to the spoyle of youth and pro∣moting of prophanenesse and ignorance. Thus whiles they proceede so severely and unjustly in pu∣nishing the refusers to their unlawfull Commands, though other∣wise never so honest and able men, they favour Popery, to the continuance and great increase thereof. Hence, Titular Bishops are by them winked at, in the exercise of  jurisdiction from forraigne power, Masse Priests are frequent, and pretend a title to every Parish in the Kingdome, Masses publiquely celebrated without controlement to the great griefe of Gods people, and increase of Idolatry and Super∣stition. They permit Fryeries and Nunneries to be within their Dio∣cesses, whereby they continue and increase of late in many
places, yea divers of them suffered to remaine in the very places where some of the Bishops have their speciall resi∣dence. In many places of the Land where Protestants are forbidden  and restrained, Papists are permitted to keepe Schooles, unto some whereof such multitudes of Children and young men doe resort, that they may be esteemed rather Universities, teaching therein not onely the tongues, but likewise the liberall Arts and Sciences. They set forth and suffer to be published wicked Libells  and ungodly Pamphlets, tending to Sedition faction and dis∣union of the Brittish Inhabitants, such as Examen conjurationis Scoticae, Lysimachus Nicanor, &c. And in their Sermons, prayer and ordinary Table talke, divers of the Bishops, in matters quite besides their calling have not desisted to rayle, curse and most bitterly inveigh against the Kingdome of Scotland, and all their proceedings, labouring to make them odious, thereby proving themselves fire-brands of Sedition, betweene the two Nations, yea proclaiming their prophanity by drinking healths to the confusion of that Nation. The most learned and seemingly moderate and pious of the  Prelates publiquely in Sermons at Dublin, exclaimed against, and condemned the Scottish Covenant, and Religion profest in that Kingdome with most invective termes. And in the Starchamber in Dublin, at the censure of Henry Stewad Esquire, his Wife and two Daughters, and Iames Gay, for refusing to take an Oath, for which there was no other ground than the Earle of Straffords command, which was against the Covenant of Scotland, uttered these words, viz. These people with Cora Dathan and Abiram doe withstand the Ordinance of God; and therefore I leave them to the judgement of Corah, Dathan and Abi∣ram, and agree to their censure though deeper. They have frequently made Symonicall pactions and bar∣gaines  in the conferring of benefices, and ordinarily permit Ministers to exchange their livings, thereby to nullifie Leases of Tythes, which the former incumbent Ministers have set at certaine rates. The Prelates have usually appointed such men to be their  Commissaries, officialls and Registers, who altogether negle∣cting the punishment of Vices cognizable in their Courts,
looke onely to their owne game. Hence, Though they pretend themselves the advancers of vertue and punishers of Vice, yet they usually without further satis∣faction absolve the most scandalous persons for a summe of money, and often question not at all, such from whom they privately before-hand receive such a summe, which is a cause that many wickednesse doe more and more abound. If any be presented by their Apparitors (who are usually Papists) if it be but for non-payment of the Clerkes groate, or not observing some one of their frivolous injunctions, yea though the party presented be not found culpable, yet they require most excessive and unjust Fees. And if their demands be not satisfied (though never so great poverty might plead for mercy) they presently proceed to the Censure of Excom∣munication, thus vainely and blasphemously abusing the High Ordinance of God, so many hundred of us, remaine under that censure, and multitudes constrained to runne out of the Land, to the undoing of them and thers. The Prelates, that they might mannage Peters sword as well as his Keyes, have some of them procured that most unlaw∣full writ of Assistance, whereby his Majesties Officers and Ministers, are required to yeeld assistance unto the Bishop, his Officiall, or any deputed by him; which Writ is by their Officers most notoriously abused, and many times put into the hands of their Apparitors, who under colour thereof, apprehend honest men and women, casting them into prison, untill they be forced to free themselves by an heavie compo∣sition. They charge Church-Wardens with Articles farre beyond their understanding to every particular whereof, if they re∣fuse to answere or present, then are they bound to answere for it at Councell Table, or High Commission Court, or both: and though there acquitted, yet no remedy left them for their great dammages. They force Church-Wardens to attend all their Visitations and circular Courts; and there, for their Articles, Oathes, Ad∣missions and Discharges, they make them pay most excessive and undue Fees, never before practised or required. The Commutations for Penance, which either should not be at all, or if exacted, then set apart for the poore, and
other pious uses, commeth either to the Prelates Kitchin, the Commissaries purse, or both. The Prelates and their faction as they inherit the Supersti∣tion  of the Papacy, so of late they exact with all severity the absolute customes of Saint Mary-Gallons, Mortuaries, Portions, &c. which as they were given by Superstition and used to Ido∣latry, so now they are taken by oppression, and applyed to riotousnesse. They have also constantly practised and suffered, the buy∣ing  and selling of the Sacraments, which is an heavie burden. And where the poore have not to pay the Minister and Clerks Fees, they will not marry them, nor suffer their dead to be bu∣ried. In the High Commission Court, against all Law and equity  they sit as Judges in their owne cause, and take cognizance of the highest and smallest matters, going therein without con∣troll. Hence, In the sayd Court they usurpe with an high hand the judi∣cature  of Civill causes, impose Fines beyond all bounds, and imprison at their pleasure; whereby many have beene utterly undone. They proceede in the sayd Court by way of most cruell and  lawlesse inquisition, not onely into mens actions and words, but reaching even to their very thoughts, in imposing the most unlawfull Oath Ex Officio, to force to accuse not onely others, but likewise their owne selves, contrary to Law, and the very Maximes of Nature. And if any refuse to take this Oath, then are they imprisoned and fined beyond measure, to the ruine of all that fall under the waight of their indignation. Divers of the Prelates did joyntly frame and wickedly  contrive with the Earle of Strafford, that most Lawlesse and scandalous Oath, imposed upon the Scottish-Brittish among us who were Protestants, for receiving all commands indefinitely. And some of the Prelates were the occasion, that women and maides should be forced thereunto. Hence, Commissions issu∣ing to all places, for the exacting of it, they were prosecuted with so much rigour, that very many, as if they had beene Tray∣tors in the highest degree, were searched for, apprehended, examined, reviled, threatned, imprisoned, fettered by threes and foures in Iron yoakes, some in chaines carried up to Dublin
in Starchamber fined in thousands beyond ability, and condem∣ned to perpetuall imprisonment, divers poore women but two dayes before delivery of Children were apprehended threatned and terrified, others of them 2. or 3. dayes afer Child-birth, so narrowly searched or, that they were faine to fly out of all harbour into Wood, Mountaines, Caves, and Cornefields, and man daes and nights together absent them∣selves to the impairing of the healh of very many, and death of divers, and losse of their goods, which the enemie at their pleasure made havocke of. These with many more unexpres∣sible, have beene the woefull effects of the Oath drawne up by advice of the Prelates, and so unjustly prest by authority of the Earle of Strafford. The Prelates with their Faction have been injurious not onely to the Spirituall, but also to the temporall estates of most men, for under colour of Church-lands, they have injuri∣ously seized into their hands, much of the best Lands in every County, so that there is scarce a gentleman of any worth, whom they have not bereaved of some part of his inheitance, fewdaring to oppose their unjust demands, and if any did, none were able to maintaine their just Titles against their power and oppression. By these wayes have they ruinated and undone many fami∣lies, destroyed and cast away thousands of Soules, and moreover in their owne persons have beene a scandall to the Gospell and a stumbling blocke even unto the Common enemy, by their sweating, cursing, drunkennesse, Sabbath-breaking, &c. having such servants usually in their families as are the most prophane in the Kingdome, ew others countenanced by them but such. And if any seeme to be of an holy life, he is scorned and per∣secuted by them. Thus they publishing and proclaiming themselves children of Ishmael and Esau, we most humbly beseech you as the true sons of Israel, to take order with them, as God shall direct, whom we shall ever pray to be ayding, and assisting unto you, in this great and glorious worke of Reformation. And thus much in briefe for the Norman, Scottish, and Irish Prelates, which I thought convenient to annex to our English, being all Birds of the same feather, that I say not Wolves of the same litter.
CHAP. VIII. Containing certaine Conclusions deduced from the Premises; with the judgements and resolutions of divers of our ancient Writers and Martyrs, and some of our learnedst Bishops and Authors in Queen Elizabeths raigne, touching the pretended divine Iurisdiction of Bishops, their Treasons, Rebellions, Temporalities, large possessions; and the uselesnesse, unprofitablenesse, and mischeivousnesse of Lorldy Bishops, and their government in our Church. YOu have now seen a large black Catalogue of the Treasons, Rebellions, Conspiracies, seditions, contumacies, State-schismes, Wars, Vproares, and Antimonarchicall practises of our Prelates against their Soveraignes, with their severall stratagems to undermine the Lawes and liberties of the Subjects, and worke the ruine and disturbance of our State in all ages; give me leave now in the close of this Relation, to draw some usefull undeniable conlusions from the premises, worthy his Majesties, and the Parliaments most serious considera∣tions. The first is this, That our lordly Prelates in all ages since  they became such, have been the greatest Rebels, Traytors, Conspirators and Opposites to our Princes; the chiefest Incendiaries and firebrands of all Warres, Seditions, State-schismes, and disturbance which have infested our Realm; and the archest tyrants, oppressors of the people, and in∣vaders of our Lawes and Liberties, of all other Callings and Professions of men, severally or joyntly considered. Secondly, That the Prelates Lordly jurisdiction over
their fellow-brethren, contrary to Christs institution: the greatnesse of their wealth and temporall possessions; their admission to temporall Offices of greatest authority and trust: their sitting as Peeres in Parliament, and Judges in some tempoall Courts; their residence in or about the Court, and advancement to be Counsellors of State; their neare relation to and privy intelligence with the Pope, whose sworne vassals they were of old: the Antichristiani∣ty of their calling, which depends wholly upon the selfe∣same grounds and principles as the Romish Heirarchy doth; and the secret curse of God upon those Princes and King∣domes who have erected, supported, and countenanced these Antichristian Lords, and imployed them in the grea∣test State-offices, against the expresse inhibition of Christ; wih the pride, avarice, malice and ambition, which inse∣prably accompany their Lordly Chaires of pestilence, are the cheife grounds of our Prelates forementioned Trea∣sons and extravagances; and that as long as they and these grounds continue, we must ever expect the selfesame ex∣amples, fruits and effects from this generation of Vi∣pers, what politick courses soever shall be excogitated to prevent them. Thirdly, That our English Lordly Prelacy, stands in di∣rect opposition to Regall Monarchy and civill Vnity; and that our Prelates Maxime, No Bishop, no King, is a false and idle Paradox, refuted by the premised histories, and the ex∣perience of all ages. Fourthly, That the calling of Lordly Prelates is neither Divine nor Apostolicall; but rather Antichristian and Di∣abolicall, as these fruits thereof demonstrate. And to speak ingenuously; the first thing that caused me to suspect our Prelates calling, not to be divine, (and thereupon induced me to search into the bottome of it, as farre as my poore a∣bilities and leasure would permit, till I found it to be so ideed;) was the pravity of their actions, and enormities of their lives: In which if I have erred, it is in following my Saviours infallible rule, Matth. 7.15. to 20. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheeps cloathing, but in∣wardly they are ravening wolves; ye shall know them by their ruits. A good tree cannot bring forth evill fruit, neither can
a corrupt tre bring forth good fruit: wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. Fifthly, That it can neither be safe for King nor State, to tolerate Lordly Prelates, or to admit them to manage the chiefe Offices, Councels, and affaires of the Kingdome, to which thir consultations and imployments for the most part, have vr proved pernicious, as ancient and present experience abundantly testifie. And that the readiest way to provide for our Kingdoms and Churches future security and tranquillity, will be utterly to suppresse and remove them from all such offices and consultations. Sixthly, That those who have beene so perfidious and  rebellious to our Kings and Kingdome, will hardly prove faithfull and trusty in matters of Religion, in which they have extraordinarily prevaricated in all ages; and not a little of late yeares, as is too manifest by sundry evidences and complaints in Parliament. And here give me leave to recommend n serious consideration to you, how dange∣rous it is to intrust our Religion in the Prelates hands, grounded upon these words of our famous Licet sit expe∣diens quod uni Populo partiali futeli, praesit unus Episcopus, nō tamen quod toti populo fi∣deli praesit unus solus. Tum quia minus malum est ut populus partialis & par∣vus inficia∣tur ab uno E∣piscopo, quàm ut totus, vel fer totus populus Christianus infi∣ciatur ab uno capite, qui om∣nibus praesit. Ockam. Dialog. l. 2. Tract. 1. p. 3. c. 30. ad 8. Occham Who writing against the Pops Monarchy, alleadgeth this rea∣son among others against it; that there is greater danger of poysoning he people and whole Church by one supreame head, then by many. We know all the Bishops of England are to be consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being, and are subject to him, as Primate and Metropolitan of all Egland, taking an See Antiqui∣tates Ecclesiae Brit. through∣out. Oath of Canonicall obedience to him; so as they all, in a manner, depend on him: Againe, we know that no Minister can be ordained, or admitted to Preach, or instituted to any living as an Incumbent, or Curate, but by these Bishops; who take upon them to visit silence and suspend them at their pleasure; yea, and to dispose of most Patrons benefices to whom they please: as we see by late wofull experience. Suppose then (which I trust shall never happen) that any to whom the Crowne of England shall descend should be ill affected to our Re∣ligion; if he should make choice of such an Archbishop (and he of other inferiour Prelates) sutable to his disaffection, who must ordaine all other Bishops, Ministers, and may suspend and silence them, or deny to admit those that
are Orthodox at his pleasure; how easily might our Church and Religion by one over-potent Arch-bishop, or Pre∣late, backed by his Soveraigne, be undermined, suppressed, and eradicated in a short space? Whereas if this jurisdicti∣on were devested from the Bishops, (which are but 26. and depend on one Arch-Prelate) and setled in the Mi∣nisters which are many, and more independent on the Prince then they, our Religion would be farre more se∣cure, and the Ministers and people lesse subject to be infect∣ed with Romish Innovations, which one Archbishop of Canterbury is now able sodainly to poyson our Church and people with. Seventhly, That these Bishops were the chiefe instru∣ments to introduce, advance and support the Popes Anti∣christian authority, usurped jurisdiction, and erronious do∣ctrines among us;Hence most Pa∣pists nw live neare Bishops Cathedrals. and to revive them again, when diminish∣ed or extinguished; the Pope and popery still raigning a∣mong us, till the Prelates attainted by King Henry the eight in a Praemunire, were inforced, sore against their wils, to re∣nounce the Popes authority, to acknowledg him the supreame head on earth of our English Church; and by speciall Letters patents and37. H. 8. r. 17.1. E. 1. r. 2. Acts of Parliament, to confesse all their Episco∣pall jurisdiction to be derived not from God, or the Pope, but ONELY from, by and under him their Soveraigne. And I dare further averre (for ratification of this Conclusion) that the Prelates of Italy, Germany, France, Spaine, Hun∣gary, and Poland, are the maine pillars, which support the Popes Monarchy, false Doctrines, Ceremonies, and Superstitions in those Countries and Kingdomes; which would soone turne Protestants, were but the Bishops suppressed, and their great temporall revenues taken a∣way; the enjoyment of which Antichristian dignities and possessions, engageth them to maintaine and uphold the Pope, and popery against their consciences. The truth of which will appeare by most of the transmarine refor∣med Churches, who could never utterly abandon the Pope with his Doctrines and superstitions, till they had extirpa∣ted their Lordly Bishops. . That as long as our Lordly Prelates continue, there will not onely be a possibility, but a probability of bringing
in popery and the Pope againe among us; since their Lordly Hierarchy is supported onely by popish Doctrines, Canons, Ceremonies, and Principles, which they are en∣gaged to maintaine, to preserve their tottering thrones from ruine. How farre the Pope his Doctrines and Super∣stitions had of late in a little time serued themselves into our Church, almost to the utter ruine of our Religion, and of the Ministers and professors of it (persecuted and driven out into forraine Countryes,) and that onely by the Bishops and their instruments machinations, is so well knowne to all, and so abundantly discovered to and by this present Parliament, that I need not relate it Onely this I dare say, that if ever they get head and life among us againe (as they did in Queene Maries dayes, and that prin∣cipally by the Prelates meanes) it will be by our Lordly Bishops activity; who if once totally suppressed, both Pope and papists would utterly despaire of ever reducing England to their vassallage. Eighthly, That Bishops have done a world of mischiefe to our Kings and Kingdomes, as appeares by all the premi∣ses, but little or no good that I can read off; And as for the diligent preaching of Gods word, and publishing Christs true Religion, the chiefe and almost onely duty of Bishops; from Augustine, the first Archbishop of Canterbury (and first introducer of the Popes authority, errours and super∣stitions among us) till Cranmers time, which is above 800 yeares, I thinke there was not one Archbishop guilty of it; The like I may say of other Seas; and I presume I may justi∣fie, that some two poor Country Curats or Lecturers in our dayes, have converted more soules to God by their diligent zealous preaching, then all the Archbshops of Canterbury put together, most of whom I read to have been Rebels, Tray∣tors, State-officers, & persecutors of Religion; but very few of them soule-converting Preachers. Why then should hese Malmesbury, de Getis Pontifi∣cum, in the life o Asele, with others forecited. p. 12.13. Popes of another World (as the Pope of Rome once stiled them) be still tolerated, when they have done so much mischiefe, and so little good to our State and Church? Ninthly, That the endowing of the Prelates, with great  Temporall revenews, was the very bane and poyson of Religion, and one principall cause of the Bishops rebellions,
Treasons, and exorbitances forementioned; And therefore they may both with good conscience and reason be substract∣ed from them and put to better uss; and they like other Ministers, be confined to one comptent living with cure, there conantly to reside and instruct the people, like Bi∣shops in the primitive times. Tenthly, That our Lorly Prelates will be still undermi∣ning the Lawes and libries of he Subjects, his Majesties royall perogtive, his Eccleasticall and temporall juris∣diction, and vexing his Subject in their Courts, till both their usurpd Authorities and Consistories be better regu∣lated, or totally abolished. Eleventhly, That the very Spirit of insolency, contuma∣cy, teachery, sedition, rebellion, ambition, pride, covetous∣nesse, vaineglory, malice, hypocrisie, tyranny, and op∣pression is almost inseparably united to the Chaires of Lord∣ly Prelates, since they infect almost all who once sit in them; and either infuse these vices into them, or augment them in them; none growing better men, but most farre worse by their Sees. Twelfthly, that the government of our Church in com∣mon, by a Presbytery or Synod of Ministers or any other way used in the primitive Church and other refomed Churches can no way be so pernicious or inconvenient to our Kings and Kingdomes as the Government by Lordly Prelates is and hath been. Our Prelates chiefe objection in point of Monarchy, against a Presbyteriall or Synodall government, is, See Bishop White Epistle before his Do∣ctrine of the Sabbath: Hey∣lyn in his Anti∣dotum Lincolni∣ense; and mode∣rate answer to H. Burton. that if this forme should be introduced, the King and No∣bles must submit therto, and be liable to their excommunica∣tions. But this is a foolish Bugbear, which recoyles and lights heavily on their owne heads. For the Archbishops and Bishops of England (and those of forraine Countrys too) have many times, not onely excommunicated their Sove∣raignes, but also interdicted their Kingdomes, enjoyned hard penances to them, absolved their Subjects from their allegiance, and oathes, armed their people and strangers a∣gainst them, and deprived them of their Crownes; offering them more and greater affronts, and requiring more sub∣mission from them, then all other their Subjects whatsoe∣ver. Did ever any Presbytery doe the like, or take so much
upon them? or did they ever deal so with their Princes, as our Prelates did with King Iohn, or with Edward, and Rich∣ard the second? If yea, then prove it: If no, then this is no solid objection, but a malicious suggestion against the Pres∣byteriall and Synodall Government. In a word, I would demand this question of the Objectors, whether Kings, and great men, when they scandalously offend, be subject to the censures of Excommunication by the law of God? If so, then why may not the Presbytery and Synode of Ministers anathematize them, as well as Lord Bishops and Popes? If not, then there is no feare of such a censure, to which they are not liable by Gods Law or mans. These twelve conclusions are sufficiently warranted by the premises; yet for the Readers better satisfaction, I shall back them with some passages and Authorities of our owne approved ancient and Moderne Writers, Martyrs, Prelates, and Authors of speciall note, and so conclude. Caelius Sedulius Scotus,Sedulius. one of the ancientest of our owne Writers, flourishing about the yeare of our Lord 390. de∣termines thus of the parity of Bishops and Presbyters by divine right, against our Lordly Prelates doctrine in these dayes, in his Exposition on Titus, Chap. 1. For a Bshop must be blamelesse, &c. He calleth him a Bishop, whom before he na∣med a Presbyter. Before by the Devils instinct parties were made in Religion, and it was said among the people, I am of Paul, but I am of Apollo, and I am of Cephas, the Churches were governed with the common Councel of the Presbyters: But after that every one thought those whom he baptised to be hi not Christs, it was decreed throughout the World, that one chosen  of the Presbyters should be set over the rest, to whom all the care of the Church should appertaine, and that the seeds of schismes should be taken away. In the Acts of the Apostls it is written,Acts 20.17, 28. tha when the Apostle Paul came to Miletus, he sent to Ephesus and called the Elders of that Church, unto whom among other things he spake thus: Take heed to your selves, and to all the flocke over which the Holy Ghost hath made you Bishops, to feed the Church of God which he hath purchased with his owne blood. And here observe more diligently, how that he calling the Elders of but one City Ephesus, doth afterwards stile them Bishops; These
things I have alleadged that we mght shew how that among the Ancts, fuisse Presbyteros quos Episcopos, Prsbyters to hve been THE SAME THAT BISHOPS WERE: But by little and little, that the seeds of dissention might be ut∣terly extïrpated, the whole cure was trasferred to one. And on the 1 Timothy 5.. It is demanded (writes he) why Paul here makes no mention of Presbyters, but onely of Bi∣shops and Deacons? Sed etiam ipsos in Episcoporum no∣mine comprehendit: But truely he also comprehndeth thm in he name of Bishops. Anselme.To him I might annex our famous Gildas, in his Acris Correptio Cleri Angliae; our Venerable In quo vos Spi∣ritus sanctus po∣suit Episcopos. Dixerat enim suprà Presbyte¦ros Ephesi Mi∣letum vocatos, quos nunc Epis∣copos, id est, superin pecto∣res nominat. Non enim una civitas plures Episcopos habe∣re potuit, sed eosdem Presby∣teros, ut verè Sacerdots sub nomine Episco∣porum signifi∣cat. Conjunctus est enim gradus & in multis pene similis. Beda, in Acta A∣postolorum, cap. 20. Tom. 5. Col. 657. and Alcuinus, de Dvinis Officijs cap. 35.36, Epistola. 108. ad Sparatum: and Comment. in Evang. Ioannis, l. 5. to. 25. Col. 547, 548, 549. Who maintaine the selfe same Doctrine of the Parity of Bishops and Presbyters, declaime much against the pride, Lordlinsse, ambition, domineering power, and other vices of Prelates; and conclude, that a Bihopricke is Nomen O∣peris, non honoris; A name of Labour, not of honour; A worke, not a dignity; A toyle, not a delght. But I rather passe to Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, a man without exception, and the greatest Scholler in his age; who neare 600 yeares since, in his Enarration on the Epistle to the Phillippians. cap. 1. vers. 1. resolves thus. With the Bishops, that is, with the Presbyters and Deacns: for he hath put Bishops for Elders, after his custome. For there were not ma∣ny Bshops in one City, neither would he intermit Presbyters, that he mght descnd to Deacons: But he declares the dignity and excellency of the Presbyters, whils he manifests the same men who are Presbyters to be Bishops. But that AFTER∣WARD one was elected, who might be preferred before the rest, it was done to prevent schisme, let every one drawing to himselfe the Gospell of Christ, should divide it: Constat ergo Apostolica institutione omnes Presbyteros esse Episcopos. It is therefore MANIFEST BY APOSTOLICALL INSTITVTION, THAT ALL PRESBYTERS ARE BISHOPS, albeit NOW those greater ones have obtained that Title. For a Bshop is called an Overseer; and every Presbyter ought to attend the cure over the flock com∣mitted
to him. In his Commentary on the first Chapter of Ti∣tus v. 5, 7. he hath the selfesame words that Hierom and Sedulius used before him, concluding from Acts 20.17, 28. and Phil. 1.1. Apud veteres cosdem fuisse Presbyteros quos Episcopos. That AMONG THE ANCIENTS PRESBYTERS WERE THE VERY SAME THAT BISHOPS WERE; and that the Churches were then governed by a common Councell of the Presbyters. As therefore Presbyters know, that they out of the custome of the Church, are subject to him who shall be set over them; so Bishops must know; SE MAGIS CONSV∣ETVDINE, Quàm DISPOSITIONIS DO∣MINICAE VERITATE PRESBYTERIS ESSE MAJORES, ET IN COMMVNE DE∣BERE ECCLESIAM REGERE: that they by CVSTOME, rather then by truth of Divine Disposition are greater then Presbyters, and Therefore it is of right and du∣ty. OVGHT TO RVLE THE CHVRCH IN COMMON with them. From which pregnant Authority, even of an old Archbi∣shop of Canterbury. I observe: First, That by Apostolicall institution, Bishops and Pres∣byters are both one and the same; and originally continued so for a season. Secondly, That the imparity now between them s onely by custome, not by divine institution, and crept in by little and little by degrees, after the Apostles time. Thirdly, That every Presbyter is still truely and properly a Bishop over his owne flock. Fourthly, That the Church of God at first was governed onely by a common Councell or Synode of Presbyters, not by Bishops. Fifthly, That Presbyters even at this day not onely may, but ought to governe the Church in common with the Bi∣shops; as they did both in Epist. 5.6 10. Ignatius, Apologia. adu. Gentes. c. 39. Tertullians, Epist. 6.18.28.39.45. Cypri∣ans, and Adv. Hr. l. 4.43, 44. c. 4. Irenaeus time, as others have proved at large. See the Answer to Bishop Hals Remonstrance. Sect. 8, 9. Sixthly, That Bishops were first Cypr. Epist. 33.58. Hierom ad uagr. elected, created, and instituted by the Presbyters;Flacius Illeri∣cus in the end of his Caral. Test. veritatis. therefore by their owne max∣ime, (Ordinans est major ordinato) are greater and better then Bishops; the rather, because Presbyters Quatenus
such are of Divin, and Bishops quatenus Bishops but of humane institution: and Presbyters as such, by Anselmes owne resolution in his Commentary on 1 Tim. 4.14. may of right ordaine Elders, as well as Bishops. Neither is Anselme singular in his opinion, in avouching the parity and identity of Presbyters and Bishops, since Atha∣nasius, In Ephes. 4. Tom. 3.239. Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Pri∣masius, Remigius, Rabanus Maurus, Haym, Theophylact, Bruno, in their Commentaries on Phil. 1.1. Acts 20.17, 28. 1 Tim. 3. Tit. 1.5, 7. and on Ephes. 4.11, 12. with sundry See A Cata∣logue Se. p. 1.2, 3.other Fathers delivered the same opinion in their writings before his time. A truth so cleare, that learned Consultatio. Artic. 14. Oper. Parisiis. 16.6. p. 952. Cassander, though a Papist, confesseth, Convenit autem inter OMNES, olim Apostolicorum aetate, INTER EPISCOPOS ET PRESBYTEROS, DISCRIMEN NVL∣LVM FVISSE, SED POSTMODVM ordinis servandi, & schsmatis vitandi causa Episcopum Presbyteris fuisse praepositum, cui soli Chyrotomi, id est, ordinandi po∣testas servata sit. That then this truth which is granted on all hands by ALL (both Theologues and Canonists) a∣mong the Papists, should now be questioned, nay contra∣dicted and and damned for Heresie by our Prelates, seemes strange and monstrous unto me. But to proceed on in our owne Writers. Aelfrick Ca∣nons.In the Henr. Spil∣manni Concil. Tom. 1. p. 576.586. Episcopi & Presbyteri Ordo VNVS. Canons of Aelfrick to Wulfinus a Bishop, about the yeare of Christ, 990. Sect. 17. There is no more difference between a Masse-priest, and a Bishop, then that a Bishop is constituted to confer Orders, and to visit, or oversee, and to take care of those things which belong to God, which should be committed to too great a multitude, if every Presbyter should doe it. For both VNVM TE∣NENT EVNDEMQVE ORDINEM have one and the selfesame Order; although that part of the Bishop be the worthier. And in certaine old Saxon Chapters of incertaine Edition about the same time. Know that your degree is next to ours, & penè CONIVNCTVM esse, and to be almost the same or conjoyned to it. For as Bi∣shops supply the place of Apostles in the Church, so doe Presbyters of the other Disciples of the Lord: whence we ought to be mindfull of so great a dignity.
John Salisbury our famous Country-man flourishing a∣bout the yeare of Christ,Iohn Salis. 1140. De Nugis Curialium. li. 8. c. 17. and 23. writes thus of the pride and sedition of Bishops. Thou must admire to see the various houshold-stuffe and riches, as they say, of Croesus among them that preach poore Christ: They live of the Gospell without preach∣ing the Gospell, and it is well if they live onely, so, as they doe not also ryot. They so gape after gaine, that they contemne the things that are Jesus Christs; and are neither worthy the honour nor name either of a Pastor or hireling. They d that which makes them to be feared of all, to bee beloved of none; they preac peace, yet make division; they shew and counterfeit humi∣lity, that they may challenge pride. In fulnesse they dispute of fastings; and what they build up with words, they pull downe with deeds. The workes they doe, beare witnesse of them; you may know them by their fruits. It is not sufficient for them to sheare and devoure the flocke by liberty of a divine Law, unlesse they also implore the ayde of secular Lawes: and being made Officers to Prince, they feare not to commit those things, which any other Publican would easily be ashamed of. In the meane time they are servants to pleasure or avarice; and those who have chosen and admitted them to their custody, they spoyle and oppresse; and desire the death of those whom they ought to foster both in flesh and spirit: Truly they beare in mind hat of the Prophet. Behold I have set thee over the Nations and over Kingdomes, to pull up and to destroy, to pull downe and to scatter, &c. Nor they doe not onely contend but fight for a Bishoprick. The Ancients heretofore were dragged against their wils to a Bishoprick, and went willingly to Martyrdome: they feared the chiefe Chaire, worse then a prison or crosse. But now the Prelates spke quite contrary; we will not, say they, be Martyrs, but the glory of our Sees we will not give to another. Yet there is something in which they seeme to imitate the constancy of Martyrs, to wit, if they are to contest for a Bishoprick. It is reported by some, and it is true, that ambitious men have sometimes, yea often contended for the Bishopricke of Rome, and not
without brotherly blood, hath the High Priest entred in∣to the holy of holies. This verily is to succeed Romulus in paricide, not Peter in feeding the flock committed to him. More then civill Warres are againe stirred up be∣tweene Caesar and Pompey, and whatsoever was presum∣ed, whaever was impiously done at Philippi, Lucade, Murina, in Aegypt, or in Spaine, a prelaticall Warre accomplisheth. Doe they therefore procure the effusion of Christian blood, that it may be lawfull for them above other men, according to their pastorall duty, to lay down their lives for the Flock? Doe they therefore pull down the Churches, prophane holy things, that there may be some thing for them to build up and sanctifie? Per∣chance they dash Nations one against another, disquiet Kingdomes, violently take away the goods of Churches, that they may make matter of promeriting to themselves; that they may compose al things, that other things concu∣ring they may lay hold on a necessity of commiserating and providing for the poore. But if they doe it, that they may safely doe any thing without punishment, that they may collect mony; that they may foster, dilate, and corrupt flesh and blood; trouble their Family, or seek their owne glory, domineering over the Lords heritage, and not being exanimo, an example to the flock, although with their lips and in simulation of office they put on a Pastor, yet they are more like to Tyrants then Princes. Philo∣phers say, nothing is more pernicious to man then man; and among men a secular, or Ecclesiasticall Tyrant is most pernicious, Yet verily in both kinds the Ecclesiasti∣call is worse then the secular. For if Salt hath lost its savour, it is good for nothing, but to be cast out and troden under feet of men. So he long since determi∣ned. Petrus BlesensisPetrus Blesensis, Archdeacon of Bath, flourishing about the yeare of our Lord 1160. writes thus to the Bishop of Bangor, concerning the wealth and State of Bishops: Epist. 147The Title of poverty is glorious with Christ; and that which hath becomed the Sonne of God, ought not to misbeseeme you: The Prince of the Apostles and Prelates saith. Acts 3.6. Gold and Silver have I none. Yea, that great fa∣mous
Possidonus in vita. Augustine (Bishop of Hippo) therefore made no will, because the poore servant of Christ had nothing at all, whereof to make any bequest. It is your duty to live of the Gospell, as the Lord hath appointed, not to goe pompously in the ornament of Cloathes, in the pride of Horses, in the multitude of Attendants. It becomes you as a professour of Priestly and Episcopall holynesse, to ut of all footsteps of your ancient conversation:Bibl. Patrum Tom. 12. pr. . p 947, 943. And in his Treatise of the Institution of a Bishop, dedicated to John Bishop of Worcester, He thus declaimes against the Lordlinesse, Courship, and secular imployments of Bishops, especially those, which concerne the Exchequer. Certaine Bishops abusively, call the liberty and almes of ancient Kings bestowed on them, Baronies and Royalties, and themselves Barons, it being an occasion of most shamfull servitude. I am afraid, least the Lord complaine of them and say, Hosea 8.4 They have raigned, but not by me, they have made themselves Princes, but I knew it not. Thou must know, that thou hast taken upon thee the Office of a Shepheard, not of a Baron: Certainely Gen. 46.34 Iosph being in Aegypt, instructed his Father and Brethren to say to Pharaoh, We are Shepheards: He would rather have them professe the office of a Shepheard, then of a Prince or Baron. Christ saith, Iohn 10.11. I am the good Shepheard: But thou art made by him a shepheard or a steward: a stewardship is committed to thee; and know, that thou must give an accoun of thy stewardship. The husbandry of God is committed to thee, thou hast need of a Weeding-hooke, as an Husbandman; of a stae as a Shepheard; of a Weeding-hooke, that as the Sonne of a Prophet, Ier. 1.101. thou mayst pull up and destroy, build up and plant; use thy staffe by driving the Wolves from the sheep-fold, by sustaining the weake sheep, by raising up those ha are fallen, by reducing those that have stayed. But among the fruits of thy Episcopall office, let eternall things be ever pre∣ferred before temporall. Let another guide and dispatch thy temporall cares and affaires for thee; but doe thou diligently attend the salvation of soules. The mind con∣secrated to the discharge of Divine service, ought to be free from worldly imployments. Thou art addicted to
great things, be not taken up with the smallest. These things what ever they are, which end to the gaine of the World, and pertaine not to the gaining of soules, are small and vile. 1 Cor. 6.4. If you shall have secular businesse, saith the A∣postle, appoint those who are most contemptible among you to be Iudges. Thou therefore, O good Prelate, set all things after the salvation of soules; for soules are as far more worthy then bodyes, and all things else that humane ambition causeth, as Heaven it selfe excels Earth in dig∣nitie. Yet at this day, with many, Episcopall authority consists onely in this, that their plowlands are fatted with chalke and dung, that thir Fishponds bee multiplyed, that their Parkes and the Ground of their possessions be inlarged; In building Palaces, Mils and Ovens. All the care of Prelates is in increasing their rents: What? is it the voice of our Saviour to the Prince of the Apostles and Prelates, if thou lovest me, till thy Lands, build high Houses; we read that he said to Peter: Iohn 21.17. If thou lovest me, feed my sheep. Thou art the heire and Vicar of Peter, feed my sheep by Preaching; doe the worke of an Evange∣list and Shepheard: thou must not be ashamed of the Gospell; if thou beleevest, thou oughtest not to be a∣shamed of thy Pastorall office. 2 Tim. 4.2. Be instant therefore in season, out of season, fulfill thy Ministry: Thy ministry hath more burthen, then honour. If thou affectest the honour of it, thou art an hireling; if thou imbracest the burthen of it, the Lord is able to increase his grace, that thou maist receive gaine out of gaine, and profit out of profit.A good note for Bishops that meddle with Court and Ex∣chequer offices. If thou shalt drowne thy selfe in the Labyrinthes of Court affaires, especially of the Exchequer, thou shalt suffer great losses of spirituall exercise. Matth. 6.24. No man can serve two Masters, God and Mammon. Let it not slip out of thy mind, how in the tonsure of thy head, when as thou wast elected into the Lords portion, how thou hast renoun∣ced, the ignominy of Lay-imployments. Yea, in the day of thy consecration, thou hast made solemne vowes to renounce all secular things and imployments (as ourSee the Booke of ordination and consecra∣tion of Bishops. Bi∣shops and Ministers yet doe in the presence of God, and the whole Congregation) which have bound up thy lips; thou art obliged with the words of thy owne mouth, when
upon the interrogation of him that consecrated thee, thou hast published without any exception, that from hence forth thou wouldst wholly discharge and sequester thy selfe from all worldly businesses, and dishonest gaines, and wouldst alwayes bend thy whole study and care upon divine affaires. What hast thou to doe with the reven∣nues of the Exchequer, that thou shouldest neglect the cure of soules, but or one short houre?Note this. What, hath Christ elected thee to the receipt of custome? Matthew being once taken from thence, never returned thither againe. Be not therfore in the number of those, who prefer world∣ly imployments before spirituall, swallowing a Camell, and straining at a Gnat. We read that in the dayes of Ruffinus Hist. l. 10. c. 2. Constantine, there were certaine Bishops, flattering the Prince, who gave greater reverence and heed to royall Edicts, then to Evangelicall precepts. And there are some Bishops now a dayes, to whom the dispensation of Gods word is committed, who are silent from good things, dumbe dogges, neither able, nor yet willing to barke; they are turned into an evill bow, giving themselves up as weapons of iniquity unto sinne. This exasperates Gods wrath, and accumulates the danger of eternall damnation on many, that certaine of the chiefe Priests and Eldrs of the people, although they pronounce not judgement in cases of blood, yet they handle the same things by dis∣puting and debating of them, and thinke themselves there∣fore free from blame, that in decreeing judgement of death, or Let those Pre∣lates who have had their voices in such sentn∣ces, conside this. truncation of members (which some of them of late have judicially given sentence of) they absent them∣selves onely from the pronunciation and execution of this penall sentence. But what is more pernicious then this dissimulation? Is it lawfull to discuss and determine that, which it is not lawfull to pronounce? Verily Saul did ma∣ny wayes handle and plot the death of David, and that he might palliate his malice under the shadow of inno∣cency, he said, 1 Kings 18.12. Let not my hand be upon him; but the hand of the Philistims be upon him. Truely as much as this dissimulation did excuse him with men, so much did it the more damnably accuse him with God. We have an expresse forme of similitude in that Consistorie wherein
Christ was condemned to death: the Scribes and Pha∣risees said, Iohn 18 31. It is nt lawfull for us to put any man to death; And yet when they cryed, saying, Crucifie him; they pronounced a sentence of death against him with bloody malignity, whom they slew with the sword of the tongue, they protested it was not lawfull for them to slay, and their iniquity was in this very thing so much the more detestable, because that they might escape the censure of men, they covered it with a simulation of innocency. Thou art set over the soules of men, not over their bodies; The Prelate hath nothing that is common with Pilate. Thou art Christs Steward and the Vicar of Peter, neither oughtest thou to give an account of the jurisdiction com∣mitted to thee, to Caesar, but to Christ: yet some Bishops by usurped offices and administrations of the world, make themselves obnoxious to the bent of the Court, and as if they had renounced the priviledge of their dignity, ex∣pect the sentence of an harder event. He adds this more against the Lordlinesse and Dominion of Prelates in the same Treatise. There are some who repute honours, Vertues and ascribe the glory of their eminency to their merits, which peradventure they have obtained in Gods wrath. The assumption of honour, becomes a temptation, and an occasion of subvertion unto many. Therefore thou must so preside, as thou mayst profit. Woe to those who rule over men, if God set not president over them. Paul glories not of his Dominion, but of his Ministration. 2 Cor. 11.23. In labours more abundant, in prisons more frequent, in stripes above measure, in deaths often. In these things a forme of glorying is prefixed thee, not in precious aray, not in much houshold-stuffe, not in heaping up money, not in Edefices or Cultures, not in enlarging possessions, not in multitudes of Horses, not in pompous rayment, not in a numerous traine: For after all these things doe the Gentiles seeke: But as the Doctor of the Gentiles glories, in Gal. 6.142 the Crosse of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the World was crucified to him, and he unto the World. Repute thy selfe an humble and abject Servant: Let not humility be a disgrace to thee, which adorned the Sonne of God. Of Prelacy thou mayest have glory, but not with
God, but if thou gloriest of humility, thou shalt not be unwise. Mat. 10.25, 26. The Kings of th Gentiles exercise Lordship over them; but ye shall not doe so Therefore thou mayst not make thy selfe a Lord, but a Servant. The Apostle Peter saith; 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. Not Lording over the Clergie, but being ex∣amples to the people. It is pernicious to a Prelate, gladly to heare of himselfe, above that he discernes to be within him. It is frequent to find one among the Bishops who may chance to dedicate the first yeare of his promotion to sanctity; and when in his novelty he became a Lamb, inveterated for some dayes, he is made a most ravenous Wolfe. The same Author in his 15.18.22, 23.25. & 64. pistles hath sundry notable Passages against the Lordli∣nesse, Pride, and oher vices of the Prelates in his age, and of the danger of Episcopacy. A Lord Prelate (writes he there) Observes not the face, but hand of him who re∣paires to him, as being alwayes ready to receive gifts: I wish this Charcter did not suit too wel with some of our Lordly Pre∣lates now. he is of a shamelesse brow in demanding, ingratefull when hee hath received, inhumane if he receive not something; he is unmercifull to the afflicted; meeke to the most cruell; unstable, untractable; tolerable to none, hatefull to all, an enemy of peace, a contemner of faith, an adversary of unity; unfaithfull in his coun∣cels, negligent in his actions, furious in anger, remisse in mercy, dissolute in words, gluttonous in banquets, haugh∣ty in prosperity, fearefull in adversity. He doth nothing according to reason, but all things according to will; and as if he were degenerated into a beastiall sense, casting away from him the counsell and judgement of reason, he followes his owne appetite. For man being in honour understandeth not, but is compared unto the brute beasts, and became like to them: His ascent is pleasing neither to God nor man: his whole study, whole honour, whole glory, is the whole and sol authority of his usurped Epis∣copall dignity, the stretching out of his breast; elevation of his necke, statelinesse of his going, distorsion of his eyes, Vultuosity, and thundring of his threatning coun∣tenance; and that I may include many things in few words, ttum datur elationi, nibil sanctitati, &c. All is addicted to pride, nothing to sanctity, nothing to chastity
nothing to amity; and finally, nothing at all is left to h∣nesty. Behold him speaking, behold him walking Quas gerit re mins? quanto premit omnia fasu? What threatnings beares he in his mouth, with how Great pride treads he upon all things below? O curas hominum! O quantum est in rebus iane! O cares of men! O how much emptinesse And vanity Lord Prelates Mindes possesse? O vaine glory! O bloody ambition! O the unsatiable desire of terrene honour! O the canker of hearts, the subversion of soules, the desire of dignities! Whence hath this plagu crept up? Whence hath this execrable presumption prevailed; that unworthy men, should co∣vet dignities? and by how much the lesse they deserve to ascend to honours, by so much the more importunately they thrust themselves into them. At this day by right and wrong, at this day to the hazard of soule and body unhappy men runne to the Pastorall chaire: and doe not consider that it is a The true Title of a Prelates Chaire.Chaire of pestilence to them, whiles they are the cause of ruine to themselves and others. In flocks and heards, witnesse Hierome, the Ramme and Bull which excels in corpulency and animosity, goeth before the rest. But a man more beastiall then all beats, presumes so much more indiscreetly and audaciously to be above his betters, by how mnch lesse he confides to the titles of vertues, or sincerity of conscience; he who hath learned nothing is made the teacher of others, and like sounding brasse and a inkling Cymball, usurpes the office of Preaching, when as he is an unprofitable tock, and a dumbe Idoll. This is it which Ecclesiastes deplo∣ringly complaines of;ccles. 10.6 I have seene (saith he) an evill under the Sunne, a foole placed in high dignity, and wise men sitting in low places. An illiterate Bishop is a dumbe preacher. It is a Prelates duty to instruct the people un∣der him, to render a people acceptable to God, by open∣ing the mystery of the Scriptures. But at this day, such as the people are, such is the Priest; as hi darknes is, so also is
light. Blush O Sidon at the Sea; a Prelae may blush and grieve, to rule over people, not to profit them; to have taken upon him the office of a Teacher, and to be mute in instructing the people. It is the word of the la∣menting Prophet: Isay 50 My people is become a lost flock; their Pastors have seduced them, they are dumb dogges not able to barke They ought to drive the Wolves from the flocks, but they themselves are wolves to their owne; taking care neither of their owne nor theirs salvation, they preci∣itate theselves with their flocks, into the pit of eternall death. Thus and much more he. Not to mention See Baus. Centriae cri. Brit. Grostheads booke de Ignavia Praelatorum; Or Halredus de Praelatorum moribus; Nigellus Wireker de Abusu rerum Ecclesiae. Gualther Mapes his Com∣plaint against the Prltes; Ad mals Pastores, & ad mpios Praelatos Robert Baston, de sacerdotum Luxu∣riis, or ohn Purvey de obliquo cleri statu, all declaim∣ing against the Lordlinesse, pompe, pride, wealth, and ves of Prelates; the most of which bookes the Prelates have sup∣pressed, their titles onely being left upon record: Nor yet to mention the passages of Robert Holkot our famous Clerke, In lib. Sapientiae. lect. 77.163. and lect. 1. in Proverbia Solomonis, to like purpose. Richardus Armachanus Archbishop of Armagh,Rich Armachanus. flourish∣ig in the beginning of Wicklif time, about the yeare of Christ 1350. De Questionibus Armenorum. l. 11. . 1. deter∣mines thus.Li. 11. De que∣stionibus Ane∣noru . 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. That neither the Dominion nor Ministry of temporall things belongs to Ecclesiasticall dignity, but rather de∣minishes i. For the Lord prohibited the Dominion of temporall things to his Apostles and Disciples, saying; Possesse neither gold nor moneys in your purses; Mat. 10.19. If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell all thou hast; & give to the poore. Now it cannot bee of Ecclesiasticall dignity, which the Head of the Church hath prohibited to his members: or at least would not have them to posess Whence it appeares, that the dominion or possession of temporall things doth in no wise essentially appertaine to Ecclesiasticall dignity, but rather diminisheth it. In the second Chapter he averres, that these states and degrees of
Patrirch, Archbishop, Bishop, &c. were invented one∣ly out of the devotion of men, not instituted by Christ and his Apostles. That no Prelate of the Church, how great soever; hath any greater degree of the power of order, then a simple Priest. In the fourth Chapter, hee proves, that the power of confirmation and imposition of hands that the Holy Ghost may be given thereby, ap∣pertains to the jurisdiction of th Presbytery, Which he ma∣nifesteth by Acts 7. & 14. 1 Tim. 4. and by the practice of the Primitive Church after the Apostles time. In the fourth and fifth Chapters he demonstrates, That Priests are called Bishops by the Apostle. Phil. 1.1. 1 Tim. 3. Titus 1. and Acts 20.28. Et quod ordine succedant Apostolis, and that they succeed the Apostles in order. In the sixth Chapter he proves, That all Priests and Bishops are equall as to the power of Order: And in the fourth Chapter he punctu∣ally determines, That there is no distinction found in the Evangelicall, or Apostolicall Scriptures, betweene Bi∣shops and simple Priests called Presbyters; Whence it follows, Quod in omnibus est una potestas & aequalis ex ordin; that in all of them there is one and equall power by reason of Order: And that for ought he can find, the Apostle Paul doth not in any of his Epistles distinguish between the Order of Presbyters (that is) of Apostles, and Bishops. That every one who hath the cure of others, is a Bishop. Which the name of a Bishop importeth and manifesteth. For a Bishop is nothing else, but a superin∣tendent, or watchman: From whence it is evident that besides the power of Order, hee hath nothing but a Cure. Iohn Wiclife.Our famous English Apostle John VVicklife, (as Master Fox oft stiles him) delivers the selfesame doctrine of the Identity of Presbyters and Bishops, Dialogorum. l. 4. c. 14. De Sacramento ordinis. f. 124, 125. Some men (saith he) multiply the character in Orders: But I consider whe∣ther their foundation or fruit be in the Scripture. But one thing I confidently averre; That in the Primitive Church and in Pauls time, two Orders sufficed: The Presbyter, and the Deacon. Likewise I say, that in Pauls time a Presbyter and Bishop suit idem, was the same.
This appeares by the first of Timothy, chap 3. and T∣tus chap. 1. And herein that profound Divine Hierome justifies the same, as appeares Distinct. 74. Cap. Olim. For then was not invented that distinction of Pope and Cardinalls, Patriarchs and Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Offi∣cials, and Deanes, with other Officers and private Re∣ligions, of which there is neither number nor Order. Concerning the contentions about these things, that eve∣ry one of these is an Order, and that in the reception thereof, the grace of God and a character is imprinted, with other difficulties, which ours babble about, it seeme good to me to be silent, because they neither establish, nor prove what they affirme But out of the faith of Scrip∣ture, it seemeh to me to suffice, if there be Presbyters, and Deacons, keeping the stae and office which Christ hath imposed on them. Quia certum videtur, quod superbia Caesa∣ra hos gradu & ordines ad∣invenit. Because it seemes certaine, that Caesarian Pride invented these other degrees and Orders. For if they had been necessary to the Church, Christ and his Apostles had not been silent in the expression of them, and description of their office, as those blaspheme who magnifie the Popes Laws above Christ. But a Catholicke ought to receive the office of these Clergy-men out of the Scriptures authority, out of the Epistles to Timothy and Titus; Neither ought he under paine of sinne to ad∣mit these new Caesarian inventions. Thomas Waldensis, Wickliffes professed Antagonist. Tom. 1. l. 3. Artic. 3. c. 29.30.31, 32. Tom. 2. c. 117, 118. and Tom. 3. c. 60.61, 62, 63. brings in Wickliff, proving by many arguments, That Bi∣shops and Presbyters are all one and the same by divine institution and Gods Law. That the Ordination of Pres∣byters belongs not onely to Bishops, sed etiam ad simplicm Sacerdotem, But even to a meere Priest as well as to them; That one ordained a Minister, by a meere Priest alone, ought not to doubt of his Priesthood, or to seeke Ordi∣nation elsewhere, if he rightly discharge his ministeriall office; That a bare Priest may supply the place of a Bi∣shop in conferring Orders, &c. And Histor. Angliae p. 474. Ypodig∣ma Neustriae. An. 139. p. 144Thomas Walsing∣hm with others testifie: That in his time one Lollard, that was a Priest, did commonly ordaine and create ano∣ther.
And oer that every Priest had as great power to conferre the Sacraments of the Church, as the Bi∣shops had. In a word, Wickliffe affirmed, Dialog. li. 4. c. 26. Fox Acts and Monuments. p. 414.That there were twelve Disciples of Antichrist which plot against the Church of Christ; to wit, Popes, Cardinal, Patriarchs Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Officials, Deanes, Monks, Canons, Friers, Pardoners: All these twelve (writes he) Et specialiter Praelagi Caesarij, and specially Caesarean Prelates, are the maniest Disciples of Antchrist, Because they take away the liberty of Chrit, and bur∣then and hinder the holy Church, that the Law of the Gospell should not have free passage as in former times it had, So that he demed the calling of Bishops, Anti∣christian: And as for their Temporalties and scular offices, He positvely maintained, Thomas Wal∣singham Hist. Angl. p. 205.302. to 307. Fox Acts and Monumnts. p. 398, 399.414. Holished p. 411. That Popes, Cardinals, Bi∣shops, and other Priests, might not civiliter dominari, rule like Temporall Lords, or beare any civill office, without mortall sinne; That it is a sinne to endow them with temporall possessions: That no Prelates ought to have any Prison to punish or restraine offendors, nor yet to purchase large temporall possessions or riches: And that no King ought to impose any secular office upon any Bishop or Curate: For then both the King and Clerke should be, Proditor Iesu Christi; a betray∣er of Jesus Christ. Which he manifests at large. Dialog. l. 4. c. 15, 16, 17, 18.26, 27. Where he proves, That the temporall Lords, have grievously sinned in endowing the Bishops and Church with large temporall possessions; That warres and contention have risen thence: that this endowment hath reversed Christs Ordination and pro∣created Antichrist, to the manifold deturbation of Christs Spouse. Whence Chronicles note, that in the dotation of the Church, an Angels voyce was then heard in the ayre, This day is poyson powred into the whole Church of God. And from Constantines time, who thus endowed the Churches, the Roman Empire and secular Dominion in it hath still decreased. Therefore if Kings would pre∣serve their Dominions intire, and not have them diabo∣lically torne; if they would reforme and preserve the peace of the Church, and keepe their Subjects oyall, and
not have them Rebels, Let them study to reforme the Church according to Christs Ordinance under whose government it will be most prosperously regulated, an all warres, symony, with other mischifes will cease. Con∣cluding, that it is not onely lawfull for them to take away these temporalities from the Church which abuseth them, but that they ought to doe it under paine of eternall dam∣nation in Hell, seeing they ought to repent of this their folly, and to satisfie for the same, wherewith they have defiled the Church of Christ. Finally, Dialog. l. 3. c. 3. f. 72. hee stiles the Bishops, lesser Antichrists, who following the great An∣tichrist, forsake and banish the office of Preaching which Christ hath designed to them, and bring in th office of spoyling those that are under them, feeding upon the sheep of Christ. William Swinderby,William Swin∣derby a Martyr under Richard the scond, had thi Article objeed to him, that hee held. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 431.434. Edit. 1610. and Edit. ult. vol. 1. p. 609 619.113.615.616.617. That all Priests are of like power in all hings, notwithstanding that some of them in this World are of higher and greater honour, degree, or preheminence. And concerning the wealth, possessions, and Lordships of Prelates he thus affir∣med before the Bishops who convented and examined him. As anent the taking away of temporalities, I say that it is lawfull for Kings, Princes, Dukes and Lords of the World to ta away from Popes, Cardinals, fro Bishops and Prelates possessions of the Church, their temporali∣ties, and their almes they have given them, upon condi∣tion they should serve God the better, when they verily seen, that their giving and their taking, beene contrary to the Law of God, to Christs living and his Apostles; and namely in that they take upon them (that shoulden be next followers of Christ and his Apostles in poorenesse and meeknesse) to be secular Lords, against te teaching of Christ and Saint Peter, Luke 22 Reges gentium: Et 1. Pet. 5. Neque Dominantes in Cle; and namely when such temporalities makes hem the more proud both in heart and array, then they shoulden been else, more in strife and debate against peace and charity, and in vill ensample to the world, more to be occupied in worldly businesse; Omnem solicitudinem pro ijcients in um: and
drawes them from the service of God, from edifying of Christs Church, in impoverishing and in making lesse the state and power of Kings, Princes, Dukes, and Lords that God hath set them in, in wrongfull oppression of Commons for unmightfulnesse of Realmes. For Paul saith to men of the Church (whose lore Prelates shoulden soveraignely follow.) Habentes victum & vestitum hii con∣tenti simus. If men speaken of wordly power and Lord∣ships, and worships, with other vices that raigne therein, what Priest that insues and has most hereof (in what de∣gree so he be) he is most Antichrist of all the Priests that been in earth. This hee thus urther backes and seconds. Truely me seemeth that all Christian men, and namely Priests, shoulden take keepe, that their doing were accor∣ding with the Law of God, either the old Law, either the new. The Priests of the old Law weren forbidden to have Lordships among their Brethren; for God said, that he would be their part and their heritage. And Christ that was the highest Priest of the new Testament forsook worldly Lordship, and was here in forme of a servant, and forbade his Priests such Lordships, and said, Reges gntium dominantur eorum, &c. Vos autem non sic, that is, The Kings of the Heathen beare dominion and rule, &c. But you hall not doe so. And as Saint Peter saith, Neque dominantes in clero, &c. Not bearing rule and dominion of the clergy, &c. So it seemeth me, that it is against both Lawes of God, that they have such Lordships, and that their title to such Lordships is not full good. And so it seemeth me, that if they have been thereto of evill li∣ving, it is no gre perill to take away from them such Lordships, but rather needfull, if the taking away were in charity, and not for singular covetousnesse ne wrath And I suppose that if Friers, that been bound to their founders to live in poverty, would breake their rule, and take worldly Lordships, might not men lawfully take from them such Lordships, and make them to live in p∣verty as their rule would? And forsooth it seemeh me, that Priests oughten all so well to keep Christs rule, as Friers owen to keepe the rul of their founder. Ieremy witnesseth how God commendeth Rechabs Children,remy 35. for that
they would not break their Faders bidding in drinking of Wine; And yet Ieremy proffered them wine to drink. And so I trow, that God would commend his Priests if they woulden forsake worldly Lordships, and holden them a∣payd with lifelot, and with cloathing, and busie them fast about their heritage of Heaven. And God saith, Numer. 18. That is, You shall have no inheritance in their Land, nor have no part amongst thm; I will be your part and inheritance amongst the children of Israel, Deut. 18. The Priests and Levites, and all that be of the same Tribe, shall have no part nor inheritance with the rest of Israel, because they shall eate the Sacrifices of the Lord and his oblations, and they shall take nothing of the possession of their Brethren: The Lord himselfe s their possession, as he spake unto them. And the four∣teenth chaper of Luke: Even so every one of you which forsaketh not all that he possesseth, cannot be my Disciple. And Ierome in his 14 Epistle. hath the like words: And Bernard in his 20 Booke to Eugenius the Pope. And aso Hu∣go in his booke De Sacramentis, the second part of his se∣cond booke the 7 chapter. And also in the 12. q. first chapter, Duo sunt. and in the chapter Clericus. And againe, Bernard in sermone de Apostolis upon this place; Ecce nos reliqui∣mus omnia; Behold we leave all, &c. Chrysostome upon the Gospell of Saint Matthew, &c. Walter Brute.Walter Brute, this Swinderbyes Disciple, was Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1 p. 622.642653. Articled against before the Prelates, for maintaining the same positions his Master did; namely, That all Priests are of like power in all points, notwithstanding that some of them are in this world of higher dignity, degree, or preheminence. And touching the wealth and Temporalties of Prelates and Clergy men, and the taking away of tbem; he thus concludes in his Examination before the Bishop of Hereford. As touch∣ing the taking away of temporall goods from those that are Ecclesiasticall persons offending habitualiter, by such as re temporall Lords, I will not affirme any thig to be lawfull in this matter (as in other matters before) that is not agreeable to charity; And that because it is a hard matter for a man to take another mans goods from him without breaking of charity; because peradventure hee
that taketh away is the more moved to such manner of taking away, by reason of the desire he hath to those goods, which he endureth to take away; or else because of some displeasure or hatred to the person from whom he goeth about to take away those goods, more then that he from whom those goods be takn ould be amended. There∣fore unlsse he that taketh away be onely moved of cha∣rity to the taking away of such goods,  dare not affirme that such taking is lawfull: And if such taking away pro∣ceed of charity, I dare not judge it unlawfull; because that the Bishop of Rome which received his temporall do∣minion of the Empeour, when the Emperour rebelled and was not obedient unto him, deprived him from his tmporall jurisdiction: How much more then may tem∣porall Lords doe the same, which have bestowed upon them many temporall Dominions and Lordships, onely to the intent that they might the better intend to serve God and kep his Commandments? Now if they per∣ceive, that they be against the Lawes of God, and that they be ove busily occupied about wordly matters, I can∣not see but that they may well enough take from them those temporall goods which to a good purpose they gav them. But if in time to come after this, those that be temporall Lords shall take from Ecclesiasticall persons such temporalties, let him that desireth to understand this, read the Prophet Ezkiel, in the chapter of the shep∣heards of Israel, which fed themselves in stead of their flock; and so let him read the Apocalyps of the fall of Babylon: Let him also read the Popes Decretal against Hereticks; and in those he shall find, that the taking a∣way of the temporalties from the Clergy shall come to pase for the multitude of their sinnes. This opinion, That the temporall Lords might tke away the temporall goods from Church, offending habitually; ws likewise main∣tained about the same time by Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. p. 572. Nicholas Hereford, Philip Rington, John Ason, and generally by all the Wick∣livists of that age; and that without any danger at all of sa∣criledge or sinne, with Walter Brute his limitations; which opinion the Lordly Prelates of England  very importu∣nate to cause them to recant by force, and flattery.
William Thorpe a Martyr in Henry the fourth his raigne:William Thorpe averred: Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. p. 700, 701.707. The viciousnes and pride of Priests, infect∣eh al the world. That the covetousnesse of Priests and pride, and the boast that they have and make of their dignity and power, destroyeth no onely the vertues of Priesthood in Priests themselves, but also over this, it stirreth God to take great vengeance both upon the Lords, and upon the Commons which suffer these Priests charitably. Where∣upon Arundel the Archbishop said to him; Thou judgest every Priest proud that will not goe arayed as thou doest, It is pity Bi∣shops cannot sweare. by God I deeme him to be more meek that goeth every day in a Scarlet gowne, then thou in thy thredbare blew gowne: Whereby knowest thou a proud man? And hee said, Sir, a proud Priest may be knowne when he denyeth to follow Christ and his Apostles in wilfull poverty and other vertues, and coveeth worldly worship, and taketh it gladly, and gathereth together with pleading, menacing or with flattering, or with Simony any-worldly goods, and most, if a Priest usy him not cheifly in himselfe, and af∣ter in all other men and women after his cunning and power to withstand sinne. And finally he adds, that the viciousnesse of these foresaid named Priests and Prelates hath been long time, and yet is, and shall be cause of wars both within the Realme and without; and in the same wise these unable Priests have been, and yet are, and shall e chiefe cause of pestilence of men, and murren of beasts, and the barrennesse of the earth, and of all other mis∣chiefes, to the time that Lords and Commons able them through grace to know and to keep the Commandements of God, inforcing them then faithfully and charitably by one assent, to redresse and make one this foresaid Priest∣hood, to the wilfull, poore, meeke, and innocent living and teaching, specially of Christ and his Apostles. So hee. Iohn Purvey a Martyr about the same time,Iohn Purvey in a Treatise of his declared, how the King, the Lords,Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. p. 711. and Commons may without any charge at all keepe fifteene Garrisons, and find 15900 Souldiers (having sufficient Lands and revenues to live upon) out of the temporalties gotten into the hand of the Clergy, and ained religious men, which never doe tha which pertaineth to the office of
Curats to doe, nor yet to secular Lords. And moreover the King may have every yeare 20000 pound to come freely into his coffers and above; also he may finde or sustaine fifteene Colledges more, and 15000. Priests and Clarks with sufficient living, and an hundred Hos∣pitals for the sick, and every house to have a hundred Markes in Lands: And all this may they take of the foresaid temporalities, without any charge to the Realm whereunto the King, the Lords, and th Commons are to be invited. For otherwise there seemeth to hang over our heads a great and marvellous alteration of this Relme, unlesse the same be put in execution: And if the secular Priests and fained religious, which be Simo∣niacks and Hereticks, which faine themselves to say Masse, and yet say none at all according to the Canons, which to their purpose they bring and alledge, 1. q. 3. Audivimus, & Cap. Pudenda, & Cap. Schisma: by which Chapter such Priests and religious doe not make the Sa∣crament of the Altar, that then all Christians, especially all the founders of such Abbies, and endowers of Bishop∣ricks, Priories, and Chaunteies, ought to amend this fault and treason committed against their Predecessors, by taking from them such secular dominions which are the maintenance of all their sinnes. And also that Chri∣stian Lords and Princes are bound to take away from the Clergy such secular Dominion as nouseth and nourish∣eth them in Hereies, and ought to reduce them unto the simple and poore life of Christ Jesus and his Apostles. And further that all Christian Princes (if they will a∣mend the malediction and blasphemy of the name of God) ought to take away their temporalities from that shaven generation which most of all doth nourish them in such malediction. And so in like wise the fat tithes from Churches appropriate to rich Monks, and other re∣ligious, fained by manifest lying and other unlawfull meanes, likewise ought to debarre their gold to the proud Priest of Rome which doth poyson all Christendome with Simony and Heresie. Further, that it is a great ab∣homination, that Bishops, Monks, and other Prelates be so great Lords in this World, whereas Christ with his
Apostles and Disciples never tooke upon them secular dominion, neither did they appropriate unto them Chur∣ches, as these men doe, but lead a poore life, and gave a good testimony of their Priesthood. And therefore all Christians ought to the uttermost of their power and strength, to sweare that they will reduce such shavelings to the humility and poverty of Christ and his Apostles; and whosoever doth not thus, consenteth to their He∣resie. Also that these two Chapters of the immunity of Churches are to be condemned, that is, Cap. Non minus. & Cap. Adversus. Because they doe decree, that tem∣porall Lords may neither require tallages nor tenths by any ecclesiasticall persons. He writes much more to the same effect. The noble Martyr, Sir Fox Acs and Monuments. p. 514.517, 518.522. Walsingham Hist. Angliae. An. 1413. p. 429. Iohn Old Castle, Lord Cobham professed,Lord Cobham. That the will of God is, That Priests being se∣cluded from all worldlinesse, should conforme themselves utterly to the examples of Christ and his Apostles, be evermore occupied in Preaching and teaching the Scrip∣tures purely, and giving wholesome examples of good living to others; being more modest, loving, gentle, and lowly in spirit then any other sorts of people. Where doe ye finde (said hee to the Prelates) in all Gods Law, that ye should thus sit in judgement of any Chri∣stian man, or yet give sentence of any other man unto death, as ye doe her dayly? No ground have ye in all the Scriptures, so Lordly to take it upon you, but in Annas and Caiphas, which sate thus upon Christ, and upon his Apostles after his ascension: Of them onely hav y taken it to judge Christs members as ye doe, and neither of Peter nor Iohn: Since the venom of Iuas was shed into the Church, Yee never followed Christ, nor yet stood in the perfection of Gods Law: y venome, I meane your possessions and Lordships: For then cryed an Angell in the ayre (as your owne Chronicles mention) Woe, woe, woe, This day is ve∣nome shed into the Church of God: Before that time all the Bishops of Rome were Martyrs in a manner: and since that time we reade of very few: But indeed one hath put downe another, one hath cursed another, n
hath poysoned another, one hath slaine another, and done much more mischiefe besides, as all Chronicles tell. And let all men consider this well, that Christ was meeke and mercifull; the Pope (and his Prelates) is proud and a Tyrant: Christ was poore and forgave; the Pope is rich and a malicious manslayer, as his dayly acts do prove him. Rome is the very nest of Antichrist, and out of that nest cometh all the Disciples of him; of whom Archbishops, Bishop, Prelates, Priests, and Monks be the body, members; and these pild Friers the tayle. Though Priests and Decons for preaching Gods word, ministring the Sacraments, with provision for the poore, be grounded on Gods Law, yet have these Sects no man∣ner of ground thereof. Hee that followeth Peter most nighest in pure living, is next unto him in succession. But your Lordly Order esteemed not greatly the be∣haviour of poore Peter, what ever ye prate of him. Peirce PlowmanPierce Plowman, Passus. 15.2, 4, 8. an ancint nglish Poet writes to the same effect. If Knighthood and kinduite and commons by con∣science, Together love lelly, leeveth it well ye Bishops, The Lordship of Lands for ever all ye lese And live as Levitici, as our Lord ye teacheth. Deut. 8. Numb. 5. per primitias & Decimas, &c. And the Author of the same Treatise, in his Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. p. 528.529, 53.532. Edit. ult.Plowmans complaint of the abuses of the World: writes thus a∣gainst the Lordlinesse and wealth of Bshops and Priests. Lord thou saydst Kings of the Heathen men be Lords ver their subjects, nd they that usen their power be clepen well doers. But Lord thou saydst, it should not bee so among thy servants, but he that were most, should be as a servant. And Lord thy Priests in the old Law had no Lordship among their brethren, but houses and pastures for their beasts: but Lord our Priests now have great Lordships, nd put their brethrn in greater thraldome, than Lewd∣men that be Lords: Thus in meeknesse forsaken. The deed shweth well of thse Masters, that they desiren more maistery for their owne worship, then for profit of the pople. For whn they be Masters, they n preche
not so often as they did before. And gif they preachen, commonly it is before rich men, there as they mowen beare worship and also profit of their preaching. But bfore poore men they preachen but seldome when they b Masters: and so by their workes we may seene that they are but false glossers. O Lord deliver the sheepe out of the ward of these Shepheards, and these hired men, that stondn more to keep their riches that they robben of thy sheep, than they stonden in keeping of thy sheep. And Lord geve our King and his Lords heart to defenden thy true shepheards and sheep from out of the Wolves mouthes, and grace to know thee that art the true Christ, the Sonne of the heavenly Father, from the Antichrist, that is, the Son of perdition, &c. Sir Geoffry The Plowmans Tale. Chaucer our renowned Poet, writs much the same effect. The Emperour gae the Poet sometime, So high Lordship him about, That at last the sely Kyme, The proud Pope put him out; So of his Realme is in doubt: But Lords bware and them defend For now these folk been wondrous stout. Moses Law forbade i th, That Priests should no Lordships weld: Christs Gospell biddeth also That they shold no Lordship held, Ne Christs Apostles were never so bold No such Lordships to them embrace, But neren her eep and keep her fold: God amend hem for his grace, &c. This Booke of Chaucer was authorised to be printed by Act of Parliament, in the 34. and 3. Hen. 8. C. 2. When the Prelates by the same Act prohibited both the printing and reading of the Bible in English, such was their piety. About the same time there was a device or counterfeit letter fained under the ne of Luifer Prince of dark∣nesse,Lucifers Letter. written to the perscuting Prltes of England in
those times, and transcribed by Master Fox out of the Re∣gister of the Bishop of Hereford and written (as some thinke) by William Swinderby or some other Lollard; The coppy whereof I shall here insert, because it lively sets sorth the use and benefit that the Devill makes of our Lord∣ly Prelates, and the ill effects of their great wealth and pow∣er, to the great prejudice both of our Church and State. Fox Acts and Monuments. E∣dit. 1610. p. 462.43.I LVCIFER Prince of Darknesse and profound heavinesse, Emperour of the high Misteries of the King of Acharot, Captaine of the Dungeon, King of Hell, and controuler of the infernall fire; To all our children of pride, and companions of our Kingdome, and especially to our Princes of the Church of this la∣ter age and time (of which our adversary Jesus Christ, according to the Prophet saith, I hate the Church or Con∣gregation of the wicked) send greeting, and wish prospe∣rity to all that obey our commandements, as also to all those that be obedient to the Lawes of Satan already e∣nacted, and are diligent observers of our behests and the precepts of our decree. Know ye that in times past cer∣taine Vicars or Vicegerents of Christ, following his steps in miracles and virtues, living and continuing in a beg∣garly life, converted in a manner the whole World from the yoake of our tyranny unto their Doctrine and man∣ner of life, to the great derision and contempt of our Prison-house and kingdome, and also to the no little prejudice and hurt of our jurisdiction and authority, not fearing to hurt our fortified power, and to offend the Majesty of our estate: For then received we no tribute of the World, neither did the miserable sort of common people rush at the gates of our deepe dungeon as they were wont to do with continual pealing and rapping, but then the easie, pleasant, and broad way which leadeth to death, lay still without great noyse of trampling travel∣lers, neither yet was trod with feet of miserable men: And when all our Courts were without Suitors, Hell then began to howle: And thus continuing in great heavinesse and anguish, was robbed and spoyled. Which thing considered, the impatient rage of our stomack could
no longer suffer, neither the ugly rechlesse negligence of our great Captain generall could any longer en∣dure it. But we seking remedy for the time that should come after, have provided us of a very trim shift; For in stead of these Apostles and other their adherents which draw by the same line of theirs, as well in man∣ners as doctrine, and are odious enemies to us;Placing of all mischeife. Wee have caused you to be their Successors, and put you in their place, which be Prelates of the Church in these later times by our great might and subtilty,The Church ne∣ver well govern∣ed since the Devils were ta∣ken of the Church men as Christ hath said of you; They have raigned but not by me. Once we promised unto him all the Kingdomes of the World, if he would fall downe and worship us; but he would not, saying, My Kingdome is not of this World; and went his way when the multitude would have made him a temporall King. But to you truely which are fallen from the state of grace, and that serve us in the earth, is that my promise fulfilled, and all terrene things by our meanes which wee bestowed upon you, are under go∣vernment. For he hath said of us ye know, The Prince of this World cometh, &c. And hath made us to raigne o∣ver all children of unbeleife. Therefore our adversa∣ries before recited did patiently submit themselves unto the Princes of the World, and did teach, that men should doe so; saying, Be ye subject to every creature for Gods cause, whether it be to the King as most chiefest. And a∣gaine. Obey ye them that are made rulers over you, &. For so their Master commanded them; saying, The Kngs of the Heathen have dominion over them, &c. But I thinke it long till we have powred our poyson upon the earth, and therefore fill your selves full. And now be ye not unlike those Fathers, but also contrary unto them in your life and conditions, and extoll your selves above all other men:Pride in Prelat ntoed. Neither doe ye give unto God that which belongeth to him, nor yet to Caesar that which is his;Popish Prelates neither give to God nor Caesar that which be∣longeth to God and Caesar. but exercise you the power of both the Swords according to our decrees, making your selves doers in worldly matters, fightng in our quarrell, in∣tangled with secular labours and businesse: And clime ye by little and little from the miserable state of poverty unto the highest Seats of all Honours, and the most
Princely places of dignity by your devised practises, and false and deceitfull wiles and subtilty, that is,The double ju∣risdiction of the Popes two swords commeth of Lucifer. by Hypo∣crisie, Flattery, Lying, Perjury, Treasons, Deceis, Simony, and other greaer wickednesse, then which our internall furies may devise. For after that ye have been by us advanced thither where ye would be, yet that doth not suffice you, but as greedy starvelings more hungry then ye were before, ye suppresse the poore, scratch and rake together all that comes to hand, per∣verting and turning every thing topsie urvey; so swolne, that ready ye are to burst for pride, living like Lechers in all corporall delicatenesse, and by fraud directing all your doings.Dōinus sanctus Sanctissimus. You challenge to your selves names of honour in the earth, calling your selves Lords, Holy, yea, and most holy Fathers. Thus, either by violence ye raven, or else by ambition, subtilly ye pilfer away and wrongfully wrest, and by false title possesse those goods which for the sustentation of the poore members of Christ (whom from our first fall we have hated) were bestow∣ed and given, consuming them as ye your selves list, and wherewith ye cherish and maintaine an innumerable sort of Whores, Strumpets, and Bawdes,The lascivious & Whorish life of the Romish Clergy. with whom ye ride pompously like mighty Princes, farre otherwise going, then those poore beggarly Priests of the primi∣tive Church. For I would ye should build your selves rich and gorgeous Palaces; Ye fare like Princes, eating and drinking the most daintiest meates, and pleasantest wines that may be gotten; Ye hoard and heape together an infinite deale of treasure, not like to him that said, Gold and silver have I none; Ye serve and fight for us according to your wages. O most acceptable society or fellowship, promised unto us of the Prophet, and of those Fathers long agoe reproved; Whilest that Christ called thee the Synagogue of Satan, and likened thee to the mighty Whore,The whorish latter Church of ome. which committed fornication with the Kings of the earth, the adulterous Spouse of Christ, and of a chast person, made a Strumpet. Thou hast left thy first Love and cleaved unto us, O our beloved Ba∣bylon, O our Citizens, which from the transmigration of Hierusalem come hither; We love you for your de∣serts,
we rejoyce over you, which contemn the Lawes of Simon Peter, and imbrace the Lawes of Simon Mgus our friend,Pope successor not of Simon Peter but of Si∣mon Magus. and have them at your fingers ends, and ex∣ercise the same publickly, buying and selling spirituall things in the Church of God, and against the Com∣mandement of God: Ye give Benefices and Honours by Petition, or else for money, for favour, or else for filthy service:Wicked & un∣worthy Miniers admitted in the Popes hurch unworthy be∣stowing of be∣nefices. And refusing to admit those that be worthy, to Eclesiasticall dignity; you call unto the inheritance of Gods Sanctuary, Bauds, Liers, Flatterers, your Ne∣phews, and your owne Children; and to a childish Boy ye give many Prebends, the least whereof ye dny to bestow upon a poore good man: Ye esteeme the person of a man and receive gifts; Ye regard money, and have no regard of Soules. Ye have made the house of God a denne of Theeves. All abuse, extortion,Extortion. is more exer∣cised an hundred fold in your judgement seats then with any secular Tyrant.Perverting of Iustice. Ye make Lawes and keepe not the same, and dispence with your dispensations, as it pleaseth you,Acception of person. you justifie the wicked for reward, and take away the just mans desert from him. And briefely,Bribery. yee perpetrate or commit all kinde of mis∣chiefe, even as it is our will yee should. And ye take much paines for Lucres sake in our Service,Love of Lucre and especially to destroy the Christian faith.Destruction of true faith. For now the Lay people are almost in doubt what they may believe, because if yee preach any such to them, at sometimes (although it be but seldome seene, and that negligently enough, even as we would have it (yet notwithstanding they believe you not, because they see manifestly, that ye do clean contrary to that yee say; Whereupon the comon people ding as yee doe which have the government of them and should be an example unto them of well doing;The life of P∣pists contrary  their teaching now ma∣ny of them leaing to your rules, doe runne headlong into a whole sa of vices, and continually a very great ulti∣tude flocketh at the strong and well fenced gates of our dungeon. And doubtlesse yee send us so many day by day of every sort and kinde of people, that we should not be able to entertaine them, but that our insatiable Chos with her thousand ravening jawes, is sufficient to devoure
an infinite numbe of soules. And thus the soveraignty of our Empire by you hath beene reformed, and out intole∣rable losse restored.The pope in∣creaseth hel. Wherefore, most specially we com∣mend you and give most hearty thankes, exhorting all you, that in any wise yee persevere and continue as hitherto yee have done; neither that you slacke hence∣forward your enterprise. For why? by our helps wee purpose to bring the whole world under our power and dominion. Over and besides this, we commit unto you no small authority to supply our places in the betraying of your brethren; and we make and ordaine you our Vicars, and the Ministers of Antichrist our Sonne,Antichrist. now hard at hand; for whom ye have made a very trim way & passage. Furthermore, we counsell you which occupy the highest roomes of all other, that you worke subtilly, and that yee faignedly procure peace betweene the Princes of the world,The pope a faigned procu∣er of peace betweene princes. and that yee cherish and procure secret causes of discord. And like as craftily yee have destroyed and sub∣verted the Roman Empire, so suffer yee no kingome to be overmuch enlarged or enriched by tranquillity and peace, lest perhaps, in so great tranquillity (all desire of peace set aside) they dispose themselves to view and consider your most wicked workes, suppressing on every side your estate; and from your treasures take away such sbstance as we have caused to be reserved and kept in your hands, untill the comming of our welbeloved sonne Antichrist. We would you should doe our commendati∣ons to our entirly beloved daughters, Pride, Deceit, Wrath, Avarice, Belli-cheere and Lechery, and to all other my daughters, and especially to Lady Simony,mony the popes nuse. which hath made you men, and enriched you, and hath given you suck with her owne breasts, and weaned you; and therefore in no wise-see that yee call her sinne. And also be yee lofty and proud, because that the most high dignity of your estate doth require suck magnificence. And also be yee covetous; for whatsover yee get and gather into your fardell, it is for Saint Peter, for the peace of the Church, and for the defence of your patrimony and the Crucifix; and therefore yee may lawfully doe it;Promoting of proud and rich Cardinalls. you may promote Cardinalls to the highest seat of dignities without any et
in the world, in stopping the mouth of our adversary Jesus Christ, and aleaging againe, that he preferred his kins∣folkes (being but of poore and base degree) unto the Apostlehip; but doe not you so, but rather call as yee doe, those that live in arrogancy, in haughtinesse of mind, and filhy lechery, unto the stae of wealthy riches and pride; and those rewads and promotions which the fol∣lowers of Christ forsooke, do yee distribute unto your friends. Therefore, as you shall have better understan∣ding, prepare yee vices cloaked under the similitude of vertues; alleage for your selves the glosses of the holy Scripture,Wresting of Scripure. and wrest them directly for to serve for your purpose. And if any man preach or teach otherwise than yee will, oppresse yee them violently; with the sentence of excommunication, and by your censures heaped one upon another by the consent of your brethren, let him be condemnned as an heretique, and let him be kept in most strait prison, and there tormented till he die,Tyranny and cruelty by the Pope. for a ter∣rible example to all such as confesse Christ. And setting all favour apart, cast him out of your Temple, lest per∣adventure the ingrafted word may save your soules, which word I abhorr as I doe the soules of other faithfull men. And doe your endeavour, that yee may deserve to have the place which we have prepared for you, under the most wicked foundation of our dwelling place: fare yee well with such felicity, as we desire and intend finally to re∣ward and recompence you with. Given at the Center of the earth in that darke place where all the rablement of Devills were present, specially for this purpose ca∣led unto our most dolorous Consistory, un∣der the Character of our terrible Seale, for the confirmation of the premises.
Divers other writings of like argument (saith Ma∣ster Fox) both before and since, have beene devised:Acts and Mo∣numents. Vol. 1. p. 656.657. As one bearing the Title, Luciferi ad malos principes Ecclesiasticos; mprinted first at Paris in Latine; And under the writing thereof, bearing this date, Anno á P∣latij nostri fractione, consortiumque nostrorum substract∣ione, 1351. Which if ye count from the Passion of the Lord, reacheth well to the time of Wickliffe, 1385. which was above six yeares before the examination of this Walter Brute. There is also another Epistle of Lu∣cier Prince o darknesse, ad Praelatos, mentioned in the Epistle of the Schoole of Prague to the Vniversity of Oxford, set forth by Huldericus Huttenus, about the yeare of our Lord (as is there dated) 1370. Which seemeth to be written before this Epistle. Also Vincen∣tius in Speculo, Hstor. lib. 25. Cap. 89. inferreth like mention of a Letter of the Fiends infernall to the Cler∣gymen, as in a vision represented, before foure Hun∣dred yeares. In which the Devils gave thankes to the spirituall men, for that by their silence and not preach∣ing the Gospell, they send infinite soules to Hell, &c. Divers other Letters also of like device have been writ∣ten, and also recorded in Authors. Whereunto may be added, that one Iacobus Carthusiensis, writing to the Bi∣shop of Wrmac, alleageth out of the Prophecy of Hil∣degard, in these words; Therefore, saith he, the De∣vill may say of you Priests in himselfe; The meates of ban∣queting dishes, and feasts of all kind of pleasure, I finde in these men: Yea also mine eyes, mine eares, my belly, and all my ines be full of their frothing, and my breasts be full stuffed with their riches, &c. Furthermor, saith he, they labour every day to rise up higher with Lucifer, but every day they fll with him more deeply. Hereunto also appertaineth a story, written, and com∣monly found in many old written Bookes: In the yeare of our Lord, 1228. at Paris in a Synod of the Cler∣gy, there was one appointed to make a Sermon; Who being much carefull in his minde and solicitous what to say, the Devill came to him, and asking him why he was so carefull for his matter what he should Preach
to the Clergy; Say thus (quoth he) The Princes of Hell salute you (O yee Princes of the Church) and gladly give you thanks, because through your default and negligence it commeth to passe, that all soules goe downe to Hell. Adding moreover, that he was also enforced by the Commandement of God to declare the same: Yea, and that a certaine token moreover was given to the said Clarke for a signe, whereby the Synod might evidently see that he did not lye. Ex Catal. Illyr. Fol. 546. Aexander Fabritius a Popish English writer,Alexander Fa∣britius. flourish∣ing about the yeare, 1420. in his Destructorium vit∣rum, part 6. cap. 79. prosecutes the same argument thus, Who are more horribly inthralled to the Devils servi∣tude then those who are constituted in the sublimity of honour? Ecclesiasticall men ought to be the light of the Wold, yet where is more abundant darknesse of vices, where more abundant gaping after earthly things then in moderne Prelates who are fatted in both powers, as well temporall as spirituall? where is greater Pompe in all appendicles? Yea, and that so much, that having left the poverty of the Primitive Church, they are now ra∣ther to be tearmed Princes of Provinces, then Pastors of Soules: In part 5. . 4. hee addes, These negligent Prelates, though they be remisse in correcting delin∣quents against God, yet about their owne proper and personall injury, or derogation of their proper honour, they are found most sharpe and rigid, and wil∣ling to remit nothing unpunished; but if any thing be done touching injury offered to God, or touching the diminution of divine honour, there are they most re∣misse, and take no care at all. Chrysostome speakes well against these. A Bishop (saith he) if he receive not due honour from a Presbyter, is angry and troubled. But if a Bishop behold a Presbyter, negligent of his duty to the Church, or finning in any other wise, against God, he is neither angry nor heares it; because all are soli∣citous of their owne honour, but have no care at all of Gods honour. And part 6. cap. 26. A Bishopricke is a Title of Worke, not of Honour; whence a Bishop is
called as it were an Overseer, and one taking the care of his flocke, and seeing such intention is a good worke, it appeares the Apostles words speaking thus are true, Hee that desires a Bishoprick, desires a good worke.1 Tim. 3.1. But from hence it followeth not, that this desire, or the worke of the desire is good, as ambitious men common∣ly object, desiring to be pompously exalted in worldly dignity, and it rather followeth, the thiefe who would steale a good Cap desires a good thing, therefore his desire unto this is good; but the contrary rather fol∣loweth, for he who desires the state of a Pastorall of∣fice ambitiously, by this disables himselfe to take it, wit∣nesse Saint Gregory: And it is found in Cap. 8. qu. 1. As the place of government, saith he, is to be denyed to those who desire it, so it is to be offered to those who flie from it. Many Bishops enter not into the sheepfold by the doore which is Christ; but by the Devill who is a lyer: and if man placed by God in Paradice could not there stand long by himselfe, but fell grievously; what wonder is it if our moderne Pastors placed in the Church not by God, but Symoniacally by the Devill, fall horri∣bly. So this English Author though a Papist. Thomas Gas∣coigne in Dict. Theolog part. 3. Ioan. Balaeus. Cent. 8. c. 19. Fox Acts and Monuments. Edit. ult. Vol. 1. p. 929, 930. Hall. 36. H. 8. fo. 171. Holinshed. p. 946. About the yeare 1457. Reynold Peacocke Bishop of Chichester Preached at Pauls Crosse,Reynold Pea∣cocke. That the Office of a Christian Prelate cheifly above all other things, is to preach the word of God: That the riches of Bishops by inheritance are the goods of the poore: That spiritu∣all persons by Gods Law ought to have no temporall possessions. And moreover hee writ a Booke, DE MI∣NISTRORVM AEQVALITATE, wherein he maintained Wickliffs opinion of the Equality of Mini∣sters and Bishops: For which and other Articles he was accused and convicted of Heresie, forced to abjure at Pauls Crosse, had his Bookes burnt by his brethren the Prelates, and was then imprisoned in his owne house during life. So dangerous is it even for Bishops themselves to write or preach any thing against the wealth, pompe, pride and jurisdiction of their ambitious Lordly brethren.
Anno 1537. Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury,All the Archbi∣shops, Bishops, Archdeacons & convocation, with King H. the eight. Ed∣ward Archbishop of Yorke, Iohn bishop of London, Cuthbert bishop of Durham, Stephen bishop of Winche∣ster, Robert bishop of Carleile, Iohn bishop of Exeter, Iohn bishop of Lincolne, Iohn bishop of Bath, Rowland bishop of Coventry and Lichfeild, Thomas bishop of Ely, Nicholas bishop of Salisbury, Iohn bishop of Bangor, Edward bishop of Hereford, Hugh bishop of Worcester, Iohn bishop of Rochester, Richard bishop of Chichester, William bishop of Norwich, William bishop of St. Davids, Robert bishop of Assaph, Robert bishop of Landaffe, Ri∣chard Wolman Archdeacon of Sudbury, William Knight Arch-Deacon of Richmond, Iohn Bell, Arch-Deacon of Glocester, Edmond Bonner Arch-Deacon of Leicester, Wil∣liam Skip Arch-Deacon of Dorcet, Nicholas Heath Arch-Deacon of Stafford, Cuthbert Marshall Arch-Deacon of Nottingham, Richard Curren Arch Deacon of Oxford, Wil∣liam Cliffe, Geoffry Dowes, Robert Oking, Ralph Bradford, Richard Smith, Simon Mathew, Iohn Pryn, William Buck∣master, William May, Nicholas Wotton, Richard Cox, Iohn Edmunds, Thomas Robertson, Iohn Baker, Tho∣mas Barret, Iohn Hase, Iohn Tyson, Doctors and Pro∣fessors in Divinity, and of the civill and Canon Law, with the whole Convocation House and Clergy of En∣land in their Booke intituled, The Institution of a Chri∣stian man, dedicated by them to King Henry the eight; Printed Cum Privilegio, subscribed with all their names, and ratified by the Statute of 32. Henry the eight, cap. 26. chap. Of the Sacrament of Order. fol. 48. &c. And King Henry 8. himselfe, in his Booke inscribed, A necessary e∣rudition for any Christian man, published with the advise and approbation of all the Prelates & Clergy of England in their Convocation, and of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, and nether House of Parliament; with the Kings owne royall Epistle to all his loving Subjects be∣fore it, Anno 1545. by vertue of the Satute of 32 Henry the eight. c. 26. Chap. of the Sacrament of Order: Doe all thus joyntly determine of the calling, jurisdiction, Lord∣linesse, and secular imployments of Bishops. The truth is, that in the New Testament, there is no mention made of any degrees or distinctions in Orders, but onely of Dea∣cons
and Ministers, and of Priests or Bishop. And of these two Orders onely, that is to say, Priests and Dea∣cons, Scripture maketh expresse mention, and how they were conferred of the Apostles by Prayer and imposition of their hands: And to these two the Primitive Church did add and conjoyne certaine other inferior and lower degrees. And as concerning the office and duty of the said Ecclesiasticall Ministers, the same consisteth in true preaching and teaching the word of God unto the people i dispensing and ministring the Sacraments of Christ, in consecrating and offering the blessed body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar, in loosing and as∣soyling from sinne such persons as be sorry and truely penitent for the same, and excommunicating such as b guilty in manifest crimes, and will not be reformed o∣therwise; and finally in praying for the whole Church of Christ and specially for the flocke committed unto them: And although the office and ministry of Priests and Bishops stand ciefly in these things before rehearsed ye neither they, nor any of them may exercise and exe∣cute any of the same offices, but with such sort and such limitation as the Ordinances and Lawes of every Chri∣stian Realme doe permit and uffer. It is out of all doubt that there is no mention made neither in Scripture, nei∣ther in the writings of any authentical Doctr or Author of the Church, being within the time of the postles, that Christ did ever make or institute any distinction or difference to be in the preheminence of power, order, or jurisdiction between the Apostle themselves, or be∣tween the Bishops themselves, but that they were all ∣quall in power, authorty, and jurisdcton. And that there is now and since the time of the Apostles any such diversity or difference among the Bishops. It was devised by the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church for the conservation of good order and unity of the Catholique Church, and that either by the consent and authority, or else at least, by the permssion and suffrance of the Prnces and civill powers, for the time ruling: For the said Fa∣thers considering the great and infinite multitude of Christian men, so lrgely encreased through the world,
and taking examples of the Old Testamnt, thought it expedient to make an order of degrees to be among Bi∣shops, and spirituall Governours of the Church, and so ordained some to be Patriarks, some to be Metropolitans some to be Archbishops, some to be Bishops; and to them did limit severally, not only their certaine Diocesse and Provinces, wherein they should exercise their power, and not exceed the same; but also certaine bounds and limits of their jurisdiction and power, &c. And lest peradven∣ture it might be thought to some persons, that such autho∣rities, powers and jurisdictions, as Patriarks, Primates, Archbishops and Metropolitans, now have or heretofore at any time have had justy and lawfully over any other Bishops, were given them by God in holy Scripture; We think it expedient and necessary that all men should be advertised and taught, that all such lawfull powers and authority of one Bishop over another, were and be given to them by the consent, ordinance & positive lawes of men only, and not by any ordinance of God in holy Scripture:Nota. and all other power and authority which any Bishop hath used or exercised over another which hath not been given to him by such consent and ordinance of men (as is a∣foresaid) is in very deed no lawful power, but plaine usur∣pation and tyranny. And therefore whereas the Bishop of Rome hath heretofore claimed and usurped to be head and governour over all Priests and Bishops of the holy catholique Church of Christ by the lawes of God; It is evident that the same power is utterly fained and un∣true. VVee thinke it convenient, that all Bishops and Pastors shall instruct and teach the people committed to their spirituall charge; that Christ did by expresse words prohibit, that none of his Apostles, nor any of their successors should under the pretence of authority of the sword, that is to say, the authority of Kings, or any civill power in this world, yea, or any authority to make Lawes or Ordinances in causes appertaining to civill powers: If any Bishop of what estate or dignity sover he be, be he Bishop of Rome, or of any other City, Province or Diocesse, doe presume to take upon him au∣thority or jurisdiction in causes of matters which apper∣taine
unto Kings and the civill powrs and heir Courts, and will maintaine or thinke that he may so doe by the authority of Christ and his Gospel, although the Kings and Princes would not permit and suffer him so to doe, no doubt, that Bishop is not worthy to be called a Bishop, but rather a Tyrant, and a usurper of other mens rights, contrary to the Lawes of God, and is worthy to be repu∣ted none otherwise than he that goeth about to subvert the Kingdome of Christ; for the Kingdome of Christ in his Church is spirituall, and not a carnall kingdome of the world, that is to say, the very Kingdome that Christ by himselfe, or by his Apostles and Disciples, sought here in this world, was to bring all Nations from the carnall kingdome of the Prince of darknesse unto the light of his spirituall Kingdome, and so himselfe raigne in the hearts of the people by grace, faith, hope and charity: And therefore, sith Christ did never seeke nor exercise any worldly kingdome or dominion in this world, but rather refusing and flying the same, did leave the said worldly governance of kingdomes, Realmes and Nations to be governed by Princes and Potentates (in like manner as he did finde them) and commanded also his Apostles and Disciples to doe the semblance, whatsoever Priest or Bishop will arrogate or presume upon him any such au∣thority, and will pretend the authority of the Gospel for his defene therein; he doth nothing else (but as in a manner as you would say) crowne Christ againe with a crowne of thornes, and traduceth and bringeth him forth againe with his Mantle of Purple upon his back, to be mocked and scorned of the World, as the Jewes did to their owne damnation, &c. The truth is, that God constituted and ordained the authority of Christi∣an Kings and Princes, to be the most high and supreame above all other powers ad Officers in this World, in the regiment and government of their people, &c. But specially and principally to defend the faith of Christ and his Religion, to conserve and maintaine the true Doctrine of Christ, and all such as be true Preachers and setters forth thereof, and to abolish abuses, heresies and Idolatries, and to punish with corporall payne
such as of malice be the occasion of the fame: And finally, to over-see and cause that the said Bishops and Priests doe execut their Pastorall office truly and faith∣fully, and specially in those points which by Christ and his Apostles was given and committed unto them; and in case they shall be negligent in any part thereof, or would not diligently execute the same, or cause them to redouble and supply their lacke; and if they obstinately withstand their Princes kind motion, and will not amend their faults, then and in such case, to put others in their roomes and places. And God hath also commanded the said Bishops and Priests, to obey with all humble∣nesse and reverence, both Kings and Princes, and Go∣vernours, and all their Lawes, not bing contrary to the Lawes of God whatsoever they be, and that not onely Propter iram, but also Propter conscientiam, that is to say; not onely for feare of punishment, but also for discharge of conscience. Whereby it appeareth well, that this pre∣tended Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome, is not founded upon the Gospell, but it is repugnant thereto. And there∣fore it appertaineth to Christian Kings and Princes for the discharge of their office and duty toward God, to endeavour themselves to reforme and reduce the same againe unto the old limits and pristine estate of that power which was given to them by Christ, and used in the Primitive Church. For it is out of doubt, that Christs faith was then most firme and pure, and the Scriptures were then best understood,Note. and vertue did then most abound and excell; and thererefore it must needs follow, that the customes and ordinances then used and made, be more conforme and agreeable nto the true doctrine of Christ, and more conducing unto the edifying and be∣nefit of the Church of Christ, than any custome or lawes used and made by the Bishop of Rome, or any other addiced to that See and usurped power sith that time. Thus all the Prelates, Clergie, King and Parliament in king Henry the eighth his dayes. Cuthbert Tonstall Bishop of Duresme, and Iohn Stokerley Bishop of London,Cuthbert Ton∣stall and Iohn Stokerley. in a certaine letter sent unto Reginald Poole Cardinall, then being at Rome, concering the supe∣riority
of Bishops over other Minsters, Thom. Beacon is Reports of certane men, vol. 3. f. 267. Fox Acts and Monuments. p. 972.973. resolve thus: Saint Cyprian saith, undoubtedly all the rest of the Apostles were the same that Peter was, indued with like equality of of honour and power. And Saint Ierome saith thus All the Apostles received the keyes o the kingdome of Heaven, and upon them as indifferently and equally is the strength of the Church grounded and established. Which Saint Ierome also as well in his Comentaries upon the Epistle unto Titus, as in his Epistle to Evagrius, sheweth, that these primacies long ater Christs assention, were made by the device of men, where before, by the common agreement of the Clergie, every one of the Churches were governed, yea, the Patriarchall Churches. The words of Saint Ierome be these: Let the Bishops understand, that they be greater than other Priests, rather of custome, than by the vertue and verity of the Lords Ordinances. And in his Epistle to Evagrius, hee hath like sentence, and addeth thereunto: Wheresover a Bi∣shop either at Rome or at Eugubinis, or at Constantinople, &c. Hee is of all one worthinesse, and o all one Priesthood; And that one was elected which should be prferred before other, it was devised to the redresse of Schismes, left any one challenging too much to themselves should rent the Church of Christ. These words onely of Saint Ierome be sufficient to prove, that Christ by none of these three Texts which be all that you and other doe alleage for your opinion (the three texts are these, Thou art Peter; and upon this Rocke I will build my Church. Peter, I have prayed for thee, that hy faith should not faile: And thou being once converted, confirme thy brothers, feed my Sheepe) Gave not to Peter any such superiority, as the bishop of Rome by them usurpeth; and that Peter, nor no other of ths chiefe Apostles did vindcate or challenge such pri∣macy or superiority, but utterly refused it. So these two popish Prelates. Why then shoulld our Bishops challenge any such primary or superiority over their fellow Ministers? Miles & Cleri∣cus.There is a notable Dialogue intituled A disputation be∣tweene a Clerke and a Knight (or a Souldier) concerning the
power committed to the Prelaes of the Church and to the Princes of the Earth; Written by our famous Schoole∣man Wilim Ocham about the yeare of our Lord, 1330. as Centur. scri. Brit. l. 5. sect 18. p. 396. Iohn Bale records; printed at London in Latin by Thomas Brthlet, Cum Privilego, in King Henry the eight hs raigne. Wherein the Clerk complaining, that the Church which in his age was had in great honour with Kings, Princes, and all Nobles, was now on the contrary made a prey to them al: many things being exacted fom them, many things given by them; and that if they gave not their goods (by way of subsi∣die or supply to ther Princes) they were violently tken from them; that ther Lawes were trampled undr feet, their Liberties infringed, &c. The Knight proves first; that Clergy men can make no Lawes nor Canons touch∣ing temporall things, but Princes onely, because they have no Dominion of temporall things: and that the Pope is chiefe Vicar, not to those things which Christ now doth in glory, but to imitate those things which Christ did in his state of humility here on earth, be∣cause those things are necessary to us. That he com∣mitted to his Vicar that power which he exercised on Earth as a mortall man, not that hee received being glorified For Christ said to Pilate, that his Kngdome was not of ths World; and that he came not to be mini∣stred to, but to minister: This testimony is so mani∣fest, that it may confound the man who resisteth it, and make the stiffest ecke to submit. And when one of the multitude spake thus to Christ, Master, command my brother to divide the inheritance with me: he said, unto him, O man, who made me a divider or judge over you? Luke 12. You heare therefore manifestly, that Christ was made neither a Judge nor a divider in tem∣porall things. Threfore in that state of his received dispensation, he neither had a temporall Kingdme, nor yet affected it; Yea, Hee fled from t, when multiplyin the read, the people would have made him a Kng. And in the Commission gven to Peter, hee delivered him, not the keyes of the kingdome of earth, but the keyes of the kingdome of Heaven And it is
apparant, that the High Priest of the Hebrewes were sub∣ject to their Kings, and deposed by them (which be farre from you) And that thou mayst know that Christs Vicar is assumed to a spirituall regiment, not to a tem∣porall dominion, receive from Paul himselfe no lesse cleare a testimony. For he saith thus, Every High Priest assumed from among men, is ordained for men in those things which appertaine unto God;Hebr. 5.1. not to governe a terrene Dominion, but to offer gifts and sacrifices for sinnes. Thou seest therefore, that the high Priest is set over those things, which appertaine to God; whence Panl writes to Timothy. No man that goeth a warfare to God, intangleth hmselfe in the affaires of this world. It is ma∣nifest then, that Christ exercised no earthly Kingdome, nor committed any such to Peter, For Peter himselfe saith. Acts 6. It is not meet for us to leave the Word of God, and to serve Tables, that is, to dispense temporall things. And although some temporall things may bee dispensed by high Priests themselves; yet it appeares sufficiently, that they ought not to be occupied in go∣verning earthly Kingdomes and Principalities, and in managing secular affaires. After which hee proves at large; That Clergy-men are lyable to pay tribute to Princes; and that Princes may take away their Lands and possessions when they abuse them to luxury, pomp, and their owne private ends, and imploy them for the defence and peace of their Realmee, which he proves by severall testimonies of Scripture. First, by the ex∣ample of King Ioas, 1 Kings 12. Who prohibited the Priests to take mony of the people, and converted the money which they were to receive from the people towards their maintenance, to the repairing of the Temple. Which act of his God himselfe commends, that he might shew, he was not offended thereat, because he did it not out of cove∣tousnesse, but piety, not out of ambition but Religion. Secondly, By the example of the same Ioas, 2 Kings 12.13. Who tooke all the hallowed things that Iehosaphat, and Iehoram, and Azariah his Fathers, Kings of Iudah, had dedicated, and his owne hallowed things, and all the gold that was found in the treasures of the house of
the Lord and in the kings house, and sent it to Hazael king of Assyria, to divert him from Ierusalem. Third∣ly, By the like example of king Hezikiah, 2 Kings 18.15, 16. who to preserve his people from the king of Assyria his invasion, gave him all the Silver that was found in the house of the Lord and in the treasures of the Kings house; And at that time did Hezechiah cut off the gold from the doores of the Temple of the Lord and from the Pillars which Hezekiah king of Iudah had over-layd, and gave it to the king of Assyria. Now if any say, Hezechiah did ill in this; he answers, that it is said in the 2 Chron. 32. That Hezekiah was blame∣lesse in all things but onely in the Embassy of the Prin∣ces of Babylon. Fourthly, of David, who in case of ne∣cessity, did eate the Priests Shew-bread, which was lawfull for thm onely to eate, and yet offended not therein. 1 Sam. 21.6, 7. Matth. 12.4. Then he addes, that all the Revenews of Clergy men, but that which is sufficient to provide them food and rayment, with which they ought to be content, as Paul saith, ought to be spent in pious uses, and in feeding the poore, Which if they be not imployed in this sort, kings ought to take care of them, Ne animas mortuorum salut emque vivorum defraudtis: And he concldes thus, Nee est parcendum materiali templo, ne his quae dedicata sun templo, ut salus reddatur, & pax periclitanti populo Chri∣stiano. Nec est blandiendum Ecclesiarum superfluitati, imò succurrendum anta gentis necessati. Hoc non est, quae Deo data sunt revocare, sed illis usibus (qbus fu∣erunt data) applicare. Quae enim sunt De data ea ip∣sa sunt piis usibus dedicata Quid enim potrit sanctius esse quàm Christiani populi sals? Es qiud preclus Do∣mino, quàm hostes, raptoes, & intersectres arcee à popul Christiano? Et pcem subjecti & fidelibus eme∣re? Cum ergo in his bona. Ecclesiae expendanur, veris u∣sibus (quibus suerunt dedicat) redduntur. Thus and much more Ocam against the secular Jurisdiction, em∣ployment, and great temporall revenues of Prelates, which he thought might lawfully be taken away, and put to other good publik uses without any danger of sacri∣ledge.
What this our learned Ockam thought of the parity of Bishops and Presbyters, you may easily guesse by this his determination. Quod Sacerdotes omas, &c. That all Priests of whatsoever degree they be, are of EQVAL AV∣THORITY, POWER AND IVRISDIC∣TION BY CHRISTS INSTITVTION; but that the Pope is superiour by the Emperours in∣stitution, who may likewise revoke this. Which opi∣nion was about the same time justified for truth by Michael Ceenas, Petrus de Corbaria, Ioannes d Castilione, Franciscus de Arcatara and others; some whereof were excommunicated, others slaine and burnt by the Pope for this verity, as Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. p. 510, 511. Catalog. Testium verita∣tis, p. 512.524, 525, 529. Antoninus m. 4. part. Extra∣ag Ioan. 22. Master Fox and others relate. But what Ockam thought of this position; of the power and errability of the Pope, of the temporall posses∣sions of Clergy men, and of the incompatibility of se∣cular jurisdiction with Bishops and spirituall men; the learned may reade at large in his owne Compendium Errorum Ioannis. 22. In his Opus 90, Dierum, & Super potestate summi Pontificis octo quaestionum Decisiones, Printed by Iohn Treschsel in Civitate Lugdunen: Anno, 1496. to which I shall referre you, for brevities sake. Onely I shall observe this memorable passage out of his Opus. 90. Dierum Cap. 12. We reade in Chronicles that since the Church of Rome was endowed with temporall riches, about twenty seven called Bishops of Rome have beene insnared in most great, publike and notorious wickednesses, after they were assumed to the Papacy, or in the very assumption to the Papacy; as the crime of Heresie, Idolatry, intruion, fostering of hereticall pravity, blasphemy, fornication: and in ma∣ny other crimes and enormities have they beene in∣volved. These were the fruits of their Lordly power, great possessions, and temporall riches heretofore. I reade in our rare Historian English Wal∣denses, Hist. Angl. p. 101. Matthew Paris, Thomas Walsingham Ypodigma Neustriae, Anno 1166. pag. 36. And Iohn Bale, Centur. 2. Script. Britan. Sect. 96.97. pag. 206.207. That in the yeare of our Lord, 1166. certaine sowers abroad of wicked Do∣ctrine at Oxford, were brought into judgement before
the King and the Bishops of the kingdome, who be∣ing devious from the catholique Faith, and overcome in tryall: Facies cauteriata notabiles cunctis exposuit, qui expulsi sunt aregno; they were stigmatized in the face which made them notable to all, and then banished out of the kingdome: VVhat this pravum dogma, or wicked opinion was for which these men were thus stig∣matized and exiled, I finde not specified in Paris and Walsingham; but Iohn Bale out of Gudo Perpinanus de Haeresibus, relates, that those men were certaine Wal∣denses who taught; That the Church of Rome was the whore of Babylon, and the barren Fig-tree whom Christ himselfe had long agoe accursed; and moreover said, Non obediendum esse Pap ET EPISCOPIS. Or∣dinesque Characteres esse magnae bestiae; That men are not to obey the Pope AND BISHOPS, and that Orders (to wit, Popish Orders) are the characters of the great beast. Had these Waldenses lived in our dayes, they should not have beene branded onely in the face by our Lordly Prelates procurement, but set n the Pillory, and had both their eares cut off, then banish∣ed into forraigne Islands, and there been shut up close prisoners so strictly, that neither their wives, children, friends should have any accesse unto them, nor they enjoy so much as the use of bookes, Pen, Inke, or Pa∣per, onely for opposing Episcopacy, as we know some others have lately been for this very cause. Expertus loquor. So dangerous, so fatall is it for any to oppose our Lordly Prelacy, as these men did in their generation, though hey smarted for it: Yet this could not deterre our most learned  Gualter Mapes Archdeacon of Ox∣ford, flourishing in king Iohns raigne, about the yeare of our Lord, 1210. from following their footsteps; who in his Satyrs, doubted not to stile Prelates, Animalia bruta & stercora, Bruit beasts and dung: and in his books Ad impios Praelats, and Ad malos Pastores, complaines; that Alegis doctoribus Lex evacuatur, Dilatatur impii re∣gnum Pharaonis; comparing the Bishops to wicked Pharaoh for their tyranny and oppression. But of him before. This Doctrine of his and other our Martyrs, was
this seconded by Sir Iohn Borthwike knight,Sir Iohn Borth∣wick, Fox, Acts and monuments vol. 2. edit. ult. p. 609, 610. martyred in Scotland, Anno, 1540. as appeares by his answers in the sixth and seventh Articles objected against him by the Prelates. The sixth Article.The sixth Article. Agreeable to the ancient Errors of Iohn Wickliffe and Iohn Hus, Arch-Heretiques, condemned in the Councell of Constance, hee hath affirmed and preach∣ed; That the Clergy ought not to possesse or have any temporall possessions, neither to have any juris∣diction or authoritie in temporalties, even over their owne subjects, but that all things ought to bee taken from them, as it is at this present in England. Borthwicke. The Lord in the eighteenth Chapter of the Booke of Numbers said thus unto Aaron, Thou shalt possesse nothing in their Land, neither shalt thou have any por∣tion amongst them, I am thy portion and inheritance a∣mongst the Children of Israel: for unto the sonnes of Le∣vi I have given all the Tithes of Israel, that they should possesse them for their Ministry which they doe execute in the Tabernacle of the Congregation. Albeit I doe not doubt, but that the Order of the Levites and of the Clergy is farre different and variable. For the admi∣nistration of their sacred and holy things, after their death, passed unto their posterity, as it were by right of inheritance, which happeneth not unto the posterity of our Clergy in these dayes. Furthermore, if any heritage be provided or gotten for them, I doe not gain-say, but that they shall pos∣sesse it, but still I doe affirme, That all temporall ju∣risdiction should be taken from them: For when as twice there arose a contention amongst the Disciples, which of them should be thought the greatest, Christ answered, The kings of Nations have dominion over them,Civill domion differing fom Ecclesiasticall. and such which have power over them are cal∣led
beneficiall; you shall not doe so, for hee which is greatest amongst you, shall be made equall unto the youngest or least, and hee which is the Prince, or Ruler amongst you, shall be made equall unto him that doth minister; minding thereby, and willing ut∣terly to debarre the Ministers of his Word from all terrene and civill dominion and Empire: For by these points he doth not onely declare, that the office of a Pastor is distinct, and divided from the office of a Prince and Ruler; but they are in effect, so much different and separate, that they cannot agree or ioyne together in one man. Neither is it to be thought that Christ did set or ordaine an harder Law then hee himselfe did take upon him: For so much as in the twelfth of Luke, certaine of the company said un∣to him, Master, command my brother that he divide his inheritance with mee. Hee answered, Man, who made me a Judge, or a divider amongst you? Wee see therefore, that Christ even simply did reiect and refuse the office of a Judge,Christ refuseth the office of a Civill Iudge. the which thing hee would not have done, if it had beene agreeable un∣to his office or duty. The like thing also hee did in the eighth Chapter of Iohn, when as hee refused to give iudgement upon the woman taken in adultery, which was brought before him Whereas they doe al∣leage hat Moses did supply both offices at once.An objection made by the ex∣ample of Moes supplying both the offices an∣swered unto. I an∣swer, that it was done by a rare miracle. Further∣more, that it continued but for a time, untill things were brought unto a better state; besides that, there was a certaine forme and rule prescribed him of the Lord, then tooke hee upon him the civill governance, and the Priesthood, he was commanded to resigne un∣to his bother; and that not without good cause, for it is against nature, that one man should suffice both charges, wherefore it was diligently fore-seene and pro∣vided for in all ages. Neither was there any Bishop so long as any true face or shew of the Church did con∣tinue, who once thought to usurpe the right and title of the sword: whereupon in the time of Saint Ambrose, this proverbe tooke his originall, That Emperours did
rather wish or desire the office of Priesthood, then Priests any Empire. For it was all mens opinions at that time, that sumptuous palaces did pertaine unto Empe∣rours, and Churches unto Priests. Saint Bernard also writeth many things which are agreeable unto this our opinion, as is this his saying, Peter could not give that which hee had not,Palaces to Prin∣ces, Churches pertaine to priests; Peter could not give that he had not, Peter had no Lordly domini∣on. Ergo Peter could not give Lordly domini∣on to his suc∣cessors. but hee gave unto his succesours that which hee had, that is to say, carefulnesse over the Congregation; for when as the Lord and Master saith, That he is not constituted or ordained Judge be∣tweene two, the servant or Disciple ought not to take it scornfully, if that he may not judge all men. And lest that hee might seeme in that place to speake of the spirituall judgement, hee straightway annexeth, there∣fore, saith hee, your power and authority shall be in offence and transgression, not in possessions. For this purpose, and not for the other, have you received the keyes of the kingdome of Heaven, why then doe you invade other mens bounds or borders? The rest I will passe over for brevities cause. The seventh Article. The seventh Article.Falsly and against the Honour, State, and reverence of the sacred Majesty of the King of Scots, hee hath said, holden, and affirmed, that our most noble King of Scots, defender of the Christian faith, would ap∣propriate unto himselfe all the possessions, lands and rents of the Church, given and granted by his pre∣decessors, and also by himselfe, and convert them un∣to his owne private use. And for this end, and purpose, as hee hath many times written unto him, so hath he with his whole endeavour perswaded our said noble Lord and King thereunto. Borthwicke.It is no marvell though these mad dogs doe so barke against mee, whom they thinke to have counselled the Kings Majesty (I would to God I had also through∣ly perswaded him) that hee should take away from these unjust sacrilegious possessors, the riches where∣with all they are fatted and ngreased like Swine. For
this is the nature of dogs; if any man goe about to take away the bone out of their mouth, by and by to snatch at him, and teare him with their teeth. It is out of all controversie, unto such as have any wit at all, that such men were very childish, that is to say, ignorant of all learning and judgement, which did so fat and feed with their possessions, these belly beasts; For who would not judge it more then childish, to bestow the Kings victuals or meate upon the bellies of the prophets of Baal and Iesabel? But all they which at this present doe endowe such filthy sinks (I will not call them dens of thieves) with such revenues, they doe follow the steps of Iesabel; for what other thing doe they, when as daily they are bleating and lowing before their Ima∣ges, burning of Incense, and fall flat downe before their Altars, but that which in times past the prophets of Baal did, when as they transported the worship of God unto an Idoll? Wherefore, if Daniel and Elias were spotted with heresie, when they would have de∣stroyed the Priests of Baal, I grant that I also must bee an Heretique. But for so much as then hee did nothing but which was commanded him of the Lord, that was able to kill the prophet which had allured the people to follow strange gods, he could not truly and justly be accused of heresie; so neither can my ad∣versaries spot mee therewithall, except, peradventure, they will condemne me, that (whereas Elias dealt more rigorously with the prophets of Baal, for he cast them into the brooke Kidron) I required or desired no more, but that the riches which was wickedly bestowed upon them, and their possessions might be taken from them. The ninth Article. He hath openly holden, said, and affirmed, preach∣ed, and taught, that the Lawes of the Church, that is to say, the sacred Canons, approved and allowed by the holy Catholique and Apostolique Church, are of no force, strength, or effect; alleadging therefore and affirming, that they are made and intended contrary to the Law of God.
God forbid that I should say, that those things which are approved by the holy Catholike Church, should be of no effect or value. For well I know, that the holy Apostolique Church hath never been allowed, ordained or taught any thing which shee hath not learned of the Lord: the Apostles are witnesses therof, Peter and Paul, whereof the one of them dared not freely utter or speake of any of those things which Christ hath not wrought by himselfe for the obedience of the Gentiles. The other exhorteth, That if any man speake, he should speake the praises of God: but I condemne those lawes which the Bishops of Rome have made according to their owne will and mind, and say that they are spirituall, per∣taining unto the salvation of the soule, and necessarie unto everlasting life; for so much as the writings of the Apostles doe evidently declare, that there was no autho∣rity knowne amongst them to make or ordaine any ordi∣nances or lawes. Furthermore, the Scriptures doe manifetly shew the same, how oftentimes, even by the Lords owne mouth, this foresaid authority is taken from the Ministers of the Church, so that no excuse for them remaineth, but that they be plaine rebels against the Word of God, how many soever doe presume or take upon them to appoint or set any new lawes upon the people of God. Which thing is more manifest and evident, than the light it selfe, in ma∣ny places of the Scripture. For in the three and twentieth chapter of Ioshua, it is written; You shall observe and doe all that is written in the Law of Moses, neither shall you swarve from that, either to the right hand or to the left hand. But that which is written in the welfth chap∣ter of Deuteronomy ought to move them somewhat the more. What soever I command, saith the Lord, that shall you observe and doe; thereunto you shall adde nothing, neither shall you take any thing from it, &c. This point hee there excellently prosecutes at large; where yo may read more at your leisure.
M. William Tyndall, our famous Martyr,M William Tyn∣dall Martyr. in his obedience of a Christian man, Printed Cm Privilegio at London, 1573. p. 98. writes thus of Bishops and their practises. God promised David a KingdomeDavid. and immediately stirred up King Saul against him, to persecute him, to hunt him as men do Hares with Greyhounds, and to ferret him out of every hole, and that for the space of many yeares to tame him, to meere his lusts, to make him feele other mens diseases, to make him mercifull, to make him understand, that hee was made King, to minister, and to serve his brethren, and that he should not thinke that his Subjects were made to minister unto his Lusts, and that it were lawfull for him to take away from them life and goods at hi pleasure. Oh that our Kings were so nurtured nowadayes,How Bishops in∣stru Kings. which our holy Bishops teach of a farre other manner, saying; your Grace shall take your pleasure; yea, take what pleasure you list, spare nothing: wee shall dispense with you, wee have power, wee are Gods Vicars, and let us alone with the Realme, wee shall take paine for them, and see that nothing be well: your Grace shall but defend the faith onely. After which he proceeded thus Pag. 114, 115. Kings defend the false authority of the Pope their office punishing of sinne laid a∣part. Bishops ministe the Kings duty, their owne laid apart: yea they persecute their owne office.: Kings were ordained then, as I before said, and the sword put in their hands to take venge∣ance of evill doers, that others might feare, and were not ordei∣ned to fight one against another, or to rise against the Empe∣rour to defend the false authority of the Pope that very Anti∣christ: Bishops they onely can minister the temporall sword; their office, the preaching of Gods Word laid apart, which they will neither do, nor suffer any man to do, but slay with the tem∣porall sword (which they have gotten out of the hand of all Princes) them that would. The preaching of Gods Word is hatefull and contrary nto them: why? for it is impossible to preach Christ except they preach against Antichrist, that is to say, them which with their false doctrine and violence of sword enforce to quench the true doctrine of Christ. And as thou canst heale no disease except thou begin at the roote: even so canst thou preach against no mischiefe except thou begin at the Bishops. Kings they are but shadowes,Kings doe but wait on the Popes Pleasr. The jugling of the Pope. vaine names, and things idle, having nothing to do in the world, but when our holy Fa∣ther needeth their helpe. The Pope contrary to all conscience, and against all the Doctrine of Christ, which saith, My King∣dome
is not of this world (Ioh. 18.) hath usurped the right of the Emperour. And by policy of the Bishops of Almany,Bishops of Al∣many. and with corrupting the electours or choosers of the Emperour with mony, bringeth to passe, that such a one is ever chosen Empe∣rour that is not able to make his party good with the Pope. To stop the Emperour that hee come not at Rome, he brngeth the French King up to Milane,Milaine. & on the other side, bringeth he the Venetians. If the Venetians come too nigh, the Bishop of France must bring the French King.Bishops of France. And the Socheners (that is, the Swit∣zers) are called and sent for to come & succour. And for their la∣bor he giveth to some a Rose, to another a Cap of Maintenance.A Cap of Main∣tenance. Most Christian King Defender of the Popes Faith. One is called most Christian King, another, Defender of the Faith, another, The eldest sonne of the most holy Seate.The eldest sonne of the holy seat. He blazeth als the armes of other, and putteth in the holy crosse, the Crown of thornes, or the nayles and so forth. If the French King goe too high, and creep up either to ononie or Naples, then must our English Bishops bring in our King.Blasing of arms. The English Bi∣shops. The craft of the Bi∣shops is to entitle one King with anothers Realme. He is called King of Denmarke, and of England:The falshood of Bihops. hee, King of England, and of France. Then to blind the Lords, and the Commons, the King must challenge his right. Then must the Land be taxed, and every man pay, and the Treasure borne out of the Realme, and the Land begger'd. How many a thousand mens lives hath it cost? And how many an hundred thousand pounds hath it car∣ried out of the Realme in our remembrance? Besides, how abominable an example of gathering was there?A cruell, and an abominable ex∣ample of yran∣ranny, judge them by their leeds saith Christ. such verily as never tyrant since the world began did, yea such as was ne∣ver before heard or thought on, neither among Jewes, Sara∣cens, Turkes or Heathen, since God created the sunne to shine; that a Hee meanes Cardinall Wl∣sey in case of the Latie. beast should breake up into the Temple of God, that is to say, into the heart and consciences of men, and compell them to swear every man what he was worth, to lend that should never be paid againe. How many thosands See Latymers Sermons, at Smford, f. 97. orsware themselves? How many thousands set themselves above their abilities, partly for feare lest they should be forsworne, and partly to save their credit? When the Pope hath his purpose, then is peace made, no man woteth how, and our most enemy is our most friend. Now because the Emperour is able to obtaine his right, French, English, Venetians, and all must upon him O great whore of Babylon,The Whore of Babylon. how abuseth shee the Princes of the world? How
drunke hath shee made them with her wine? Hee further addes, p. 124. They that are sworne to e true unto Cardinalls and Bishops, that is to say, false unto God, the King, and the Realme, may breake their oathes lawfully without grudge of conscience by the authority of Gods word. In making them they sinned, but in repenting and breaking them they please God highly, and receive forgivenesse in Christ. Let Kings take their duty of their Subjects, and hat is necessary unto the de∣fence of the Realme. Let them rule their Realme, themselves, with the helpe of Lay men that are sage, wise, learned, and ex∣pert. Is it not a shame above all shame, and a monstrous thing, that no man should be found able to governe a worldly King∣dome save Bishops and Prelates, that have forsaken the world, and are taken our of the World, and appointed to preach the Kingdome of God? Christ saith, that his Kingdome is not of this world, Ioh. 18. and Luke 12. unto the young man that desired him to bid his brother to give him part of the inheritance,Note this. Hee answered, Who made thee a Iudge, or a divider among you? No man that layeth his hand to the plough and looketh backe, is apt for the Kingdome of heaven. Luk. 9. No man can serve two masters, but he must despise the one. Mat. 6. To preach Gods word is too much for halfe a man.Bishops. And to minister a temporall Kingdome is too much for halfe a man also. Either other requieth an whole man. One therefore caot well do bot. He that avengeth himself on every  is not mee to preach the patience of Christ,Behold the face of the Pope, and of the Bishops in this glasse. how that a man ought to forgive and to suffer all things. He that is overwhelmed with all manner riches, and doth but seeke more daily, is not meere to preach poverty. Hee that will obey no man, is not meete to preach, how we ought to obey all men. Pee saith, Act.  It is not meee that we should leave the Word of God and serve at the Table. Paul saith in the 9. Chapter of the rst Corinth; W i m if I preach not: a errible saying verily, for Popes, Cardinals, and Bishop. If he had said,Peters patrimony. Woe be unto mee, i I fight no, nd move Princes unto warre, or if I increase nor Saint Peers Parimony (as they call it) it had beene a more  saying for them,The Popes au∣thority is im∣proved. Christ forbiddeth his Disciples, and that oft (as thou mayst , Matth. 1 & and also 20. Marke 9. and also 10. Luk. 9. and also  even at his last Supper) no onely to clime above ords, Kings, and Em∣perours in worldly rule, but also to exalt themselves one above nother in the Kingdom of God: Bt in vaine, for the Pope, would
not heare it, though he had commanded it ten thousand times. Gods Word should rule onely, and not Bishops decrees,Bishops have captived Gods Word with their own decres. or the Popes pleasure. That ought they to preach purely and spi∣ritually, and to fashion their lives after, and with all ensample of godly living and long suffering, to draw all to Christ, and not to expound the Scriptures carnally and worldly, saying, God spake this to Peter, and I am his successor, therefore this autho∣rity is mine onely: and then bring in the tyranny of their flesh∣ly wisedome, in Praesentia majoris, cessat potestas mnoris, that is, in the presence of the greater, the lesse hath no power. There is no brotherhood where such Philosophy is taught. After which, speaking of Kings, the Prelates Canon Law, and the Bishops treacheries, he proceedes thus. pag. 137.138, Alas, Kings be Captives to the Prelates ere ever they be Kings,Kings are in cap∣ivity. yea, almost ere they be borne. No man may be suffered about him but flatterers, and such as are first sworne tue unto our most holy Fathers the Bishops, that is to say, false to God and man. If any of the Nobles of the Relme be true to the King, and so bold that hee dare counsell him, that which should be to his honour, and for the wealth of the Realme; They will wait a season for him (as men say) they will pro∣vide a ghostly Father for him. God bring this wickednesse to light. There is no mischiefe whereof they are not the roote, nor bloodshed, but thorough their cause, either by their counsell, or in that they preach not true obedience, and teach not the people to feare God.The duty of Kings. If any faithfull servant be in all the Court, hee shall have twenty spies waiting upon him; hee shall e cast out of the Court, or, (as the saying is) conveyed to Calice, and made a Captaine, or an Ambassador, hee shall be kept farre enough from the Kings presence. The Kings ought, I say, to remember, that they are in Gods stead, and ordained of God, nor for themselves, but for the wealth of their Subjects. Let them remember that their Sub∣jects are their brethren, their flesh and blood, members of their owne body and even their owne selves in Christ. Therefore ought they to pity them,,Vnlawull Oaths ought to be bro∣ken and may without dispen∣sation. and to rid them from such wily ty∣ranny, which encreaseth more and more daily. And though that the Kings by the falsehood of the Bishops and Abbots be sworne to defend such liberties: yet ought they not to keepe their Oathes, but to breake them; For as much as they are un∣right, and cleane against Gods Ordinance, and even, but cruell
oppression, contrary unto brotherly love and charity. Moreover the spirituall Officer ought to punish no sinne,The King onely ought to punish sinne: I meane that is broken forth, the hrt must remaine to God. but if any sinne breake out, the King is ordained to punish it, and they not, but to Preach and exhort them to feare God, and that they sinne not. And let the Kings put downe some of their tyranny, and urne some unto a Common wealth. If the tenth part of such tyranny were given the King yearely, and layd up in the shire townes against the Realme had neede, what would it grow to in certaine yeares? Moreover, One King, one Law; is Gods Ordinance in every Realme.Against the Coon Law. Therefore ought not the King to suffer them to have a severall Law by themselves, and to draw his subjects thither. It is not meete will they say, that a spirituall man should bee judged of a worldly or a temporall man: O abomination! the King is in the roome of God, and his Law is Gods Law,The Kings Law is Gods Law. and no∣thing but the Law of nature and naturall equity, which God graved in the hearts of men; Yet Antichrist is too good to be judged by the Law of God, he must have a new of his owne ma∣king. It were meete verily that they went to no Law at all. No more needed they, if they would study to Preach Gods Word truely, and be contented with sufficient, and to be like one of their Brethren. Moreover when the spirituall officers have ex∣communicate any man, or have condemned any opinion for he∣resie, let not the King nor temporall officers punish and slay by and by at their Commandement;Kings ought to see what they doe, and not to beleeve the Bi∣shops, namely seeing their li∣ving is so sore suspect. but let them looke on Gods Word, and compare their judgement unto the Scripture, and see whether it be right or no, and not beleeve them at the first chop, whatsoever they say, namely in things that per∣taine unto their owne authorities and power. For no man is a right judge in his owne cause. The Emperour and Kings are nothing now adayes but even hangmen unto the Pope and Bishops,The Kings are become Anti∣christs hangmen. to kill whatsoever they condemne, without any more adoe, as Pilate was unto the Scribes and Pharisees and the High Bishop, to Hang Christ. For as those Prelates answered Pilate (when he asked what he had done) If he were not an evill doer we would not have brought him unto thee. As who should say, we are too holy to doe any thing amiss thou mayst beleeve us well enough: yea and his blood on our heads sayd they, kill him hardily, we will beare the charge, our Soules for thine; we have also a Law by which hee ought to dye, for he calleth himselfe Gods Sonne. Even so say our Prelates,
he ought to dye by our Lawes, he speaketh against the Church. And your Grace is sworne to defend the Liberties and Ordinances of te Church, and to maintaine our most holy Fathers Authority our soules for yours, ye shall do a meritorious deede therein. Neverthelesse a Pilate escaped not the judgement of God, even so is it to be feared lest our Temporall powers shall not. Wherefore be learned ye that judge the Earth,Be learned ye that judge the arth. lest the Lord be angry with you, and ye perish from the right way. Who slew the Prophets?Who slew the Prophets. Who slew Christ? Who slew his Apostles? who the Martyrs, and all the righte∣ous that ever were slaine? The Kings and the Temporall sword at the request of the false Prophets. Page. 140. He goes on thus. Behold the monsters how they are disguised with Miters, Croses, and Hats, with Crosses, Pillars and Pollaxes, and with three Crownes? What names have they?Glorious Names. My Lord Prior, my Lord Abbt, my Lord Bishop, my Lord Arch-Bishop, Cardinll and Legate: if it please your Father-hood, if it pleas your lordship, if it please your Grace, if it please your Holinesse, and innumerable such like Behold how they are e∣steemed,How are they e∣steemed. & how high they be crept up above al, not into world∣ly seates onely, but into the seate of God, the hearts of men, where they sit above God himselfe. For both they and what∣soever they make of their owne heads is more feared and dread than God and his Commandements. In them and thir deser∣vings put we more trust than in Christ and his merits. To their promises give we more aith, than to the promises which God hath sworne in Christs blood. The Hypocrites say unto the Kings and Lords,Kings ar downe they cannot goe lower. These Heretickes would have us downe first, and then you, to make of all Common. Nay, ye Hypocrites and right heretickes approved by open Scripture, the Kings and Lords are down already, and that so low that they cannot goe lower, ye tread them under your feete, and lead them cap∣tive, and have made them your bond Servants to waite on your filthy Lusts,Note this. and to avenge your malice on every man, contrary unto the right of Gods Word; ye have not onely robbed them o their land, authority, honour, and due obedience, which ye owe unto them, but also of their wits, so that they are not without understanding in Gods Word onely, but even in worldly mat∣ters that pertaine unto thei offices, they are more than Chil∣dren; ye beare them in hand what ye will, and have brought them even in case like unto them, which when they dance na∣ked in nets, beleeve they are invisible. We would have them
up againe, and restored unto the room and authority which God hath given them, and whereof ye have robbed thm. And your inward falshood we doe but utter onely wih the Light of God Word, that your hypocrisie might be seene. Be lear∣ned therefore ye that Judge the world, lest God be angry with you, and ye perish from the right way, Page. 141. He proceeds thus? When all men lose their Lands, they remaine alwayes sure and in safety,They win some∣what alwayes. and ever win somewhat For whosoever con∣quereth other mens Lands unrightfully, ever giveth them part with them: To them is all things Lawfull In all Councels and Par∣liaments are they the chiefe, without them may no King be Crowned,Note this. neither untill he be sworne to their Liberties. All secrets know they, even the very thoughts of mens hearts. By them all things are mini∣stred. No King nor Realme may thorough their falshood live in peace. To beleeve they teach not in Christ, but in them and their dis∣guised hypocrisie And of them compell they all men to buy, redemption and forgivensse of sinnes. The peoples sinne, they eate, and thereof wax fat. The more wicked the people are, the more prosperous is their common wealth. If Kings and great men doe amisse, they must build Abbies and Col∣ledges, meane men build Chauntries, poore finde Trentalls and Brotherhoods and begging Fryers. Their owne heires doe men dis-herit to endote them. All Kings are compelled to submit themselves to them. Read the Story of King Iohn, and of other Kings. They will have their causes avenged, though whole Realmes should therefore perish. Page 142.143. He Addes. What signifieth that the Prelates are so bloody, and cloathed in Red?The Prelates ae cloathed in red. that they may be ready every houre to suffer Martyr∣dome for the testimony of Gods Word. Is that also not a false signe? when no man dare for them once to open his mouth to aske a question of Gods Word, because they are ready to burne him. What signifieth the Pollaxes that are borne before high Legates A Latere?Pollaxes. whatsoever false signe they make of them, I care not but of this I am sure, that as the old hypocrites when they had slaine Christ, et Pollaxes to keepe him in his Sepulcher, that he should not rise againe: even so have our hy∣pocrites buried the Testament that God made unto us in Christs blood, and to keepe it downe, that it rise not againe, is all their study, whereof these Pollaxes are the very signe. Is not that Shepheards hooke the Bishops crosse, a false signe? Is
not that White Rotchet that the Bishop and Channons weare so like a Nunne, and so effeminately, a false signe? what other things are their Sandals, Gloves, Miters, and all the whole pompe of their disguising, then false signes, in which Paul pro∣phesied that they should come? And as Christ warned us, to beware of Wolves in Lambes skins, and bad us, looke rather unto their fruites and deedes,Judge the tree by his fruite, and not by his leaves than to wonder at their disguisings; Runne throughout all our holy religious, and thou shalt finde them likewise all cloathed in falsehood. Againe, Page 145. He writes thus; But Christ saith, Mat. 7. By their fruites shalt thou know them, that is by their filthy cove∣tousnesse and shamelesse ambition, and drunken desire of ho∣nour, contrary unto the example and doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles.Compare their deedes to the Doctrine and deedes of Christ and of his Apo∣stles, and judge their fruites. Christ sayd to Peter, the last chapter of Iohn, Feede my sheepe, and not sheare thy flocke. And Peter saith, 1 Pet. 5. Not being Lords over the Parishes, but these sheare, and are become Lords. Paul saith, 2 Cor. 2. Not that we be Lords over your faith: but these will be Lords and compell us to beleeve whatsoever they lust, without any witnesse of Scripture, yea cleane conra∣ry to the Scripture, when the open text rebuketh it. And Page 146. (saith he) as for that solemne doubt, as they call it, whe∣ther Iudas was a Priest or no:What Judas is now. I care not what he was then, but of this I am sure, that he is now not onely Priest, but also Bishop Cardinall and Pope. Page 155. he addes. Confession is there held, thereby know they all secrets, thereby mocke they all men, and all mens wives, and beguile Knights and Esquires, Lord and King, and betray all Realmes. The Bishops with the Pope have a cetaine conspiration and secret Treason against the whole world.Bishops wrke Treason through Conession. And by Confession know they what Kings and Emperours thinke. If ought be against them, doe they ne∣ver so evill, then move they their Captives to warre and to fight, and give them pardons to say whom they will have taken out of the way. They have with falsehood taken from all Kings and Emperours their right and duties, which now they call their Freedomes, Liberties, and priviledges, and have peverted the Ordinances that God left in the world, and have made every King sweare to defend their falsehood against their own selves.Kings be sworne to the Bishops, and not the Bi∣shops unto the Kings. So that now if any man preach Gods Word truely, and shew the freedome and Liberty of the Soule which we have in Christ, or entend to restore the kings againe unto their duties and right,
and to the roome and authority which they have of God, and of shadowes to make them Kings indeed, and to put the world in his order againe, then the Kings deliver their swords and au∣thority unto the Hypocrite to slay him. So drunken are they with the wine of the whore. Page 180.181.182.183. He there thus farther proceedes. On the other side I have also uttered the wckednesse of the Spiritualty, the falsehood of the Bishops an juggling of the Pope, and how they have disguised themelves, borrowing some of their pompe of the Jewes, and some of the Gentiles, and have with subtile wiles turned the obedience that should be given to Gods Ordinance unto themselves. And how they have put our Gods Testament and Gods truth, and set up their owne traditions and lyes, in which they have taught the people to beleeve, and thereby sit in their Consciences as God, and have by that meanes robbed the world of Lands and goods,The  reape by having Bishops. of peace and unity, and of all temporall authority, and have brought the people into the ignorance of God, and have heaped the wrath of God upon all Realmes, and namely upon the Kings, whom they have robbed (I speake not of worldly things one∣ly) but ven of their very naturall wits. They make them be∣leeve that they are most Christian, when they live most abo∣minably, and will suffer no man in their Realmes that beleeveth on Christ, and that they are defenders of the aith, when they burne the Gospell and promises of God, out of which all faith springeth I wed how they have ministred Christ, King and Emperour ou of their roomes, and how they have made them a severall kingdome, which they got at the first in deceiving of Princes, and now pervert the whole Scripture to prove that they have such authority of God. And lst the Ly-men should see how falsely they alleadge the places of the ripture, is the greatest, cuse of this perecton. They have  Con∣fession for the same ppose to blish teir Kingdome with∣all.Confession Note this P∣licie. All secrets know they thereby The Bishop knoweth the Confession of whom he usteth throughout all his Diocesse. Yea, and his Cncellour commdeth the Ghostly Father to deliver it writt The Pop, his Cadinal nd Bishop know the confession  Kings, and  all Lords,The manifold ormities which their Auricla Confession  brd ad by confession hey know all  cape. f ny leeve in Chrit by cofssion, hey know him.  where
thou wilt: Whther at Sion, Charter-house or at the Observants, thy conession is knowne well enough. And thou, if thou be∣leeve in Christ, art waited upon. Wonderfull are the things that thereby are wrought.No wonder then our Prelates and Priests of late were so eager to bring in Confes∣sion againe. The wife is feard and compelled to utter not her owne onely, but also the Secrets of her husband, and the Servant the Secrets of his Master. Besides that, through con∣fession they quench the faith of all the promises of God, and take away the effect and vertue of all the Sacraments of Christ. They have also corrupted the Saints lives, with lyes and fained miracles, and have put many things out of the sentence or great curse, as raising of Rents and Fines, and hiring men out of their houes, and whatsoever wickednesse they themselves doe; and have put a grea part of the stories and Chronices out of the way, lest their falshood should be seene. For there is no mischiefes or disorder, whether it be in the temporall regiment,The Pope and his Chaplaines are the Foun∣taines of all evills in spiritu∣all regiment or temporall. or else in the Spirituall, whereof they are not the chiefe causes, and even the very Fountain nd Springs, and as we say, the Well head so that it is impossible to Preach against any mischief except thou begin at them, or to set any reformation in the world, except thou reforme them first. Now are they indurate and tough as Pharaoh, and will not bow unto any right way or order. And therefore persecute they Gods Word and the Prea∣chers thereof; and on the other side, lye awaite unto all Princes, and stirre up all mischiefe in the world, and send them to war, and occupy their mindes therewith or with other voluptuous∣nesse, lest they should have leisure to heare the Word of God, and to set an order in their Realmes. By them is all things mini∣stred, and by them are all Kings ruled: (marke that which olloweth) yea in every Kings Conscience it they ere he be King, and perswade every King what they lust, and make them both to beleeve what they will, and to doe what they will. Nei∣ther c any King or any Realme have est for their businesses. Behold King Heny th 5. whom they sen ou, for such a pur∣pose, as they sent ur King that now i. See how the Realme is inhabited. Ake where the goodly Townes, and their walls, and the people that was wont to be in them a become, and where the blood Royall of the Realme is become also. Turne thine eyes whither thou wilt, and thou shalt see nothing pro∣perous but their subtle polling, with th it is flowing water, yea and I trust it wil be shortly a full Sea. In all their doings,
though they pretend outwardly the honour of God or the Common wealth,Vnder an ot¦ward pretence of Gods honour the Popes Cler∣gie procured their owne dig∣nity. their intnt and secret Counsell is onely to bring all under their power, and to take out of the way whosoever letteth them, or is too mighty for them. As when they send their Princes to Ierusalem to conquer the Holy Land, and to fight against the Turkes, whatsoever they pretend outwardly, their secret intent is, while the Princes there Conquer them more Bishopricke, to conquer their Land in the meane season with their false Hypocrisie, and to bring all under them; Which, thou mayst easily perceive by that they will not let us know the faith of Christ. And when they are once on high, then are they tyrants above all tyrants, whether they be Turk or Saracens. How minister they proving of Testaments? How causes of Wedlocke? or if any man dye intestate? If a poore man dye and leave halfe a dozen young children, and but one Cow to finde them, that they will have for a mercilesse Mortry, let come of wie and children what will. Yea, let any thing bee done against their pleasure, and they will interdict the whole Realme, sparing no person. Read the Chronicles of England [out of which yet they have put a great part of their wickednesse] and thou shalt finde them alwayes both Rebellious and disobedient to the Kings,Note this. and also Churlish and unthankefull, so that when all the Realme gave the King somewhat to maintaine him in his right, they would not give a mie. Consider the story of King Iohn, where I doubt not but they have put the best and fairest for themselves, and the worst for King Iohn. For I suppose they make the Chronicles themselves. Compare the doings of their holy Church (as they ever call it) unt the learning o Christ and of his Apostles. Did not the Legate of Rome assoyle all the Lords of the Realme of their due obedience, which they ought to their king by the Ordinance of God? would he not have cursed the king with his solemne pompe, because he would have done that office which God commandeth every king to doe, and wherefore Go hath put the sword in every kings han that is to wit, becaue king Iohn would have pished a wicked Clarke that had coy∣ned false money. The Lay men that had not done halfe so great faults must dye, but the Clarke must goe & escape free. Sent not the Pope also unto the king of France remission of his sinnes to goe and Conquer king Iohns Relme? So ow emission of sinnes commeth not by faith in the Testament that God hath made in Christs blood, but by fighting and murmering for the Popes
pleasure. Last of all, was not king Iohn faine to deliver his Crowne unto the Legate, and to yeeld up his Realme unto the Pope, wherefore we pay Peter-Pence? They might be called the Polling-Pence of false Prophets well enough. They care not by what mischiefe they come by their purpose Warre and conquering of Lands is their harvest. The wickeder the people are, the more they have the Hypocrites in Reverence,Not. the more they feare them, and the more they beleeve in them. And they that conquer other mens Lands, when they dye, make them their heires, to be prayed for, for ever. Let there come one conquet more in the Realme, and thou shalt see them get yet as much more as they have [if they can keepe downe Gods Word,The keeping downe of Gods Wod promoted the Popes spiri∣ualties, honour. that their jugling come not to light.] Yea, thou shalt see them take the Realme whole into their hands, and Crowne one of themselves King thereof. And verily I see no other likelihood, but that the Land shall be shortly conquered. The Starres of the Scripture promise us none other fortune, in as much as we deny Christ with the wicked Jewes, and will not have him raigne over us: but will be still children of darkenesse under Antichrist, and Antichrists possession, burning the Gospell of Christ, and defending a faith that may not stand with his holy Testament. If any man shed blood in the Church, it shall be interdicted, till he have payd for the hallowing. If he be not able, the Parish must pay, or else shall it stand alwayes, interdicted. They will be avenged on them that never offended. Full well prophesied of them Paul in the second Epistle to Timothy 3. Some men will say, wouldst thou that men should fight in the  unpunished? Nay, but let the King ordaine a punish or them, as he doth for them that fight in his Palace, and le not all the Parish bee troubled for ones fault. And as for heir hallowing, it is the juggling of Antichrist. A christian man is the Temple of God and of the Holy-Ghost, and hallowed in Christs blod. A Christian man is holy in himselfe by reason of the Spirit that dwelleth in him, and the place wherein he is, is holy by reason of him, whether he be in the field or towne. A Christian hus∣band sanctifieth an unchristian wife, and a Christian wife an unchri∣stian husband, [as concerning the use of Matrimony] saith Paul to the Corinthians. I now while we seeke to be hallowed in Christ, we are found unholy and must be hallowed by the ground, or place, or walls, then dyed Christ in vaine. Howbeit
Antichrist must have wherwith to fit in mns Consciences, and to make them feare where there is no eare, and to rob them of their faith, and to make them trust in that that cannot helpe them, and to seeke holinesse of that which is not holy in it selfe. After that the old King of France was brought downe out of Italy, marke what pageants have ene played, and what are yet a playing to seperate us from the Emprour, (least by the helpe or ayde o us he should be able to recover his right of the Pope) and to couple us to the French men, whose might the Pope ever abuseth to keep the Emperour from Italy. What prevaileth it for any King to marry his daughter or his Sonne, or to make any peace or good ordinance for the wealth o his Realme? For it shall no longer lst than it is profitable to them: Their Treason is so secret that the world cannot perceive it. Thy dis∣simule those things which they are onely cause of, and simule discord among themselves when they are most agred. One shall hold this, and another shall dispute the contrary: but the conclusion shall be that most maintaineth their falshood, though Gods Word be never so con∣trary. What have thy wrought in our dayes, yea and what worke they yet to the perpetuall dishonour of the King, and rebuke of the Realme, and shame of all the nation in whatso∣ever Realmes they goe? I uttered unto you partly the malici∣ous blindnesse of the Bishop of Rochester,The Bishop of Rocheste is a fit patterne to judge all the rest of affinity by. his juggling, his con∣veying, his Fox wilenesse, his opeepe, his wresting, renting and shamfull abusing of the Scripture, his Oratory and alleadging of Heretickes, and how he would make the Apostles Authors of blind Ceremonies without signification, contary to their owne doctrine, and have set him for an ensample to judge all other by. The cause why Laymen cannot rule Temporall Offices, is the falshood of the Bishops. Their polling i like a consumption wherein a man complaineth of felnese and of faintnesse, and worteth not whence his disease commeth it is like a pocke that fretteth inward and consumeth the very marrow of the bones. There seest thou the cause why it is impossible for Kings to come to the knowledge of the truth.Th cau why Kings could not come to the knowledge of the truth. For these spirits lay awaite for them, and serve their appetites at all points, and through con∣ession buy and sell and betray both them and all their true friends, and lay aites for them and never leave them till they have blinded them with their sophistry and have brought them into their nets. And then when the King is captive, they compell all the rest
with violence of his sword. For if any man will not obey, be it right or wrong, they cite him, suspend him, and curse or excommunicate him: if he then obey not, they deliver him to ilate, that is to say, un∣to the temporall Officers to destroy him. All this and much more he ully proves and more largely prosecutes in his Booke inti∣tuled The Practise of Popish Prelates. Concerning Bishops in∣termdling with temporall matters he thus writes. Our Saviour Jesus Christ answered Pilate, Ioh. 18. that his Kingdome was not of this world. And Mat. 10. he saith: The Disciple is not grea∣ter than his Master but it ought to suffice the Disciple that he be a his Master is. Wherefore if Christs Kingdome be not of this world, nor any of his Disciples may be otherwise than hee was, then Christs Vicars which minister his Kingdome here in his bodily absence,The ministers of Christs Doctrine may not have n temporall offices. and hve the over-sight o his flocke may be none Emperours, Kings, Dukes, Lords, Knight, Temporall Iudges, or any temporall Officer, or under false names have any such Dominion, or minister any such Office as requireth violence. And Mat. 6. No man can serve two Masters;Mat. 6. where Christ concludeth saying, Yee cannot serve God and Mammon; that is, riches, coveousnese, am∣bition and temporall dignities. And Christ called his Disciples un∣to him, and saydMat. 20. Ye know that the Lords of the Heathen people have dominion over them, & they that be great do exercise power over them: Howbeit, it shal not be so among you, but whosoever wil be great among you, shall be your minister, and he that will be chiefe, shall be your ser∣vant; even as the Son of man came not that men should minister unto him, but for to minister and give his life for the redemption of many: Wherefore the Officers in Christ Kingdome may have no temporall dominion or jurisdiction, no execute any temporall authoriy or Law of violence, nor may have any like manner among them.The Officers in Christs King∣dome may have no temporall do∣minion. But cleane contrary they must cast themselves downe under all and become servants unto all, suffer o all, and beare the burthen of every mans infirmities, and goe before them, and ight for them a∣gainst the world with the word of Gods Word, even unto the death, after the example of Christ. And Mat. 18. when the Disciples asked,Mat. 1. Who should be greatest in the Kingdome of heaven, Christ called a young Child unto him, and set him in the midst a∣mong them, saying: Except ye turne backe and become as children ye shall not enter into the Kingdome of heaven. Now young chil∣dren beare no rule one over another, but all is fellowship among them; and he sayd moreover, Whosoever humbleth him∣slfe,
after the ensample of this Child, he is greatest in the King∣dome of heaven, that is, to be (as concerning ambition and worldly desire) so childish that thou couldst not heave thy selfe above thy Brother, is the very bearing of rule, and to be great in Christs Kingdome. And to describe the very fashion of the greatnesse of his Kingdome, he sayd: He that receiveth one such child in my name receiveth me. What is that to receive a childe in Christs name?To receive a child in Christs name what it is. verily to submit, to meeke and to humble thy selfe under all men, and to consider all mens infirmities and weakenesses, and to helpe to heale their diseases with he word of truh, and to live purely, hat they see no contrary ensample in thee to whatsoever tho teachest them in Christ, that tho put no stumbling blocke before them to make them aile while they be yet young and weake in the faith: But that thou ab∣staine as Paul teacheth, 1 Thes. 5.1 Thess. 5. Ab omni specie mala, from all tat might seeme evill, or whereof a man might urmise amisse; and that thou so love them, that whatsoever gift of God in them is, thou thinke the same theirs, and their food, and for their sakes given unto thee, as the ruth is; and that all their infirmites be thine, and that thou feele them, and that with all thy power to helpe to amend them, and cease not to cry to God for them nei∣ther day nor night: and that thou let nothing be found in thee that any man may rebuke, but whatsoever thou teachest them, that be thou; and that thou be not a Wolfe in a Lambes skin, as our Holy Father the Pope is, which commeth unto us in a name of hypocrisie, and in the Title of cursed Cham o Ham, calling himselfe Servs servoum, the Servant of all ervants,The Pope i  Wolfe in a Lamb Ski and is yet found tyrannus yrannorum, of all tyrants the most cru∣ell. This is to receive young Children in Christs name, and to receive young Children in Christs name is to beare rule in the Kingdome of Christ. Thu ye see that Christs Kingdome is al∣together spirituall, and the bearing of rule in it is cleare contra∣ry unto the bearing of rule temporally: Wherefore none that be∣reth rul in it may have any temprall jurisdiction, or minister any temporall Office that requireth violence to compell withall. Thus and arre more Mr. Tyndall. All whose passages are very remark∣able, and worthy serious consideration. Iohn Frih our learned English Martyr,JOHN RIT. in his Bound up wit M. Tylls worke Answere to the Prefac of Mr. Moores Book. pag. 116 writes thus of Bi∣shops an their great possessions; This Canker then began to
spread in the Congregation, and did full sore annoy the body, insomuch that within foure hundred yeares, there were very many Sects scattered in every coast. Notwithstanding there were faithfull Fathers that diligently subdued them with the sword of Gods Word. But surely since Silvester received such posses∣sions,Silveer. hath the Canker so crept in the Church, that it hath al∣most left never a sound member. And as Cistercensis writeth in the eighth booke, that day that hee received revenues was a voyce heard in the ayre, crying over the Court, which sayd, This day is venome shed into the Church of God.When corrupti∣on entred into the Church. Before that time there was no Bishop greedy to take a Cure. For it is no ho∣nour and profit as it is now, but onely a carefull charge which was like to cost him his life at one time or other.Bishoprickes were not greedi∣ly sought after in the Primitive Church, for then it was a charge and not a Lord∣ship. And there∣fore no man would take it, but he that bare such a love and zeale to God and his locke, that hee could be content to shed his blood for them. But after that it was made so honourable and profitable, they that were worst both in learning and living, most laboured for it. For they that were vertuous would not entangle themselves with the vaine pride of this world, and weare three Crownes of gold, where Christ did weare one of thorne.Mat. 27. And in conclusion it came so farreMark. 25. that whosoever would give most money for it,Joh. 1. or best could flatter the Prince (which he knew well all good men to abhorre) had the prehe∣minence and got the best Bishopricke, and then instead of Gods Word, they published their owne Commandements, and made Lawes to have all under them, and made men beleeve they could not erre whatsoever they did or sayd, and even as in the Roomes & stead of Moses, Aaron, Eliazer, Iosue, Caleb, and other Faithful folk, came Herod, Annas, Caiphas, Pilate and Iudas, which put Christ to deathA great altera∣tion in the Chrch since the time of Christ and his Apostles. So now in the stead of Christ, Peter, Paul, Iames, and Iohn and the faithfull followers of Christ, we have the Pope, Cardinalls, Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and proud Prelates with their Proctors the malicious Ministers of their Master the Devill, which notwithstanding transform them∣selves into a likenesse, Cor. 11 as though they were the Ministers of righteousnesse, whose end shall bee according to their workes. So that the body is cankered long agone, and now are left but certaine small members which God of his puissant power hath reseved uncorruptedA little flcke is left that are not corrupted. and because they see that they cannot be cankered as their owne lesh is, for pure anger they bue them
lest if they continued there might seeme some deformity in their owne cankered carkasses, by the comparing of these whole members to their scabbed body. Our godly Martyr, D. Barnes,D. Barnes. in his Articles, pag. 210, 211, 212, 213. writes thus of Bishops; I will never beleeve, nor yet I can never beleeve that one man may be by the Law of God a Bishop of two or three Cities, yea of an whole Country:The sixt Article. for it is contrary to Saint Paul, which saith, I have left thee behind, to set in every City a Bishop.Tit. 1. And if you find in one place of Scrip∣ture, that they be called Episcopi, you shall find in divers other places, that they be called Presbyteri. I was brought before my Lord Cardinall into his Gallery,The Cardinall and D. Barns rsnd toge∣thr. and there he read all my Articles till he came to this, and there he stopped, and said, that this touched him, and therefore he asked mee if I thought it wrong, that one Bishop should have so many Citties underneath him? unto whom I answered, that I could no farther goe, than to Saint Pauls text, which set in every City a Bishop. Then asked hee mee,Bt therefore was I am here∣ticke. if I thought it now unright (seeing the Ordinance of the Church) that one Bishop should have so many Cities? I answered, that I knew none Ordinance of the Church (as con∣cerning this thing) but Saint Pauls saying onely: neverthe∣lesse I did see a contrary custome and practice in the world, but I know not the Originall thereof. Then said hee, that in the Apostles ime there were divers Citie, some seven miles,O figmentum. some sixe mile long, and over them was there set but one Bishop, and of their Suburbes also. So likewise now,  bishop hath but one City to his Cathedrall Church, and the country about, is as Suburbs unto it. Mee thought this was farre fetched, but I durst not deny it, because it was great Authority, and of so ho∣ly a Father, and of so great a Divine.If I fained such a thing I should be an hereticke. But this date I say, tha his Hollinesse could never prove it by Scripture, nor yet by any authority of Doctors, not yet by any practice of the Apostles, and yet it must be tre, because a pillar of the Church hath spoken it But let us see what the Doctors say to my Article: Athanasius doth declare this text of the Apostle. I have left thee behind; &c.Athanius, com. in Ttm c. 1. Hee would not commit unto one Bishop a whole Isle, but hee did enjoyne, tht every City should have his proper Pastor, supposing that by this meanes they should more diligently oversee the people, and also that the labour should be more easie to beare, &c.Chrysostome in Titum. Also Chrysostome on that
same text. Hee would not that a whole Country should be per∣mitted unto one man, but hee enjoyned unto every man his Cure; by that meanes hee knew, that the labour should be more easie, and the subjects should be with more diligence governed, if the teachers were not distracted with the governing of many Churches, but had cure and charge of one Church onely, &c. Mee thinketh these be plaine words, and able to move a man o speake as much as I did. But grant that you may have all these Cies, yet can you make it no heresie. For my Lord Car∣dinall granted, that it was but against him, and against you, who be no gods.The eighth Ar∣ile. But I poore man must be an heretique, there is no remedy, you will have it so, and who is able to say nay? Not all Scripture, no yet God himselfe. Sure I am, that they cannot by the Law of God have any jurisdiction secular, and yet they challenge both powers, which if they have why do hey not put them both in use? for they must say, as the Jewes said, Wee may kill no man. This is the Article that did bite you: for you cannot be content with the office of a Bishop, but you will be also Kings. How that standeth with Gods Law, and with your Oat, I have declared it to our Noble Prince. I doubt not, but he will put you to the tryall of it.Officers be but Bishops hang∣men, God amend it. Have you not this many yeares condemned many a poore man, and then delivered him to the Temporal power to be put to death, which knew nothing of his cause? And if he would, that yee should put him to deah your selves, hen answered yee, how you might kill no man. So that they were always your hangmen. They say they b he Suc∣cessors of Christ and of his Apostles,The ninth Ar∣l. but I can see them follow none but Iudas. For they beare the purse, and have all the money. And if they had not so great possessions, I am sure an hundred would speake against them, where now dare not one, for losse of promotion. And for this Article, I will overcome you with the witnesse of all the world, you may well condemne it for hereie, but it is as true as your Paer Noster, Iudas sold our Master but once, and you ell him as often as he commeth in your hands. But I would it were that yee could prove mee a lye, and that you followed ny of the Apostles aving Iudas onely, yet I would that yee were in certaine points as good s Iudas was.The tenth Ar∣icle. These ordinary Bishops and Prelates do follow that lse Prophet Ba∣am, For they would curse the people, but by the provision of Go they were compelled to blesse them, that is to say, to each
them to live well, though they themselves live most mischie∣vously. And so the Asses which they ride upon, that is, the common people, have their lives in abominaton. This is the hainous hereie. For it speaketh against the holy Fathers, which be almost as holy as Balaams Asse, that did once speake the Word of God to a good purpose. And so do they never. But I grant that I did offend in calling you Ordinary Bishops, for I should have called you inordinate butchers. And as or that that I compared you to Balaam, it is your owne Law. 2. quest: 7. Secuti sunt. And cap. Nos si.2. qu. 7. Secuti sun & ap. No si. And as for your living, all the world knoweth it. I could tell here many holy points of Bishops living, as keeping of mens wives, and daughters, but I will not, for I should be reckoned uncharitable. But you may do them breaking not your holy charity. So he. The namelesse Author of a Supplication to King Henry the eight,A supplication to King Her the eight. printed 1544. writes thus of Bishops, their calling, practi∣ses, and great revenues; How cruelly do the Bishops punish all them which pretend to have learning, and especially in Gods Word? such hey call heretiques, and persecute with putting them to open shame, with imprisonment, and in conclusion with death most feaefull and painfull. All this they do to dis∣courage all men from the study of Gods word, fearing lest that by such studious braines which learne Gods Word and publish the same, their iniquity should be made manifest. What study and pains do they take to keep the light from the people But no man which knoweth the Scriptures will marvell of his their po∣licie and cruelty. For Saint Iohn declareth their practice plainly,Ioh. 3. saying. Hee that doth evill hateth the light, and why? becuse his workes which be evill should not be reproved by the light. And for as much as our Bishops counenance of living their great possessi∣ons, and Lordly Dominions in them agreeth with Gods Word, s death with life, God with the Devill, light with darknesse, there∣fore they hate the light which declareth the same, and study  up∣presse the same by all rat and poliy. Also they be enemies  all men which can and doe preach Gods Word sincerely and truly, because they live ontrary to the same. And his i the originall ground, and case of the abndance of nd icrse of darkenes, and of sinne,  lso of the long continnce o Po∣pish blindnesse, which hath aigned in this Realme so lg. After which he proceeds thus, Most dread Soveraigne Lord, I see
two foule deformities and great lamentable mischiefes annexed to the vocation and office of Bishops, which not reformed will poyson and utterly corrupt the godly vocation and election of the said Bishops. The onely infection, and pestilent poyson is their great Lordships and dominions with the yearly provents of the same, which hath so fashioned them in proud countenances, and worldly be∣haviour, that now they be most like the Heathen Princes, and most un∣like unto Christ, although they would be esteemed of all men to be his true successours: yet poore Christ saith, The fxes have holes, the birds have nests, but the Sonne of man hath not wherein to lay his head. But our Bishops have gorgeous and sumptuous builded houses, mannors, and castles pleasantly set about with Parkes well replenished with Deare, warrens swarming full of conyes, and pooles well stored with divers kinds of fishes. And not onely these commodities and pleasures, but also divers other pleasures. How doth this Lordly and worldly Bishoplike estate agree with Christs words? I thinke a man cannot reasonably conjecture or imagine by their countenance and living that they be Christs true Disciples. The other mischiefe, and evill is, that they have too many worldly cares and businesses. For to these Man∣nors and Lordships belong many Tenants, for whose leases to be made fines and haryots to be appointed and taken, amercia∣ments to be assessed, taxed and also forgiven and dispensed, there be no few suits made to my Lord Bishop: also the hearing of Testamentary causes, divorces, causes of Matrimony, cau∣ses of slanders, of lechery, adultery and punishment o baw∣dery, and such other bumme Court matters (whereof not one belong to his office and vocation appointed by Gods Word) My Lord Bishop is so occupyed and unquieted, that he hath no lea∣sure to study, nor to preach Gods word. But such affaires and worldly businesses, nothing pertaining to his vocation, be very great hinderance and let to my Lord Bishop that hee can not apply him to exercise his owne office.Matth. 5. For no man can serve two masters, saith Christ. The Apostles thought it not just and equall to provide for the necessary living of the poore,Act 6. leaving Gods word untaught. But my Lord Bi∣shop doing these things nothing pertaining to his office thinketh that he hath exactly done his office. From these great Mannors commeth yearly great rents, pleasures, and profits, which although they be the good creatures f God, yet the abundance of them (being where they be more impediment than helpe) be a great occasion of corrupti∣on in the user of them. And peradventure they would allure and
intice a Bishops heart to trust in them, and so corrupt him, as the Scripture saith: Blessed is the rich which is found without blemish, hath not gone after gold nor hoped in mony and treasures; Where is here such a one, and wee shall commend him and call him blessed, for great things doth hee among his people. And if my Lord Bishop should give the superfluity of his goods to the poore (whose goods justly they be) as the Propht Esay saith;Isay 3. then my Lord should lacke them to furnish his Lord∣ly countenance, and so my Lord should lose his Lordly honour and prayse of the world. Wherefore as these superfluous possessions be annexed to estates of Bishops by mans vaine fantasie, and not by Gods word, so my Lord Bishop will either keepe them to make him more friends (remembring that ri∣ches maketh many friends;Prov. 14.20. but the poore is forsaken of his neighbour,) or devise the expence of them contrary to Gods Word, either to make sure friends in the Court about the King to obtaine more promotions and benefices, or in curious building, sumptuous and delicate fare, well apparelled ser∣vants, trimme decked horses to ride pompeously like a Lord. Although there were no authority to prove this, yet the Lord∣ly countenance, and fashion of Bishops, yea their common exer∣cise, and practise can well prove and testifie this plainely before the face of all men, which knoweth the Lordlinesse of Bishops, as the Prophet Esay saith.Isay. 11. The changing of their countenance bewrayeth them; yea they declare their owne sinnes themselves at Sodomites, and hide them not. Do no these things faintly agree with the saying of their predecessour Paul the Apostle, which saith, When wee have food and rayment, wee must be contented.1 Tim. 6. Is not this Lordly honour directly against Christs words, which saith,Luk. 22. The Kings of Nations raigne over them, and they that have authority over them are called gracious Lords: but you shall nt be so. Also Peter speaketh to his true successors, saying,1 Pet. 5. Feed you Christs flocke as much as lyeth in you, taking the oversight of them, not as compelled thereunto, but willingly after a good sort, nor for the desire of filthy lucre, but of a good mind, not as though you were Lords over the parishes, but that you be an example to the flocke and that with good will. But our Lordly Bishops estate and proud countenance of living (as it is now used) is contrary to Gods Word, as it appeareth by these words, But you shall not be so. And also by these sayings.
Not at though you were Lords over the Parishes. And Christ saith, Hee that is not with mee is against mee. Wherefore so long as they raigne so Lordly in the Clergie contrary to Gods Word, so long be they against God and so long as they be against God, they be not sent from God, and then can they not preach truly and sicerely his Word: For, how can they Preach except they be sent?Rom. 10. saith Paul. Christ was snt to preach, as it appeareth, Mar. 1. Luk. 4. and Isay 61. And Christ saith to all his true Disciples.Joh. 2. As my Father sent mee, so do I send you. And comman∣deth also all his Apostles and true Successors of the Apostles, to preach the Gospel to the whole world, and not Lordly to raigne in the Clergie. Whom Paul teacheth to be as Ministers, saying Let a man this wise esteeme us even as the Ministers of Christ, and the stewards of the secrets of God.1 Cor. 4. To preach the Gospel there∣fore (most gratious and prudent Lord) is the true vocation and office of all godly Bishops, Parsons, Vicars and of other Shep∣heards, and not to be Ambassadors to Princes, not to be judges to heare matters of contention, Testamentary causes, divorces, slanders, baudery, and such other. Your Grace hath of your Lay see sufficient both in Learning and wisedome, and of good conscience to heare, and judge such causes and variances, re∣mitting Bishops to attend their office and vocation by God (and not by man) appointed. And therefore they should not exercise any other office than God hath appointed to them: for no man can serve two masters.Mat. 6. And if Bishops and other Pastors would diligently execute their vocation & office, much ewer of those matters of contention shall be in ure, & experience either to be heard or judged. Seeing the Scriptures commandeth so earnestly every man to walke as hee is called. Many Christian men marvell greatly why the Bishops desire and procure so gree∣dily to exercise the office pertaining to another vocation, and to leave their vocation and office (appointed by God to them, to be exercised) not executed, nor performed and done:Ioh. 9. Veri∣ly because they love the glory of men, more than the glory of God. And surely, even as Caiphas and Annas being Bishops and exercising the office of secular and temporall Judges did judge Christ to be crucified, so our Bishops so long as they contrary to their cal∣ling, do exercise the office of temporall judges, so long shall they persecute Christ and his members, and study to suppresse his Word, and not to preach the same. Have not they busi∣nesse
sufficient wherewith to occupie them in their owne office? If they would looke well thereunto, do not they see on every side detestable sinne to raigne throughout all this your Realme? Detestable vices raigne in this your Realme, against the which our Bishops and other Pastours should continually cry out, as the Prophet saith;Isay 5. Cry now as loud as thou canst, leave not off, lift up thy voyce like a trumpet, and shew my people their offences, & the ouse of Iacob their sins. But alas they be become both blind and dumbe, as the Prophet saith.Isay 66. His watchmen are all blinde, they have altogether no understanding, they are all dumbe dogges, not able to barke, they re sepy, foolish are they, and lye snoring, they are shamelesse dogges that e never satisfied. The shepheards also in like manner hve no uderstanding ut every man turneth to his owne way, every out after his owne covetousnesse withall his power. What is the cause that they do not execute this their office? O∣ther becase they cannot, or because they have so much world∣ly businesse, that they will not apply hemselves to performe both. Or else they be afraid to speke the truth lest they should displease men, whom Paul reproveth saying:Gal. 1. If I should please men, I should not be the servant of Christ. Also the Prophet saith,Psal. 53. God breaketh the bones of them which study to please men they be con∣founded because the Lord  thm. Our Bishops love so well their great dominions whereby they maintaine their Lordly honour, tht they will ot displese men with preching the ruth lest they should hn loose their great poessions, and con∣sequently their Lordly glory. But surely, as long as they pos∣sesse their great Dominions, so long they will continue and maintaine their pride: And so long as they continue in pride, so long they shall not receive the holy Ghost, which shall reach them to speake the truth. For upon whom shall my spirit rest (saith the Prophet Esay) but upon the mke and lowly, and upon him which feareth my sayings?Isay . Also the Prophet saith, God ressteth the proud, and unto the mke and lowly he givth is grace. Wherefore so long as the Bishops contie in this worldly wealth and honour, so long will they  their duy and office, but raher perscute the word of Go, which declareth and sheweth what is their office nd their duty. And so long as they do not eercise their offe nd vocion, but o pesecue he Word, and such as sincely peach the same so long shall sinne incrase. For if the eye be wicked, all the body shall be
ull of darknesse. For even as at such time, when the Bishop of Rome was first endowed with great possessions, a voice was heard, saying, Now venome and poyson is cast and shed forth into the Church of God. In like wise no doubt, most godly Governour, semblable voyce and saying may be verified in, and upon all the Church of England, sith your Bishops were endowed with so great possessions and Lordly Dominions.Note this. No doubt, gracious Lord, so long as great Lordly Dominions, worldly honours, and wealth be annexed and knit to the vocation and offices of Bishops and other pastours, these mischiefes and inconveniences shall ever ensue and follow. First the most proud and ambiti∣ous, the most covetous and wicked which other by mony, friend∣ships, or flattery can obtaine the benefice, will labour with all studie and policie to get the benefice, onely for the worldly ho∣nour, and not for the zeale and love which he should have to instruct and teach the people committed to his cure and charge. And for the Profit which belongeth and appertaineth to the same benefice, they will dissemble humility, and despection, of all worldly profits and pleasures so colourably and subtilly, that it shall be very hard for your Majesty, or any other having autho∣rity to give benefices to perceive them. And when they have obtained the benefice, then every Christian man shall well per∣ceive, that he hath not entred in by the doore; that is, for the zeale and love to do and execute the office, but hath climed up and ascended by another way, that is, for the lucre and honour annexed to the office. And then certainly, whosoever ascendeth and entereth in by another way, cannot be but a theefe by day, and by night, whose study and labour must be to steale, kill and destroy, as Christ (whose words must ever be true) saith.Ioh. 1. The theefe commeth not but to steale, to kill, and to destroy. So that so long as so much worldly profit and honour belongeth to the benefice, so long will hee that for want and lacke of learning cannot doe the office, and also the most covetous and proud will labour to have th fice, whereby the people committed to his cure shall not on be untaught, and not learned in Gods Word, but also all they which can preach and teach Gods Word, and love the same, by such a worldly wolfe shall be ex∣tremely persecnted and tormented. For hee cannot but steale, kill, and destroy, and utterly abhorre and hate the godly, as Christ saith,Iohn 15.19. If you were of the world, the world would love his
owne. But because you be not of the world, but I have chosen you from the world, therefore the world doth hate you. No doubt a man shall much rather upon thornes gather grapes, and upon bram∣bles, and bryers gather figges than of such greedy theeves to have any Christian religion, either set forth, preached, or sta∣blished. Wherefore (most redoubted Prince) seeing that their great possessions, riches, wordly offices, cures and businesse be the impediment, and let that they do not execute their voca∣tion and office, which is so godly, profitable & necessary for this your Commonwealth; You, being our Soveraigne Lord and King (whom God hath called to governe this your Realme, and to redresse the enormities, and abuses of the same) by all justice, and equity are bounden to take away from Bishops, and other spirituall shepheards such superfluity of possessions and riches, and other secular cures, businesse, and worldly offices which be the cause of much sinne in them, and no lesse occasion where∣by they be letted to execute their office to the great losse and hindrance of much faith, vertue, and goodnesse, which might be administred to your subjects through the true preaching of Gods Word. And that done, then circumspectly to take heed that none be admitted to be Pastours, but such as can preach and have preached sincerely Gods Word: And all such as will not, to remove them from their cures. This godly order observed in the election of spirituall Pastours, & the pestilent poyson removed, and taken away from their vocation; faith shall increase, and sinne shall decrease, true obedience shall be observed, with all humility to your Majesty, and to the higher powers by your grace appointed in office: civill quietnesse, rest, and peace shall be established. God shall be feared, honoured, and loved, which is the effect of all Christian living. O Lord, save our most Soveraigne Lord King Henry the eight, and grant that hee may once throughly feele and perceive what miserable calamity sorrow and wretchednesse we suffer now in these dayes abroad in the Country by these unlearned, Popish, and most cruell tyrants, even the very enemies of Christs Crosse, whose paine shall be without end, when wee shall live in joy for ever: Grant yet once againe, I say, good Lord, and most mercifull Father, through thy Sonne Jesus Christ, that when his Grace shall know and perceive (by thy gift and goodnesse) their most detestable wayes in misusing thy heritage, that hee
will earnestly go about to see a redresse among them, and to the penitent and contrite in heart, to shew his accustomed good∣nesse, and to the other his justice according to Saint Pauls Do∣ctrine, and his Graces Lawes. And most dread Soveraigne (with all humility, and humblenesse of heart) I beseech your grace (according to your accustomed goodnesse) to take this my rude Supplication to the best as a fruit of my obedience, wherein I have not dissembled, but have opened fully unto your Grace the ground and very bottome of my heart, not of any grudge, evill will or malice that I beare to any spirituall Shepheard (God I take to record) but onely for the glory of God, the honour of your Grace, and the wealth and profit of your most naturall and loving subjects. Thus this namelesse Supplicant. Our learned Martyr Iohn Lambert. Iohn Lambert, alias, Nicholson, Anno 1538. in his answer to his 9. and 22. Articles, thus determins of the parity and identity of Bishops and Ministers. As touching Priesthood in the Primitive Church,Fox Acts and Monument, old edition. p. 541. 553. when vertue bare (as anci∣ent Doctors do deeme, and Scripture in mine opinion recordeth the same) most roome, there were no more officers in the Church of God than Bishops and Deacons: that is to say, Ministers, as witnesseth, besides Scripture, full apertly Ierome in his Com∣mentaries upon the Epistles of Paul, whereas he saith, That those whom we call Priests,The order and state of Priests were all one and none other but Bishops, and the Bishops none other but Priests; men ancient both in age and learning so neere as could be chosen. Neither were they institu∣ted and chosen as they be now adayes, with small regard of a Bishop, or his officer onely, opposing them if they can con∣strue a Collect; but they were chosen not onely by the Bishop, but also with the consent of the people among whom they should have their living, as sheweth Saint Cyprian. And the people (as hee saith) ought to have power to chuse Priests, that bee men of good lear∣ning, of good and honest report.Election of Mi∣nisters in the old time, not with∣out the assent of the people. But, alacke for pity, such electi∣ons are now banished, and new fashions brought in; which if wee should conferre with the forme of the election shewed of Christ by his Apostle Paul, wee should find no small diversity, but all turned upside downe. In the 2. where you demand, Whether I beleeve that it is lawfull for all Priests freely to preach the Word of God or no: and that in all places, at all seasons, and to all persons to whom they shall please, although they be not sent? I say, that Priests are called in
Scripture by two distinct words, that is to wit, Presbyteri and Sa∣cerdotes. The first is to say, ancient men, Seniors and Elders: and by that word or vocable are the secular Judges, or such like head officers sometimes also signified; as wee read in Daniel, of these that defamed and wrongfully accused Susanna; but this is seldome, and nothing so customeablely, as those be called Presbyteri, which are set to be Prelates in the Church, to guide the same by the word of God and his blessed Doctrine, that is the rod of direction, and the foundation of Christs faith. And Priests thus called Presbyteri in the Primitive Church (what time wee but few traditions and ordinances to let us from the straight trade or institution made by Christ, and his Apostles) WERE THE SAME AND NONE OTHER BUT BISHOPS, as I have shewed you in the first part of mine answer, by autho∣rity of Saint Hierome, and Paul recordeth the same right evident∣ly, and Tit. 1. in this forme. I left thee Titus (said blessed Paul) behind mee in Crete, that thou shouldest correct, or set in a due order such things as lacke, or be not else perfectly framed, and that thou shouldest set Priests in every Towne, like as I did appoint thee, such as are without reproach or blamelesse, the husband of one wife, ha∣ving faithfull children, not subject to the vice of riot, or that hee be not unruly: for so ought a Bishop to be, &c. These are not my words, but of Saint Paul in the Epistle to Titus; where you may see, that a Priest called Presbyter, should be that same that a Bishop, whom he requireth a little after, to be able by wholsome Doctrine of Gods Scripture to exhort the good to follow the same do∣ctrine; and those that shall speake against it, to reprove them thereby. And marke you how hee would have a Bishop, otherwise called an ancient man, and a Priest, to make exhortation by holy Scripture, and thereby to reprove them that shall speake against the truth, & not to condemne them by might or authority only, or else by traditions of men made in generall Councels. And as many as are these wise Priests which are called commonly Pres∣byteri, otherwise Bishops, such as in the Church are set to take cure of soules, and to be spirituall Pastors, ought to Preach freely the Word of God, in all places and times convenient, and to whomsoever it shall please them, if they suppose, and see that their preaching should edifie and profit. And whereas you adde this particle, though they were not sent. I say, that all such are chosen to be Preachers, and therefore sent, for of this spea∣keth
S. Gregory in his Pastorals, in this wise Praedicationis, quippe officium suscepit, quisquis ad sacerdotium accedit, &c. So hee, who much condemned Ex Officio Oathes and proceedings; the Canon Law; and inequality of Bishops and Ministers, as con∣trary to Christs institution, who made all his Apostles of equall authority, in his answers to the 29.30.41. and 43. Articles, too large and too common to transcribe. The Image of a very Christian Bishop, &c.The booke intituled: The Image of a very Christian Bishop, and of a counterfeit Bishop, (written & printed cum privilegio re∣gali, in Henry the eight his raigne, though by the Bishops pra∣ctice called in by this See Fox Acts and monuments. old edition, p. 574.Kings injunctions, An. 1539. with sundry other orthodoxe bookes,) determins thus both of the Bishops callings, and practices in those times. The booke being very rare, I shall transcribe more of it than otherwise I would doe. The preachers ought much ra∣ther to rebuke the spirituall heads, than the temporall, for divers just causesOver and besides this, the Ministers of the Word of God are principally bound hereunto, that they shall more sharpely re∣buke the Bishops and the Primates of the Church, than the worldly Princes and Rulers, and that for many causes; first, because that Ecclesiasticall highnesse and dignity, as it is now, is not of God; for God doth not acknowledge, not elect this disguised, and painted de∣ceitfull people, and these childish, and in a manner counterfeit, and Nicholaicall Bishops, forasmuch as they do neither teach, no yet do execute any point belonging to the office of a Bishop. Secondly,Nicholaicall Bi∣shops, I wene he means the Bi∣shops made of children at Saint Nicholas time. these shadows of Bishops have not beene constituted by men, but they have exalted their owne selves, and they have catch∣ed unto themselves Empire, Dominion, and Lordships, against both God and men, against reason, common sense or judgement; after the nature and property of Tyrants, which doe rule onely by the wrath, and great indignation of God. The Temporall, or Worldly Gover∣nours, and Officers are constituted by the gracious favour, and mercifull ordinance of God, to the chastisement, and punish∣ment of evill men, and to the protection, defence, and mainte∣nance of good men.Tyrants. Temporall Prin∣ces and Gover∣nours. Besides this, the worldly Governours, al∣though they do injury and wrong never so much, and do un∣justly and wickedly,Rom. 13. yet for all that, they doe but onely hurt the temporall goods, and the body. But these great estates, and Prelates of the Church, if they be not good and vertuous, and do not promote, and e forwards the course of the word of God unfainedly, and with their hearts, they are meere wolves, and most cruell murderers of soules. And it is much like in evill and
wicked Bishops as if Satan having a Miter on his head, and rings on his fingers, did i in a chaire and did rule the people. Where∣fore even the Bishops also which doe not teach the pure Word of God, are no lesse to be eschewed than the Devill himselfe. For wheresoever the Word of God is not,The Word of God. there without doubt is nothing else but humane errour, meere doctrine of Devills, and butchery and slaughter of soules; for the consciences or soules without the Word of God can neither live no bee delivered from the Devill. But here I know well enough they will object and say;Object. that it is jeopardy, lest sedition might be raysed up against those Bishops and Prelates of the Church. Loe I make answer,Answ. Shall the Word of God (I beseech you) for this your fained objection be neglected, and shall therefore the whole people perish? And is it (I pray you) right and con∣venient, that all soules should perpetually perish and be slaine,Note this. that the temporall and most vaine pompe of such men might be preserved and maintained, and might endure and continue in her peace and quietnesse? Nay, it were better (for spirituall harmes are most to be weighed) that sixe hundred times all the Bishops should perish for ever in their pride and dignity, and that all the Churches collegiate, and al Monasteries were plucked up by the rootes, were overthrowne and utterly destroyed, (so it were done by the authority of the higher powers) thn that one soule should perish: Because I will not in the meane season say, that infinite soules; yea, that all soules shall perish for any thing that such as they doe. I pray you tell me, what profit com∣meth of many of the Bishops that now are, or wherefore serve they, but onely to live in voluptuousnesse and pleasures, and to play the rioters and wantons of other mens labour and sweat, and in the meane season with much grievos threatnings, and with dreadfull feares to condemne, to hisse out, to cast out and to warre against the Word of God? Good men, they take ex∣ceeding great thought and care for themselves,The profit that commeth of our Bishops. and with mar∣vellous great unquietnesse of minde, feare and dread seditions in the temporall common-wealth; but as for the death of soules, being thereof all carelesse and without any manner of feae, or unquietnesse of minde, they doe neglect and passe nothing up∣on it, I beseech thee good Reader, are not these goodly, wise and exceeding bold and manly heardsmen of the Church? If
they did receive the Word of God and of truth, and did prin∣cipally search for the life and safeguard of soules, then the God (as the Apostle saith) of patience and of Comfort and hope would be with them,2 Cor. 1. that they should not neede to feare any seditions or ri∣sings of the people, which is but their crafty cloaked excuse to blind the eyes of the Princes;Psal. 57. Deafe Serpents. But in as much as they like deafe Serpents stopping their eares will not heare the Word of God, but (such is their fury and madnesse) doe rage against it with excommu∣nications, cursings, imprisonments, with the sword, and finally with fire; I beseech you what other thing doe they, as concer∣ning their part, with this their extreame woodnesse, then (which God defend) even willingly provoke that there should rise up a very great sedition, and that some certaine tempest and storme should violently and suddenly come upon them which should rid them at once out of the world: And surely if any such thing did chance unto them, yet were they nought else but to be laughed and scorned, as Wisedome saith in Proverbs 1. Because I have called and you have refused to come, I have stretched forth my hand and there was none of you that would looke to me, and you have despised all my counsell, and have set at nought my rebukings, I also will laugh in your destruction, and I will mocke and scorne when that thing which you did feare shall be chanced and come unto you. They that resist the Word of God be sediious persons.The Word of God doth not stirre or raise up seditions and strifes, but the stubborne aud obstinate disobedience of them which doe rage against it, is the cause that trouble and sedition is stirred up among the people, and that then by such seditions that thing should happen unto them which they had deserved through their owne unbeleefe and frowardnesse and wicked blindnesse; for whosoever receiveth the Word of God, that man raiseth up no manner of seditions at all, albeit that he doth no longer feare those vaine ugges, neither doth worship those Episcopall Puppets, now since that he doth know the Word of God, and because that men doe not feare and reverence their vaine imaginations, as heretofore they have done, that same is the thing (if I be not beguiled) which they doe call seditions;What the Bi∣shops call edi∣tion. and this is the thing that those persons doe so greatly feare, which have hitherto suffered themselves to be worshipped and feared like Gods, as though they had beene true Bishops or true Hearsmen of the Church. After which he addes; S. Peer saith of these, The Lord knoweth how to keepe the unrighteous persons un∣to
to the day of judgement for to be punished; Namely, such as following the flesh, doe walke in the concupiscence and lust of uncleannesse, and doe despise the Governors, and Rulers; being presumpuous, stubborne, and which doe no feare to raise and speake evill words on them which are in high authority. Our delicate Bishops doe ot beleeve that this was spoken of them. But I beseech thee good Readr marke here, how well the words of Peter doe agree with Paul, when he describeth their filthy and uncleane life: For where he saith presumptious, stubborne; there are scantly any men to whom those words doe sooner agree. For it is they which of all men doe most set by themselves, insomuch that they doe despise all worldly Rulers and Officers, and whatsoever other person is of high dignity and authority in the world in comparison of themselves, and doe also rayle upon them and speake opprobrious words against them: For the Pope hath many yeares agoe taken this monstrous ty∣rannie unto himselfe,The tyranny of the Pope. that hee hath not beene afraid to tread Kings and Princes under his feete, to depose them, to excom∣municate them, to curse them unto the 4.5. and 6. Generation, and after their owne pleasure to exercise all things which any manner of way whatsoever it may belong and helpe unto ex∣treame and wonderfull tyranny, none otherwise than if the Princes and Governours were Swine or else Dogges, notwith∣standing that the Scripture willeth all men, to e subject and obe∣dient unto the Princes and Governours of the publicke peace and tranquillity of this life Namely, forasmuch a they  and ordained to serve the divine Ordinance as Ministers of the sword: And yet neverthelesse there are found some Kings and Princes so faint-hearted, and of so little manfulnesse, and courage, that they doe feare these harmelesse thunders, and vain cursg, and doe humbly beseech and obtaine the exreame and termost foolishnesse and insenibility, that they may be blessed againe (for so they call it) of the Pope I wo nt with what charmes or conjurations and words appointed for the same purpose onely, that is to wit, to the end that that cruell psumption, and that wonderfull tyranny of his (a though he were not md enough of his owne Swing) might by the reason hereof the sooner gather power and strength, and with those most vaine deceies of cursings might deceive all the whole world. Besides this, the Bishops de stoutly and manlly helpe the Pope, and so all the great Lrds belonging to the Pope, and
they be in very deede the dispisers of all Rulers and Potestates which will in no wise be subject to any manner of high power, neither in body nor in goods, but onely they being presump∣tuous and stubborne and more than Wood doe on every side make businesse, and rage to excommunicate and curse all Kings and Princes and others which are in authority. Tell me I be∣seech you, hath not our Peter here largely and plainely touched our most delicate and tender Bishops? I pray you of what o∣ther persons may these words be understood, that they are not subject nor obedient unto the Rulers, that they speake evill of Kings and Princes; briefely, that being presumptuous and stubborne they doe feare no man?The sloathful∣nesse and reach∣lesnesse of Bi∣shops. Is it not knowne openly to the world who they be that commit these lewd deedes? Why then should I be affraid to touch and rebuke these coloured and painted Bishops, which by the tyranny of the Pope, by the favours of men, and by holy gold have invaded Bishoprickes, without the Commandment either of God or men? But for as much as these delicate and tender Bishops have foreheads of Iron, and neckes of brasse, as it is sayd in the Prophets, and will not feare, they cannot be perswaded, and they runne forth on according to their owne madnesse, their owne course, and their owne swing; and whereas they ought to spend their blood and their life (I meane not in any worldly fight) for the main∣tenance of the Word of God against the doctrines of men; They sleepe all carelesse, and give their mindes altogether to pleasures and to fare well, and the soules of which they boast themselves to be the Pastours and feeders, they doe most sloathfully neg∣lect, and nothing care for. But such is their negligence: they doe onely thinke and study how they may bring in the dread∣full wrath of God upon men, and draw soules unto the deepe pit of hell, and that they may at the last carry the Conscien∣ces of men cleane overthwart from the Word of God into lyes and devillish Errours, and the doctrines of men; wherefore wee ought here so much the more diligently to take good heede and to looke well about, that we may shew and utter unto the world these so cruell and so bloody wolves, which doe lye hid under forked Miters, set with pearles and precious tones: I doe there∣fore exhort all Christian men in our Lord, that they will here conider and ponder the wrath of God. And therefore like∣wise as you would doe with a visible Idoll, even so do now with
the Bulls of these Romish Balaam, the tormentor and slayer o soules. Consider, how pleasant a thing you shall doe unto God, if you doe breake and dash in peeces (with the Word of God, and not with the sword) these Idolls, and doe sanctifie his glorious name, and doe deliver it from the filthy abomination of Idolatry. After which he addes, That a Bishop ought to abhorre and to be farre a way from filthy Lucre, but the Bishop of Rome and his Clients, and other Bishops of their complexion, have infinite crafts, and most shamefull meanes of getting money. And here it is not unknowne to me what they doe object.Object I i not enough, not sufficient for a Prince (say they) to have meate, drinke, and cloathing, except he have also suffici∣ently whereof he may keepe and maintaine a guard, or band of men, according to the condition and estate of a Prince? What Princes doe in this place object and alleadge for them∣selves of the Princely state,Answ. and of Princes Courts advise them, the Apostle speaketh not of Princes, but of Bishops, As for these Princely Bishops and Bishoply Princes he utterly knoweth no∣thing of, which doe beguile the world with the name of Bishop, and with the most vaine colours of Ceremonies and gloves and Miters. But therefore Paul and the Spirit of God which spake in him, shall not change their words, neither attemper themselves uno these Princes, but these Princelike Bishops shall be faine to at∣temper and apply themselves in their living according to the minde of S. Paul, and his word or else they shall not be Bi∣shops, nor Pastours, but meere puppets and vsurs. I cannot here refraine (although I list not now greatly to bourd in the rehearsall of these things) but I must rehearse a pleasant and merry History. It happened upon a time that a certaine Princely Bishop, (of Colen in Germany,An History  Narration.) did ride with a Royall Pompe and goodly company of horsemen (as commonly such Bishops are wont to shew themselves set forth gayly and gorge∣ously,Fulgsus Collect. lib. . even above any worldly or temporall Princes) through the fields that lay neere unto a certaine Village, whom when a certaine shepheard had haply espied, as he rode over the fields, he left his flocke, and did run unto him, and staring and gazing upon him, as it had beene one amazed, he marvelled greatly at the riches, pompe, and gorgeousnesse which he saw about him. The Bishop seeing him so gazing, sayd unto him; What dost thou see here, that thou dost marvell so greatly? Then he, as he
was an homely rusticall fellow, made to him this plaine answer. I mervaile (said he) whetherThe Patron of Coln. S. Martin did use this same Pomp or like gorgeousnesse and superfluity. To whom the Bishop said, Forsooth, thou art a starke foole, and takest thy marke amisse, for S. Martin was scarcely one of the vile and rascall people: but I am also a Prince of high and Noble birth. Then sayd the shep∣heard againe, I beseech you my Lord, will you give me leave to speake a word? yea marry sayd the Bishop I give thee good leave, demand what thou wilt. Then said the Shepheard, what if the Devill should take and beare away the Prince shall there remaine any thing of the Bishop? At these words that good Princely Bishop being confounded and ashamed, depar∣ed from the man, and rode his way. So the Apostle Paul in comparison of those Dukes and Nimrods, was a plaine simple craftsman, living by the worke of his owne hands. And there∣fore he went sometime on his feete and preached the Gospell all abroad, he could play the Apostle; but such a poore and lewd person as he was, could never have played the royall and Princely Bishop after this fashion. Let no man thinke it is to be sayd or done against the heads and governours of Christs Church: whatsoever is sayd or done against these sloathfull, idle and sluggish beasts, given all to the belly. For they are not Bishops, but plaine Idols and dumbe Images, idle Puppets, visurs, blockes, shadowes, disguised game players, which doe not so much as know what this word Episcopus, that is to say, Bishop doth signifie: so farre off they be from knowing what is the Office or duty of a Bishop. Wilt thou that I tell thee at one word what they are?A true Chara∣cter of Lordly Prelt. Wolves they are, tyrants, traytors, manquellers, monsters of the world, burdens of the earth, the Apo∣stles of Antichrist, graven and made to corrupt and destroy the Gospell. And to utter at once what I thinke. Loe I will here play the Bedell or common Cryer. Be it knowne to all men, that the Bishops of Rome with their clients Bishops, which doe now ex∣ercise tyranny upon so many Cities in most ample and large domini∣on, are not Bishops by the Ordination of God, but by Errour and by he seduction of the Devill, and by the traditions of men, wherefore without doubt they are the messengers and Vicars of Satan. If I doe not shew and prove this, by so evident testimonies, that mine enemies shall be constrained to confesse this verity, and that even themselves (so that they doe meanely repent and waxe
wise) cannot deny it, then let them be Bishops, then let me be thought to doe injury unto them. First, Paul writeth unto Titus 1.5.7. Titus, That he should constitute and ordaine Presbyters in every Towne. Here I suppose that no man can deny, that all one thing is signified by this word Preshyter,Presbyter. and by this word Epi∣scopus, in Saint Pauls writings; for as much as he doth bid Titus, that he should in every City constitute Presbyters. And because a Bishop ought to be unreproveable, therefore he calleth him Presbyterum. It is evident therefore what Paul doth signifie and meane by this word Episcopus,Episcopus. Bishop; that is to say, A man excel∣lently good and vertuous, of ripe age, which also hath a chaste wife and children, obedient in the feare of the Lord. And the Apostle will that he should have the oversight and government of the Congregation, in the Ministery of the Word and the Admini∣stration of the Sacraments. All men whosoever they be, which by all honest and lawfull meanes, doe spend and bestow their goods, honour, blood and life, to the end that these Bisho∣prickes so pompous and Courtly, so farre unlike and contrary to all the office and duty of an Apostle, namely to the mini∣stration of the Word, and that all this devillish Kingdome of the Bishop of Rome may be overthrowne and destroyed, or if they cannot in very deede destroy it doe cry against it, doe dispraise and condemne it, and doe avoyde it as abhomination all those persons that so doe, are the sonnes of God, and true Christian men fighting and helping the Faith of the Gospell in spirituall barraile against the gates of Hell; Contrariwise who∣soever doe favour the Kingdome of the Popes Bishops so wic∣ked, and that so tyrannous and devillish cruelty, and doe wil∣lingly and gladly submit themselves and obey unto it, those persons are the ministers of the Devill, fighting as enemies against the Words, the Lawes, and Ordinances of God. This sentence of mine, nay rather of Gods Judgement, I prove with strong effectuall arguments in this wise. The Apostle Paul com∣mandeth Titus,Titu 1.. That he should Ordaine and constitute a Bishop in every City, such one as was the husband of one wife, a man vertuous and unreproveable, &c. This is the Word, this is the will and sentence of God. Against this sayd Will of God these men doe now strive, which have taken quite away all true Bishops ou of all Cities, and insteed of true Bishops have constituted shops or worke-houses of most cold Ceremonies, Monasteries
and Churches Collegiate, and have brought in themselves in their steed, that by this meanes they might be made Bishops or Over-seers of many Cities, and also of many Provinces. Now the sentence of Paul, or rather the Words of the Holy Ghost doth continue firme, stable, and not able to be moved or stirred of the gates of hell, and doth stand as stiffe as a bra∣sen wall, which saith plainely and evidently, That in every City there ought to be constituted and Ordained one Bishop, and these then shal be every one of them of equal power with the other. For Paul speaketh plainly of every City, & he giveth to every Bishop full power & authority in his own City. Go to therforenow ye world¦ly Bishops. Why doe ye not here rise? Why do ye not boldly & manfully resist? Why do ye not break forth all of you together? Here you have to doe not with me, but with the Apostle Paul. Here you resist (that I may say with the holy Martyr Stephen) not me,Acts 7. but the Holy Ghost, which likewise againe of his part doth mightily resist you. oe to then, what will you say here, I beseech you? Will you all hold your peace, and say nothing at all? Loe your sentence is given and pronounced against you, you have the matter judged, that is to wit, that unto all Chri∣stian men it belongeth of their part (with the Word of God) againe to destroy, to plucke up by the rootes, and utterly to ex∣tinct both you and your Kingdome, which you doe tyrannou∣sly exercise, to extinct and destroy the Gospell; you have heard now that they be in the indignation of God, whosoever favoureth you, and on the otherside that they are in the favour of God, whosoever overthroweth and destroyeth you. But I will not in any wise these words which I doe speake of the de∣struction and utter subversion of the Kingdome of false Bishops, so to be understood or taken, as though it ought to be done with the hand, or with sword, or with violence, or bodily in∣vasion of them, for with this destruction of the men, we shall be nothing further in this so great a matter,Ye se here that the Preachers of the Gospel tach no sedition, shed∣ding of blood, or fighting with the hand. that is to wit, Gods cause or businesse: But as Daniel prophecied in the 8. chapter, The Kingdome of Antichrist is to be broken all to peeces without any hand of man. Saint Peters words, you are a regall Priesthood and a Priestly Kingdome, are meant of Spirituall Bishops, who are all the Preachers of the Word of God in Cities, Townes, and Villages, although they doe neither buy Pall nor Gowne, nor yet any other Garment of those bawdes the Romanists: the Cor∣porall
Bishops are you which bearing orked Miters on your heads under the apparell of Aaron, doe in very deede play the very Tyrants, and are fellowes unto Nero and Caligula, riding upon fat and well fed Palries and sleeke Mules, and afterwards with your rings onely, and your Gloves, and your silver Sheep∣hooke (if God be pleased) you doe play the Bishops. And here againe I guesse what they will object.Object. For all that (say they) oftentimes many Saints have beene Bishops, not onely of one City, but of many Cities. I make answere,Answ. As many as have beene oly Bishops in very deede, and called Pastours by the calling of God, all those for the most part were the Bishops of one City alone, as Cyprian,Note this. Hilary, Ambrose, Augustine, Ireneus, and these ob∣served the tradition of the Apostles; it is found in deede in Hi∣soriographers, that there have beene certaine (such was holy Boniface,Boniface. and such also TiteTit. unto Paul) which did after their own judgement constitute other Bishops in the Cities, as Titus did, but yet wre they not therefore the Bishops of many Cities;Note this. and al∣beit that such manner of example could be shewed of the Saints,The Examples of holy men may not be perjudi∣ciall to Gods ho∣ly Word. shall the examples of holy men be prejudiciall to the Word of God? Is not God greater than all Saints? how oftentimes doe we finde that holy men have sinned & erred?For all men may erre. God saved Daniel in a Dungeon of Lyons,God saved Da∣niel in the Dun∣geon of Lyons. Dan. 6. Dan. 3. and he saved Ananias, Azarias and Misael in the flaming Furnance of Babylon. Is the hand or power of God now shortned and minished? Is it any doubt but that be might preserve and keepe his elect and chosen persons, if it should happen them by any meanes to be seduced, and led out of the right way (as Christ prophecied) even in the middest of mens Ordinations and traditions, and of the errours of the Devill?Note. we ought not to put confidence in any ensample, deed, or word of Saints, but our Consciences ought to leane, and to be groun∣ded onely upon the Word of God, which onely is he (as Paul saith) that cannot lye. But let us furthermore heare Paul, what he saith of this Ordinance of God, for in this wise Luke writeth of him in the 20. Chap. of the Acts, And sending messengers from Miletum to Ephesus, he sent for Priests of the Church, which when they were come to him, he sayd unto them, Take heede to your selves and to all the flocke in which the holy Ghost hath set or ordained you Bishops to governe the Church of God, which he hath purchased and gotten with his owne blood. Goe to now, is here any new thing? Is Paul a foole, and doth he not know what he doth? Ephesus
was but one City alone, and Paul calleth openly all the Priests or Elders by one common name Episcopos, Bishops. But per∣adventure Paul had not read those bookes, and those Apologies wretchedly patched together of Papists, nor the holy Decretals. For how would he have bin bold else to make many Bishops o∣verseers to one City, & to call al the Priests of one City Bishops,All the Priests of one City be called of Paul, Bishops. in as much as they were not all Princes, neither kept a gard of men, and goodly Palfries, but were certaine rascall persons, and of the most abject and vile sort of men, after the worldly estima∣tion. For Paul peradventure was ignorant of that, which is growne in use now in our time, that no man can be a great Bi∣shop in very deed, unlesse he doe (as the Poet saith) keepe an hundred Horses in goodly stables, unlesse he have a gorgeous house full of royall Pompe, unlesse he have many royall titles of Lordships. For this alone is sufficient now in our time, to that that Knights and Princes (be they never so much unlearned and foolish, yea and though their minds other whiles doe stand nothing towards it) may by the commendations of their pa∣rents and kinsfolkes, and otherwhiles by gifts and rewards be suddainely made Bishops. But in good sadnesse thou seest plain∣ly that the Apostle Paul doth call these onely Bishops, which doe Preach the Gospell unto the people, and doe minister unto them the Sacraments, as now in our time be the Parish Priests and the Preachers.All true Prea∣chers been Bi∣hops. Wherefore I doe not doubt but these, al∣though they doe Preach the Gospell, but to very little Villa∣ges and Granges, and if they be the faithfull and true ministers of the Word: I doe not doubt (I say) that they have by good right the Title and name of a Bishop. Contrariwise, those vali∣ant horsemen ad tyrannous Bishops have no point of the Of∣fice of a Bishop, saving onely those bare goodly titles, and cer∣taine disguised apparell, in like manner as those Bishops which are painted on a Wall, have indeed the shape and likenesse of Bishops, but they are without life and speech: For even such dead and idle stockes and blockes are the Popes Bishops in eve∣ry point: albeit that then they are evermore strong and quick when they doe exercise tyrannous cruelty against the very Pa∣stours, which doe busily governe Cities in the ministration of the Word of God, and by more than devillish tyranny doe forbid them holy Wedlocke, and to the open slander of the Church doe winke at the keeping of Whores, doe blaspheme
the Gospell, doe extinct the Word of God, and under the pre∣tence and colour of vertue and godlinesse, doe with incredible woodnesse exercise continually extreame tyranny upon the silly poore people. By the reason whereof we doe see in the Courts and Palaces of some Bishops, likewise as in the foun∣taine of all vice and mischiefe in the Court of Rome,The Court of Rome. not so much as one crum, not so much as the least shadow to bee found of Christian manners: we see also all the Cities of Priests, and namely those Noble eates of Priests to be nothing else but schooles of uncleanelinesse and bodily plesures, Ware-houses of vices, so much that in comparison of their houses the Courts of their secular Princes may be accounted Monasteries and holy schooles of vertue and godlinesse, yea and Sodome and Gomorrah in comparison of them, may seeme temperate, measurable and thrifty.Note. For out of their Courts or houses commeth forth nei∣ther the Gospell, nor any other holy Doctrine, but onely Cita∣tions, Excommunications, Exactions, Interdictions, Citations (I say) in very deed peremptory, that is to say, slayers both of goods and of soules. For such as the Bishops are themselves, such also is their Doctrin.Proverbs. And though thou do never so much cloath an Asse with a Lyons skin, yet he continueth still an Asse; and an Ape is still an Ape although he be clad in purple. Besides this, S. Paul writeth to the Philippians in this wise:Philippi. Paul and Timothy the Ser∣vants of Iesus Christ, to all the Saints in Christ Iesu which are in the City of Philippi, and to the Bishops also and the Deacons, &c. Lo Philippi was but onely one City, and yet S. Paul saluteth all them that beleeveth, together with the Bishops undoub∣tedly the Bishops whom he meaneth there, were the Priests, likewise as he was wont to constitute and ordaine in all the o∣ther Cities. This is now the third place of Paul, in which wee doe see, what God and the holy Ghost hath constituted and or∣dained, that is to wit, that they onely are called Bishops in ve∣ry deede, and by right, which doe take and beare the charge of the people in the Administration of Gods Word, in caring for the poore locke in the Administration of the Sacraments; as are now in our dayes the Christian Cuates or Parish Priests,uraes or Pa∣rish Priests. if they might be suffered for those Mired Horsemen. And that this belongeth to the Office of a Bishop, the very Word it selfe doth very well declare; for this Word Episcopu,Episcopus. is derived of two Greke words, Epi, and Scopin, which signifie, to give at∣tendance,
to Oversee, to give diligence, to play the Keeper or watchmen over the people, in like manner as watchmen doe keepe watch upon the walls of a Citie, or as Shepheards doe keepe watch upon their sheepe. And Episcopos in Greeke doth properly signifie in English an Overseer, and in the Hebrew it signifieth a Visiour, that is to say, one which visiteth men at their owne house, and doth diligently enquire and search the con∣dition of them, and the state of their life, being readily and in∣differently to helpe and comfort all men. So Christ saith in the nineteenth Chapter of Matthew, Because thou hast not knowne the time of thy visitation. That which is there called time of Visita∣tion, we call the time of thy Bishopricke. But ou Papisticall Bi∣shops have found and devised a certaine new proofe and decla∣ration of that Episcopall Office, seemely for such as they are, that is, to set themselves a high in a chaire guilded, clad in purple, with Cushions of cloath of issue under their buttockes and their el∣owes, having abundance and plenty of all manner of delights and pleasures, as much as any King can have, and in the meane season to offer and set forth the men belonging to their governance, to be pilled, tormented and slaine of their officials, to whom they make their flockes subjects; men for the most part wicked, ungodly, and which doe thinke that there is no God,Bishops Officials what kinde of men. which then may also with their Commandements at their owne pleasure by com∣pulsion cause to appeare at those heir holy Consistories, persons that dwell very farre off, not without dammage and hurt both in goods, and in their soules, and may exercise and use all manner of extreame tyranny upon them. For as much then as now it is evident & open of these three places of the Apo∣stle, that those Bishops, which are so far away from ministration of Gods Word, and be negligent about their duety, are not onely no true Bishops, but rather the people of malediction be∣fore God, as the men which have setled their minds against the Statutes and Ordinances of God to extinct the gospell, and doe exalt themselves to destroy soules. It is every Christian mans duty by all lawfull ad honest meanes that he may, to procure that their tyrannous and sinfull traditions may once be utterly contemned and come to confusion: It belongeth (I say) to eve∣ry Christian mans duty manfully, and with great confidence, and boldnesse, where charity will suffer, without offending the weake, to endeavour himselfe to doe all things which are con∣trary to their traditions, none otherwise than he would doe
against the Devill himselfe. And also to treade under the feete and utterly despise the obedience of them by which they desire to have their owne traditions greatly regarded and observed, the Word of God neglected and nothing set by, even as they would tread under their feete the very Devill himselfe.Note. All we therefore (if it be so that we have pitty of so many soules which doe perish for ever; if we be earnestly moved and stirred with the Word of God) owe (pray make this passage well) with our uttermost diligence to goe about and with very great contentation and strayning of our selves to labour about this, that there may againe according to the institution of the Apostle, very Bishops and Shepheards be constituted eve∣ry where in Cities, which be men pure and vertuous, and well learned in holy Scripture, and in spirituall things, which have chaste wives, and children obedient (as the Apostle saith) in the feare of the Lord. Wherefore seeing that the Bishops and Pastours eve∣ry where in the Cities, which are now adayes, have hitherto ra∣ther obeyed the Devill than God,Bishops wer in those dayes dee∣med intollerable greevances fit to be removed. banded themselves against the Scripture, to this wicked vow of living single, or sole, (if there be any point of Christian breast or minde in us) we ought to give diligence and bestow labours, for a reformation of the same to be had by the King our onely supreame head of the Church, in whom onely the reformation lyeth, so that once such a reformation had, the poore captive soules may boldly, to contempt of the Devill and his Papisticall aditions, revoke those vowes, as being through errour made with the Devill, and with the very gates of hell, and that they may according to the Word of God wed wives, or rather to be willing (according to the institution of S. Paul) to be good married men in the sight of God, then for the pleasure of those bauds the Romanists to be Adulterers and whore-keepers. Fo the very time it selfe doth now in so great revelation of the Gospell require that once at the last the holy ordination of the Spirit of God, which cannot be but very good, should be restored and set up against those prophane and abominable traditions of men.The Decree of the Author. Loe this is my decree against those proud puffed Bulls of the Devill, and of the Devillish Romanists and their factors. Neither doe they heare and obey me, but they heare and obey God, and the Spirit of God, whosoever doe heare and obey this. And there∣fore I can also in very deede promise both everlasting life, and
also the favour of God to all those, whatsoever they be, that doe in faith observe and keepe it. And because this shall not bee judged the ordination of Paul alone (for it is reported that the Deane and Canons of a certaine Cathedrall Church, did say after a blasphemous manner and fashion, openly to a Prea∣cher, whom they did expulse for the Gospell sake, What of Paul, what of Paul? The Pope hath received more power of Christ than ever Paul did: and for the pleasure of those so sweee and gentle men, and excellently devillish Priests, let us see what Peter and what Christ himselfe did say concerning this matter. In the fifth Chapter of he first Epistle of Peter it is thus written,Pesbyters. The Priests that are among you I beseech (which am also my selfe a Priest, and a record of the afflictions of Christ, and also a parta∣ker of the glory, which shall be shewed) feede, as much as lyeth in you to doe, the flocke of Christ, taking the charge and oversight of them not by compulsion, but willingly, not for the desire of filthy lucre, but of a good favourable and loving mind, neither as men exercising domini∣on in their inheritances, but that you may be your selves ensamples to the flocke, and when the head shepheard shall appeare, you shall re∣ceive an incorruptible crowne of glory. Here thou seest that Peter even likewise as Paul did, doth use these two words Presbyter and Episcopus, both for one thing, that is to wit, that they are Episcopi, which doe teach the people, and doe preach the Word of God and he maketh them all of equall power one with another, and he fobiddeth them to behave themselves so, as if they were Lods or had dominions over those whom they have charge of. He calleth himselfe a fellow Priest, (that I may so say) by these words evidently declaring and proving, that all Parish Priests and Bishops of Cities are of equall power among themselves;Note. and as touching the Authority of a Bishop, that one is nothing superiour to another, and that he himselfe also is fel∣low Priest with them, and hath no more power & authority in his own City, then have the other or every one of them in their owne Congregation Loe Peter maketh himselfe equall and not superiour to the Bishops, what I beseech you will those beasts alleadge here against these things, which doe not cease nor onely to be Lords and have dominion, but also to exercise most cruell tyranny upon our soules and our goods; which also doe never cease with exceeding mad brawlings and suites to contend and strive among themselves about the difference, and
degrees of power and authority. And that I may once make an end, Christ himselfe in the 22. chapter Luke saith, The Princes of the Paynims are Lords over them, and they which have power and authority over them, are called beneficiall and gracious;Note. but it shall not be so among you, but he that is eldest among you, let him be made as youngest. Hereunto hearken and give good atten∣dance you pompous and Lordly Bishops; Loe all the holy Chri∣stian people require of you a reason and cause of your dominati∣on and Lordship, which you have hitherto with so many titles, and also with so many tyrannous deedes taken, violently usur∣ped, and challenged unto your selves: Loe, I say, the Christian world requireth a cause of this your doing, for this you cannot deny which is so open and evident afore the eyes of all men, that your Kingdome is an outward and a worldly Kingdome, yea and that more worldly, than the Kingdome of any worldly Prince. For you play the Lords openly both upon the bodies, and also the minds, and that not by the Word of God, but by exteriour pompe, by exteriour and worldly tyranny, as other Princes and Rulers of the heathen people doe: I say, goe to therefore now and tell me, how those Words of Christ, vos au∣tem non sic, that is,Vos non sic. but so shal not you doe, how do tey agree with that your Kingdome? Goe to now, because you shall not (as you are very slippery) slip from me, let us ensearch and ponder well the signification of the words. What is the meaning of these words: But you not so? for here undoubtedly is rebuked your Kingdome & your condition & state, for this ought not to be such a one as it is, if it were a Christian state. Now let it be whatsoever manner one you will, yet for all that Christ speaking of the domination of those worldly Princes saith plainely unto you (for you will seeme to be Bishops) But ye shall not doe so. Which words hee largely prosecutes, and afterwards proceedes thus. You doe eede and nourish your selves most delicately and enderly in riot and pleasures with the blood and sweate of poore men besides impoverishing and beggering the world with your gues and deceipts; you doe with your Excommunications and In∣terdictions vex and tosse all things up and downe,Not this old and new practise of Prelates. afflicting and tormenting poore men both in soule, in body, and in their goods; you doe extinct and destroy the Gospell, and not onely your selves doe no manner of worke belonging to the Office of a Bishop, but also you will not suffer any other men to preach the Word of God; you doe pursue the Preachers from City to
City, as it was prophesied in Matth. 24. and you do expulse them as knaves, and vild wretches out of all your dominions, and yet in the meane season your selves are nothing else in comparison, but vipers, whom as unprofitable burthens of the earth the world can no longer beare nor suffer, unlesse you do waxe wise and a∣mend. Wherefore here labour and apply your selves lustily and stoutly, that you do not please the people overmuch, increase your benefits and good deeds, give diligence lustily, that there may not neede any great businesse to destroy your tyranny, whiles you do shake out your owne selves, and do your owne selves wilfully runne forth to your owne confusion nd destction I verily (to give you good and faithfull counsell) would advertise you, that you should purchase and get unto your selves the favour and love of the people with mildnesse, with mercifulnesse, with softnesse, with patience and Apostolicall sincerity, that is to wit, with those vertues, with those holy means, which S Paul did use; goe forth and hold on as you have begun, this is even the right and next way to undoubted destruction, whereunto you do so greatly make haste; for even so did your Fathers the Iewes, into whose hypocrisie you are succeeded, who when they had slaine the Lord and author of life Jesu Christ, and had by degrees promulged, and published the Gospell to be for bidden, yet could they not rest untill they had provoked the Romans, and so had sought their owne un∣doubted mischiefe, which said Romans at the last setting vio∣lently upon them, slew them, and utterly destroyed them; for how could you better observe and fulfill that which becommeth your personages to do, than if you do goe about and endea∣vour to prove, and shew your selves the very right and true sonnes and heires of such manner of Parents; But here (I see) they will put upon them all the whole Episcopall armour, that is to say, a purple pall, and a forked Miter upon their heads, their gloves and their rings with precious stones to fence both their hands withall, they sall also have their feet shod, not with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, but of the sandall of vanity, and a silver Crosse, hanging downe to the midst of their breast, and if I be not deceived, a Roman Pall also covering their shoulders, and a shepheards staffe to measure their pace, and so then having this armour upon them, with a stately and solemne gate, they shall come forth, &c. Who hath commanded that Bishops should so play the gallants, and use such pompe and gorgeousnesse of the Court? Christ did openly forbid them
to be as the Kings and Princes of the Gentiles, where ee dot by expresse and open words separate and divide tem from Princes of the World, ad saith, The Kings and Rlers of the Gentiles are Lords over them, but you shall not do soe: These words, that Prince of Princes, and King of Kings, and that Lord of Majesty will not revoke; hee will not abolish them, nor suffer them to be thrust out of place and made void for thy peevish excuses wherewith thou dost in thy conscience coldly and faintly com∣ort thy selfe, Why dost thou not rather forsake thy Lordly Port be it never so pleasant? if thou cast not eecute and fulfill the offie of a Bishop, why dost thou for transitory and most vild honour forget thine owne health and salvation? yea moreover witting∣ly, and willingly dost cast away thine owne soule for the most deceit∣full pleasure of this life? Why dost thou (I say) wittingly ad wil∣fully perish? Even those men are scantly saved at the last, which with couragious faith continually wrestling and fighting with their flesh and the Devill do live in a good and a vertuous kind of life: why dost thou then hope in vaine, hat thou shalt be saved among so many jepardies, among so many voluptuous plaasures? What doth it pro∣fit (saith Christ himselfe) if hee do possesse all the World, and all the Kingdomes, and do cast away his owne soule? But whereof, or which way (will some say) should Kings,Object. Princes, Earles, Barons, Knights, briefely all the Nobles of the world provide for their younger children, if these Bishopricks, if those Cathedrall and Collegiate Churches were not? And therein first we may openly see the exceedinge foolish∣nesse and blindnesse of all Christendome,Answer. which hitherto have bought commonly of the Romanists, the Benefices and Pre∣bends founded by themselves with the blood of their Children. Loe here I doe speake unto thee whosoever thou art, who dost wittingly so cast away thy children, If any Ploughman or Smith did wound or kill thy Sonne or did defile thy daughter, or thy Sister, thou wouldst for anger goe about to doe the utter∣most mischiefe that thou couldst to overthrow and destroy even whole Cities, whole Provinces, for the revenging thereof would seeme but a small matter unto thee, thou wouldst thinke in thy minde it to be so high and so hainous an offence that was done unto thee:Note. but I beseech thee here open the eyes of thy minde, and looke whether there can be a more sure Homicide and murtherer of thy children, any more grievous and more
cruell enemie unto them than thou art thine owne selfe, advan∣cing and promoting them to a Bishopricke, or thrusting them downe into such a Church (as they doe call it) for thou makest thy sonne a Bishop,Note. which state, as it is now far away from the mini∣stration of the word and from all godlinesse, thou knowest undoubted∣ly to be a devillish state, in which thy sonne can in no wise be saved. Sith it is so, that thou dost know this, tell me I beseech thee whether thou dost not more sore rage and use more cruelty against him than if thou cut him into gobbets and didst throw his flesh unto dogs to be devoured; if thy sonne through his owne mis-understanding, ignorance or error had stumbled, and falne into such a certaine kind and manner of living, thou oughtst with all diligence, and with all thy power to labour and goe about (if there were any wisedome, or any point of a Christian mind in thee) to rid him out of it, although thou hadst but onely one loafe of bread to live on thy selfe, whereof thou shouldst be faine to give him the one halfe: but here I beseech thee looke upon thy selfe somewhat more neere, and more narrowly, whosoever thou art which dost cast downe thy children headlong into these kindes and manners of living, and consider what manner of father thou art, onely to keepe thy Dominion, and thy riches upright, and from decay, onely lest thy gold and silver should be diminished if it were divided among many heires: thou dost thrust downe, & willingly cast headlong thy Sons, and kinsmen into the deep dungeon of hell; neither doth it move or stirre thee any whit to see thine owne blood supped and swallowed up in the throate of the Devill, and perpetually to perish, so that thou be not compelled to diminish or debate any thing of thy superfluity, or any parcell of thy pompe and royalty. Lo this most ungraci∣ous opinion, this custome is crept in and used in many places, that as oftentimes as any great mans Sonne, being meete rather for any other thing than for a Bishopricke, is chosen and lected Bishop, or is brought into the Temple; then with solemne pompe, and a solemne company set in their array, are madde cries and loud shouts, as it were in a triumph; then all the Halls and Courts doe sound and ring with the noise of trumps, with trumpets, with bres then are in every place lighted tapers and torches; then that solemne Song, Te Dewn laudamus is thundered out, so that these triumphs do plainly represent unto us the image of those foolish Kings of Israel
which did burne up their sonnes and daughers for a Sacrifice in the honour of the Idol Molo, and with the divers loud sounds of trumps did bring to passe, that the lamentable crying ou and wayling of them, that were in the midst of the fire, could not be heard. The author of this booke hath many such like pas∣sages against Bishops. And as for Cathedrall Churches, hee stiles them: Stewes, and the Gates of hell, a certaine unsatiable bottom∣lesse whirle poole which swallowes up the riches of Kings, of Princes, of Dukes, of Earles, of the Common people, and of all the world. But I passe from this old Treatise. About the same time there was a Treatise expressing the cau∣ses of the Divisions betweene the Spiritualty,The causes of the Division be∣tweene the Spi∣ritualty and the Commonalty. and the Tempo∣ralty. Printed, Londini in aedibus Thom Bartheleti, prope aqua∣gium sitis sub intersignio Lucretiae Romanae, excus. Cum Privilegio. I shall transcribe no passages out of this Treatise, but onely the Table of the Chapters at the end thereof, wherein the causes of the division betweene the Spiritualty and the Temporalty are sum∣marily expressed. Chap. 1. That the Division among spirituall men themselves, hath beene one cause of the Division that is now betweene the spiritu∣alty and temporalty in this Realme. Chap. 2. That the omitting of divers good lawes, with certain de∣falts & disorders in men of the Church, which among others be recited, and declared by John Gerson, have been another occasion of this divi∣sion. Among these he numbers the neglect of these two Canons. That Bishops should have poore apparell, lodging, and table, and should not strive for transitory things: And the Clerkes shall not take upon them the acts or procurations of spirituall men. Chap. 3. That certaine Lawes made by the Church, wherein it is recited, Quod Laici sunt Clericis infesti: That is to say, That Lay men be cruell to Clerkes, hath beene another cause of this division. Chap. 4. That the extreme Lawes made by the Church for laying violent hands upon Clerkes have beene another cause of this Division. Chap. 5. That the disordering of the generall sentence of excom∣munication, hath beene another occasion of the said division; which (saith hee) will never be appesed, till the heads spirituall will re∣forme themselves, and shew a fatherly affection to the people, and not extend the sentence o the Church upon so light causes, and upon such partiality, as they have done in times past.
Chap. 6. That another occasion of this division hath partly ri∣sen by temporall men through disordering of their Chaplaines and Chauntry Priests. Chap. 7. That suits taken in the Spirituall Courts (Ex officio) have beene another occasion of this Division: which suits together with Oathes Ex officio, whereby a man shall be condemned, and not know the names of them that be causes thereof; he termes a sore law, and much declaimes against them. Chap. 8. Though after the determination of Doctors, a man is not an hereticke, for that onely that hee erreth, but for that hee opi∣natively defendeth his errour: and that neverthelesse the spiritualty as a common voyce goeth among the people, have in time past punished many for heresie upon light causes and offences, whereupon many people have grudged, and that grudge hath beene another occasion of this Division. Chap. 9. That the partiality that hath beene shewed upon suits taken in the Spirituall Court by spirituall men, hath beene another cause of this Division. Chap. 10. That the extreme and covetous demeanour of some Curates with their Parishioners, hath beene another cause of this Division. Chap. 11. That the granting of pardons for money, as it were to some Charitable use, that hath not after followed, hath raised ano∣ther grudge among the people, which hath beene another occasion of this Division. Chap. 12. That making of Lawes by the Church which they had no authority to make, hath beene another occasion of this Divisi∣on. In which Chapter he cites divers Lawes made by the Cler∣gie, and executed contrary to the Lawes of the Realme, touching Tythes of wood, exemption of Clerkes from secular jurisdiction, and the like: which lawes while spirituall men, sticke fast to, and stifly maintaine, temporall men by reason of common use and custome that they have seene to the contrary, have resisted them, whereupon have risen great strife, and variances, and expences in the spirituall Law. Chap. 13. The lacke of good visitations hath beene another oc∣casion of this Division: wherein hee shewes that Bishops keepe their visitations onely to gaine money, and procurations, not to re∣fraine vices. Chap. 14. That the great multitude of Licenses, and dispensa∣tions
made by the spiritualty for money, upon light suggestions, hath beene another cause of this division. Chap. 15. That the great laxenesse and worldly pleasures of religious persons, whereby the people hath beene greatly offended, hath beene another occasion of this Division. Chap. 16. Then for a conclusion of this Treatise, it is somewhat touched, how good it is to have a zeale of Soules, and how perilous it is to do any thing whereby they might be hurt: And that if zeale of Soules, pitty, good doctrine, and devout prayer were abundantly in this world, mist specially in Prelates and spirituall Rulers, that then a new light of grace, and tractability would shortly shew and shine among the people. The summe of the whole Treatise is to prove; that the Bi∣shops and Prelates, are the authors of much division, trouble and dissention both in Church and State, and that by their Episco∣pall practises and unjust usurpations, lawes and proceedings. William Wraughton,William Wraugh∣ton, alias Turne. who wrote about the same time, In his Re∣scuing of the Romish Fox, Dedicated to King Henry the 8. writes thus: Wee have put downe some of your orders of the world, there remaine yet two orders of the world in England: That is, the order of pompous and Popish bishops: and Gray Fryers. Which if they were put downe as well as the other put downe before, I reckon that there should be no Kingdome wherein Christ should more raigne than in England. And there hee proves at large, the Canon Law to be the Popes law, and that as long as the Bishops maintaine it in England, they main∣taine the Pope in his soveraignty and Legislative power in Eng∣land, and that the reading of this Law makes men papists. Roderick ors,Rodericke Mors. sometimes a Gray Fryer, in his Complaint to the Parliament house of England, about the 37. yeare of King Henry the eight Chap. 23, 24. writes thus of our Prelates. No doubt one Bishop, one Deane, one Colledge, or House of Canons, hath ever done more mischiefe against Gods Word, and sought more the hinderance of the same, than tenne houses of Monkes, Fryers, Canons, or Nunnes. The Kings Grace began well to weed the Garden of England: but yet hath he lest stan∣ding (the more pitty) the most fowlest, and stinking weedes, which had most need to be first plucked up by the rootes, that is to say, the pricking thistles, and stinging nettles; which still standing, what helpeth the deposing of the petty members of
the Pope, and to leave his whole body behind, which are the pompous Bishops, Canons o Colledges, Deanes, and such o∣ther? Surely it helpeth as much as to say, I will goe kill all the Foxes in Saint Iohns wood, because I would have no more Foxes breed in England Which well pondered, wee may say and lye not, that the Pope remaineth wholly still in England, save onely that his name is banished. For why his body (which be Bishops and oher shavellings) doh not onely remaine, but also his tayle, which be his filhy Traditions, wicked Lawes, and beggerly ceremonies (as Saint Paul calleth them) yea and the whole body of his pestiferous Canon Law, according to which judgement is given throughout the Realme So that we be still in Egpt, and remain in capivity, most grievously laden by ob∣serving and walking in his most ilhy drosse aforesaid, which is a mistie and endlesse maze. And so long as yee walke in those wicked lawes of Antichrist the Pope, and maintaine his Knights the Bishops in such inordinate riches, and unlawfull authority: so long say I, Note well what nsueth. yee shall never bani that monstrous beast the Pope out of England yea and it shall be a meanes, in pro∣cesse of time to bring us into temporall bondage also againe, to have him raigne as he hat done, like a God, and that know our forked caps right well, which thing maketh hem so boldly, and shamelesly to right in their gods quarrell against Christ and his Word, &c. The Bishops by their subtiles, and most crafty wiles make the people to abhore the name of the Pope of Rome for a face, and compell them to walke in all his wicked lawes; and the Word of God which wee say we have received, is not, nor cannot be suffered to be preached a aught pure∣ly and sincerely, without mixing it with their invnted traditi∣ons and service. Wherefore to open the conclusion o this little lamentation: f ee will banish for ever the Antichrist, the Pope out of this Realme; yee must fell downe to the ground those rotten poasts the Bishops, which be clouds withou moy∣sture and utterly abandon all and every of his ungodly Lawes, traditions and ceremonies. Now will I speake no further a∣gainst the particular Pope, for as much as every Bishop is now a Pope, and yee may plainly see by all the premises, that the proud Prelates (the Bishops I meane) be very Antichrists, as is their Father of Rome. So he, and much more. Henry Stalbridg.Henry Stalbridge, in his Exhotatory Epistle to his deerly belo∣ved
Country of England, against the pompous Popish Bishops thereof, as yet the true members of their filthy Father the great Antichrist of Rome. Printed at Basill in King Henry the eighth his dayes, thus seconds him. I say yet once againe, and that in the seale of the Lord, as hee is my Judge, I wish (if his gracious pleasure so were) that first the Kings Majesty, and so forth all those to whom God hath given power and authority upon earth under him, may throughly see and perceive how that no onely the bloody Beare-Wolfe of Rome, but also the most part of the o∣ther Bishops, and stout sturdy Canons of Cathedrall Churches with other petty pronlers and prestigious Priests of Baal his malignant members, in all Realmes of Christendome (especial∣le here in England) doth yet roare abroad like hungry Lyons fre like angry Beares, and bite as they dare like cruell wolves, clustering together in corners, like a swarme of Adders in a dung∣hill, or most wily subtill serpents; to uphold and preserve their filthy Father of Rome, the head of their bawdy brood if it may be. No lesse do I iudge it, than a bounden duty of all faith∣full ministers to manifest their mischiefes to the universall world evey man according to his Talent given of God, some with pen, and some with tongue; so bringing them out of their old estimation, lest they should still raigne in the peoples conscien∣ces to their soules destruction: An evident example have they of Christ thus to do, which openly rebuked their filthy forefa∣thers, the Scribes, Lawyers, Phariees, Doctors, Priests, Bishops, and Hypocrites, for making Gods commandements of no effec to support their owne traditions. Mark 8. Luk. 12. Paul also admonisheth us, that after his departure should enter in among us such ravenuing wolves as should no spare the flocke. These spirituall manhunters are the very off-spring of Cain, children of Caiphas and successors of Simon Magus, as their doctrine nd living declareth, needing no frther probation: most cruell enemies have they beene in a lages to the verity of God, ever since the Law was first given, and most fierce persecutours of Christ and his Church (which hee there proves at large by se∣verall examples) No where could the verity be taught, but these glorious gluttons were ever at hand to resist it. Marvell not yee Bishop and Prelates, thugh I thus in the zeale of He∣lias and Pineas stomacke against your urdie stormes of stub∣bornenesse, for never was any tyranny ministred upon Christ
and his mysticall members, but by your procurements, and now in our dayes, where are any of the Lords true Servants burned, or otherwise murthered for true preaching, writing, glossing, or interpretting the Gospell, but it is by your cruell calling upon &c. If you be not most wicked workers against God and his verity, and most spitefull Traytors to the King, and his Realme, I cannot thinke there be any living upon the earth. Be this onely spoken to you that maintaine such mysteries of madnesse; never sent Christ such bloody Apostles, nor two hor∣ned warriours, but the Devils Vicar Antichrist, which is the deadly destroyer of faithfull Beleevers. What Christian blood hath been shed betweene Empire and Empire, Kingdome and Kingdome, as between Constantinople and Almaine, England and France, Italy and Spaine or the Bishops of Rome? and how many cruell watres of their Priests calling on, were too much either to write, or to speake: Alwayes have they beene working mischiefe in their idle Generation to obscure the veri∣ty of God. I say yet once againe, that it were very necessary for the Kings worthy Majestie with earnest eyes to marke how God hath gratiously vouchsaed to deliver both him and his people from your troublesome Termagaunt of Rome, which afore made all Christian Kings his common slaves, and to be∣ware of you hollow hearted Traytors, his spirituall promoters, considering that your proud predecessours have alwayes so wic∣kedly used his Graces noble Progenitors, the worthy Kings of this Realme, since the Conquest, and aore. Who overthrew King Herald, subduing all his land to the Normans? Who procured the death of King William Rufus, and caused King Stephen to be throwne in prison? Who troubled King Henry the First, and most cruelly vexed King Henry the second? Who subdued and poysoned Kings Iohn? Who murthered King Ed∣ward the second, and famished King Richard the second most unseemingly? Besides that hath been wrought against the other Kings also To him that shall read, and throughly marke the religious acts of Robert the Archbishop of Canterbury of old, Egelwinus, Anselmus, Randolfe of Durham, Ralfe of Chichester, Alexander of Lincolne, Nigelus of Ely, Roger of Salisbury, Tho∣mas Becket, Stephen Langhton, Walter Stapleton, Robert Baldocke, Richard Scrope, Henry Spencer, Thomas Arundell, and a great sort more of your anointed Antecessors, Pontificiall Prelates, mited mummers, mad mastry workers, ringed rulers, rocheted rut∣ters,
shorne sawcy swilbols, it will evidently appeare, that your wicked generation hath done all that, and many other mischiefes more. By these your filthy orefathers, and such oher, hath this Realme beene alwayes in most miserable captivity, either of the Romans or Danes, Saxons or Normans, and now last of all, under the most blasphemous Behemoth, your Romish Pop, the great Antichrist of Europe, and most mighty main∣tainer of Sodome and Gomorrah: How unchristianly your said Predecessors have used the Rulers of all other Christian Realms, it were too long to write. I reckon it therefore high time for all those Christian Princes, which pretend to receive the Gospell of salvation, and accordingly after that to live in mutuall peace and tranquillity, for ever to cast you out of their privy councels, and utterly to seclude you from all administrations, till such time as they find you no longer wolves, but faithfull feeders; no destroyers, but gentle teachers. For as Saint Peter doth say, 1 Pet. 5. Yee ought to be no Lords over the people of your Diocesse, but examples of Christian meeknesse. Who seeth not that in these daies your bloody Bishops of England, Italy, Cycell, France, Spaine, Portugall, Scotland, and Ireland,See the 5, & 6. part of the Hom. against wilfull rebellion. And the 2. part of th Homely on Whitsunday. be the ground and originall foundation of all controversies, schismes, variances & wars be∣twixt Realme and Realme at this present &c. Consider your be∣ginning never came yee in with your Miters, Robes, and Rings by the doore, as did the poore Apostles, but by the window unrequired, like Robbers, Theeves, and manquellers, with Si∣mon Magus, Marcion, and Menander, never was your proud Pon∣tificall power of the heavenly Fathers planting, and therefore it must at the last up by the rootes, yee must in the end be de∣stroyed without hands Dan. 8. &c. Ibid. fol. 18. & 22. to 31. I thinke he devils in hell are not of a more perverse mind, nor seek no more wayes to the soules destruction than you. Yee play Pharaoh, Caiphas, Nero, Trajanus, with all tyrants parts besides: Oh abominable scorners and theeves, which practise nothing else but the utter destruction of soules. If any thing under the Heavens hath need of Reformation, let them thinke this to be one which minded any godlinesse for never did cruell Pharaoh hold the people of Israel in so wicked captivity, as doth his superstitious sort idle Sodomites, the most deerly redeemed heritage of the Lord. If they be no spirituall theeves, soule murtherers, heretickes of and schismatickes Church-robbers, rebels, and traytors to God,
and to man, where are any to be looked for in all the world? Another thing yet there is, which causeth mee sore to lament, the inconveniences thereupon considered: And that is this, although the Scriptures, Chronicles, Canons, Constitutions, Councels, and private hystories, with your manifest acts in our time,Note. doth declare your Foreathers, and you such Heretickes, Theees, and Traytors to the Christian Commonwealth, as hath not beene upon the earth, but you, yet you are still taken into the privy councels both of Emperour and King. But what a plague it is, or miserable yoke to that Christian Realme, whereas yee beare the swinge, I thinke it truly un∣speakable, though it be not seene. O eternall Faher, for thy infinite mercie sake graunt thy most faithfull servant the Kings Majestie, our most worthy So∣veraigne Lord and Governour under thee, cleerly to cast out of his privie Counell House these echerous Locusts of Egypt, and daily upholders of Sodome and Gomorrah, the Popes cruell cattle, tokened with his owne proper marke, to the universall health of his people, as thou hast now constituted him an whole compleate King, and the first since the Conquest. For never shall hee have of them, but deceitfull workemen, and hollow hearted Gentlemen, and not onely that (good Lord) but also deprive them of their usurped authority and power, restoring againe hereunto his temporall Majestraes, whom their proud Pope hath hitherto most tyrannously thereof deprived. Finally, to take from them their inordinate pompe and See a supplica∣tion to King Henry the 8. An. 1544. ac∣cordingly. riches, and more godly to bestow them, that is to say, to the aide of his po∣vety, as for an example the noble the noble Germans have gra∣ciously done before him. After a farre other sort defended the Apostles, the spirituall Kingdome of Christ then they: their ar∣mour was righteousnesse, poverty, patience, meknesse, tribula∣tion, contempt of the world and continuall suffering of wrongs; their strong shield was faith; and their sword the Word o God, Eph. 6. Wih the Gospell preaching drove they down all super∣stitions, as you by your Lordlinesse have raised up againe in the glorious Church of Antichrist. The Kingdome that hee or∣looke Ioh. 6. and the Lordhip, that hee so straitly forbad you, Luke 22. have ou received of the devill, with that ambi∣tious raigne of covetousnesse which hee left behind him on the high Mountaine, Matth. 4. What ruinous decaes hath chan∣ced
to all Christian Region, and their Babylonish bood, it wee much to write It shall be therefore necessary for our most worh King to looke upon in time, and both to diminish you authority and riches, lest yee hereafter put all his godly enter∣pises in hazard. For nothing else can yee doe of your spiritu∣al naure, but worke daly mischiefe. As well may yee be spa∣red in the Commonwealth, as may Kites, Crowes, and Buz∣zards, Plats, Wesels, and Rats, Oters, Wolves, and Foxes, Bodilice, Fleas, and Fleshflies, with other devouring and noy∣some vermne; for a unprofitable are yee unto it as they, and as lile have yee in the word of God to uphold you in these vaine offices of Papistry as they. This uncommodious commodity hath Enland had of you alwayes, when yee have beene of the Kings privie Councell, and I thinke hath now at this pre∣sent hower, that whatsoever godly enterprize is there in doing, be hey never so privily handled, yet shall the Popish Prelates of Ialy, Spaine, France, Flanders, and Scotland have sure knowledgde thereof by your secret Messengers, and you againe their crafty compassings to deface it if may be. M. Tindals pra∣ctise of Prelates accordingly. Neither shall thse ealmes coninue long after without wae, specialy if an earnest reformation of your sainefull abuses be sought there, and never shall the originall grounds of that warre be known but other causes shall be laid to olour it with; as that the King seekes his rig, his Princely honour, the maintenance of his titles, or the Realmes Commonwealth, eg nothing lesse in the end, but an upholding of you in your mischiefes. So long as you beare rule in Parliament Hose, e Gospell shall be kept under, and Christ persecuted in his aithull members. So that no godly Acts shall come out from hene to the glory o God, and Christian Commonwealth, but you will so sawce them with your Romish Sorceries; that they be ready to serve your turne. Although the Kings Majestie hah pemitted us the Scriptures, yet must the true Ministers thereof at your most cruell appointment either suffer most tyrannous death, or else with open mouth deny Christs veriy, which is worse than death Thus give ye strength to his lawe, & nourish up his King∣dome, whom ye say with your lips yee have refused, your pesti∣lent Pope of Rome. Ye play altogether Hick-sone under the figure of Ironia. That yee say, yee hate, yee lov, and that yee say, yee love, yee hate. Late all faithfull men beware of such double
day dreamers, and hollow hearted Traytors, and thinke, where∣as they beare the rule, nothing shall come rightly forward ei∣ther in faith or Commonwealth. What other workes can come from the Devills working tooles than commeth from the hands of his owne malignant mischiefe? who can deny the Bishops to be the instruments of satan, understanding the Scrip∣tures, and beholding their daily doings? Thinke yee here can be a greater plague to a Christian Realme than to have such Ghostly Fathers of the Kings Privie councell? If wise men do judge it any other than a just plague for our sinnes, and a yoke laid upon us for our unreverent receiving of that heaven∣ly treasure, the eternall Testament of Christ, to have such hy∣pocrites, theeves, and traytors to raigne over us, truly they judge not aright. If wee would earnestly therefore repent of our former being, and unainedly turne to our everliving God, as wee find in the Testament, I would not doubt it, to jeo∣pard both my body and soule, that wee should in short space bee delivered of this Popish vermine rising out of this bottom∣lesse pit; Apoc. 9. which eateth up all that is greene upon earth, or hath taken any strength of the living word of the Lord: for the heart of a King is alwayes in the hands of God, and at  his pleasure hee may evermore turne it, Prov. 21. Take mee not here that I condemne any Bishop or Priest that is godly, doing those holy offices that the Scripture hath commanded them, as preaching the Gospell, providing for the poore, and ministring the Sacraments right; but against the bloody but∣chers, that murther up Gods People, ad daily make havocke of Christs congregation to maintaine the Jewes Ceremonies, and the Pagans Superstititions in the Christian Church. Those are not Bishops, but Bite-sheepes, Tyrants, Tormenters, Terma∣gaunts, and the Devils slaughter men. Christ left no such Disciples behind him to sit with cruell Caiphas at the Sessions upon life and death, of his innocent members, but such as in poverty preached the Gospell, rebuking the wicked world for Idolatry, hypocriie, and false doctrine. Episcopus is as much to say, as an overseer, or Superintendent, whose office was in the Primitive Church, purely to instruct the multitude in the wayes of God, and to see that they were not beastly ignorant in the holy Scripture, as the most part of them are now adayes. Presbyter is as much to say, as a Senior or Elder, whose office
was also in godly Doctrine and examples of living to guide the Christian Congregation, and to suffer no manner of superstition of Jew nor Gentile to raigne among them. And these two offices were alone in those dayes, and commonly executed of one severall person. They which were thus appointed to these spirituall offices did Buceus de Regn Christi, l. 2. c. 12. nothing else but preach and teach the Gospell, having assistants unto them, inferiour officers cal∣led Deacons, Act. 6. 1 Cor. 1. Rom. 3. No godly man can de∣spise these offices, neither yet condemne those that truly exe∣cute them: not onely are they worthy to have a competent li∣ving, 1 Cor. 9. but also double honour after the doctrine of Saint Paul, 1 Tim. 5. Note. See the Supplication to King Henry the eight. An. 1544. But from inordinate excesse of riches, ought they of all men to be sequestred, considering that the most wicked nature of Mammon is alwayes to corrupt, yea the very Elect, if God were not the more mercifull, Matth. 6. which might be an admonition to our Lordly Bishops when they be in their worldly pompe, that they are not Gods servants belee∣ved they his sayings, as they do nothing lesse. Master Fish in his Supplication of Beggers,Mr FISH. thus complaines to King Henry the Eight of the inconveniency of the Prelates greatnesse and sway,Fox Acts and Monum. p. 926.927. both to himselfe, and his subjects, worthy his Majesties most serious consideration; Oh the grievous ship∣wacke of the Common-wealth, which in ancient time before the comming of these ravenous wolves, were so prosperous, &c. What remedy? Make Lawes against them? I am in doubt whe∣ther yee be able. Are they not stronger in your owne Parlia∣ment house than your selfe, what a number of Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, are Lords of your Parliament?The fruits of Prelates great∣nesse sitting in Parliament. Are not all the lear∣ned men of your Realme in see with them, to speake in the Parliament house for them, against your Crowne, dignity and Common-wealth of your Realme, a few of your owne learned Counsell onely excepted? What Law can be made against them that they may be availeable? Who is hee (though hee be grieved never so sore) that for the murther of his ancester, ravishment of his wife, of his daughter, robbery, trespasse, maihme, debt, or any other offence, dare lay it to their charge by way of Action? and if hee doe, then is he by and by, by their Now they bring such into the High Com∣mission, & there ruine them, or force them to give over their actions wilinesse accused of heresie, yea they will so handle him ere hee passe, that except he will beare a faggot at their pleasure, he shall be excommunicated, and then be all his
Actions dashed. So captive are your Lawes unto them, that no man whom they list to excommunicate may be admitted to sue any action in any of your Courts. If any man in your Sessi∣ons dare be so hardy to indite a Priest of any such crime, hee hath ere the yeare goe about such a yoake of heresie layd in his necke, that it makth him wish he had not done it. Your Grace may see what a worke there is in London, how the Bshop rageth for indiing certaine Curates of extortion, and incontinency the last yeare in the Ward-mote Quest. Had not Richard Hunne Commenced action of Premunire against a Priest, hee had yet beene alive and no hereticke a all, but an honest man.Note the danger that accrews by making Clergy∣men chiefe Tem∣porall officers. And his is by reason that the chiefe instrument of your Law, yea the chiefe of your Counsell, and hee which hath your sword in his hand, to whom also all the other instruments are obedient, is alwaies a spirituall man, which hath ever such an inordinate love unto his owne kingdome, that hee will maintaine that, though all the temporall Kingdomes and Common-wealths of the world should therefore utterly be undone: After which he swes the intolerable exactins of the Prelates on the people, and how much wealth and money they extort from their po∣strity. You have heard now the opinion of our Martyrs, Prelates, and godly Writers touching Episcopacie, Lordly Prelates, their trayterly practises, Tmporalties, and perniciousnesse to our Church and State both before and in K. Henry the eighth his raigne, in the very inancie of reformation, many then desiring and earnestly writing for their utter exterpation, as most perni∣cious instruments of mischiefe both to King, Church and Kingdome: I shall now proceed to give you some briefe account, what hath beene hough of these particulars by our Writers, and Martyrs in King Edward the sixth, Queene Maries, and Queene Elizabeths subsequent raignes. MARTYN BUCER.Learned Martyn Bucer, Professor of Divinity in the Universi∣ty o Cambridge, in King Edward the sixth his raigne in his booke Lib. 2. c. 1.2.12. In his Scripoa Anglicana Basi∣lea. 1577. p. 65.69.70.71.580. De Regno Christi (dedicated to this King) and Devi & usu sancti Ministerii, determines thus of Lordly Prelates, and their tem∣porall offices: First, I doubt not, Most noble King, that your Majesty discernes, that this reformation of Christs Kingdome which wee require, yea which the salvation o us all requires, Ab Episcopis nullo modo expectandum, is by no meanes to be ex∣spected
from the Bishops, since there are so few among them (even in this Kings raigne when they were best, which is worthy no∣ting) which do clearly know the power of this Kingdome, and the proper offices thereof; yea, most of them by all meanes they may and dare, do either oppugne it, deferre or hinder it: and thereupon hee adviseth the King not to make use of Do∣ctors Bishops, who had the greatest Titles, and largest revenues in this reformation, but of other godly Ministers, and Lay-men, wherein the knowledge and zeale of God did most abound; & to choose them for his Counsellours in this great worke who b knew the power of Christ Kingdome, and desired with all their hearts that it might prevaile and raign first in themselves, & then in all others. And because (writes he) it is the duty of Bi∣shop to govern the Churches, not by their owne sole pleasure, but with he counsell of Presbiters, and Ministry of Dea∣cons, there will be a nececessity, as al the offices of Churches are now dissipated, and perverted, to adjoyne to every one of the Bishops, though never so approved, a councell of Presby∣ters, and ministry of Deacons, who also ought to be most holi∣ly examined and tryed, whether they have received of the Lord, both ability and will to be assistant to their Bishop in the administration and procuration of the Churches: the Presby∣ters in councell, and assistance, the Deacons in observance, and ministration, &c. But now there are some of the Bishops, whose service your sacred Majesty useth in the administration of the Kingdome. But sith nothing in this world is commended to the care of men by the most high; which ought more solici∣tously & religiously to be looked to and managed, then the pro∣curation of religion, that is, of the eternall salvation o the elect of God; summum est nefas, it is the highest impiety to preferre any other Businesse before this care, or for any cause whatsoever to hinder them, so as their ministeries be lesse ully adhibited to their Churches. Moses was most amply endued with the spirit of God, and excelled with incredible wisedome, and he altoge∣ther burned with a most ardent study of planting and preserving the true religion; yet seeing hee ought to governe the whole Common-wealth of Irael, hee by Gods command set Aaron his brother with his sonnes over matters of religion, that they might WHOLY bestow themselves in them. The Maccabees truly joyned the Civill administration to the Ecclesiasti∣call,
but with what successe their histories testifie, wherefore it is to be wished that Bishops according to Gods Law, religionibu solis vacent procurandis, should onely addict themselves to mat∣ters of Religion, and lay aside all other businesses from them, though beneficiall to mankind, and leave them to those who should wholly bestow themselves on them, being chosen thereto by God. There is no office that requires more study and care han the procuration of soules. It is the Divell then, not God that calls Bi∣shops to be Cour∣tiers and tempo∣rall officers. Satan knowing this very well, hath brought to passe, that Bishops and chiefe Ecclesiasticall Prelates should be sent for by Kings & Emperours unto their Courts to manage publike affaires, both of warre and pece. Hence these mischiefes have ensued; first, a neglect of the whole sacred ministry, the corruption of doctrine, the destruction of discipline. After as soone as Prelates began to usurpe the place of Lords, they challenged their luxury & pomp to themselves to which end since the wealth of Princs was requisite, that which they ought to bestow out of their Ecclesiasticall revenues, upon the faithfull Ministers of Churches, upon Schooles, upon the poore of Christ, all these things being taken from them by hor∣rible sacriledge, they spent them upon riot, and princely pompe. And when as the goods of the Church were not sufficient to maintaine this luxury and pompe, they flattered away, and beg∣ged, and by various frauds tooke from Kings goodly rich posessions, and great Lordships:How Prelates came by their great Lordly possessions. by which accessions their luxury and pride was thenceforth not onely fostered and su∣stained, but likewise infinitely increased: which afterwards so farre prevailed, that the spoyles of single Churches would not suffice each of them, but they brought the matter to this passe, that one at this day may fleece or spoyle three or foure Bishop∣rickes, Abbies, and other Prelacies, and such a multitude of pa∣rish Churches as is horrible to name; for they say there is one lately dead in this Kingdome who fleaed above 20. Parishes. So Bucer,See his Scripta Anglicana. pag. 254.255.259.291, 292, 293. and Comment. in Matth. 16. And he unbishoping of Timothy and Titus. p. 106, 107, 108. who held Bishops & Ministers to be all one, and that the power of ordination (resting originally in Christ, derivatively in the whole Church, and ministerially onely in Bishops, and Presbyters as servants to the Church) belonged as well to Pres∣byters as to Bishops; with whom Peter Martyr his fellow Re∣gius professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford fully con∣cures, in his Commonplaces, printed at London cum privilegio: Ann. 1576. Class. 4. Loc. 1. Sect. 23. p. 849. to which I shall re∣ferre you for brevity sake.
To these I might adde; The image of both Pastors, written by Huldricke Zwinglius,Zwinglius. translated into English by Iohn Veron, de∣dicated to the Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector, and Printed at London, Cum privilegio, An. 1550. Wherein he proves the parity and identity of Bishops and Presbyters: condemnes the Lordly and seclar dominion, Wealth, Pompe, Pride, Tyranny, Nonpreach, and rare preaching of Prelates; and manifests Lord Bishops, as then they stood (and now) to be false Pastors, and meer papall and antichristian officers, not warranted by Gods word; but because Zwinglius was a forraigner, I shall passe it by without transcribing any passage thereof. Mr. Iohn Hooper,Bishop Hooper. both a Bishop, and martyr of our Church, a great Fox vol. 3. pag. 46.137. opposer of Ceremonies, Episcopall Rochets, and Vestments in which hee would not b consecrated,Upon the 8. Commandement p. 78. writes thus of the secular imployments, wealth, and calling of Bishops. For the space of 400. yeares after Christ, the Bishops applyed all their wit on∣ly to their owne vocation, to the glory of God, and the honour of the Realmes they dwelt in: though they had not so much upon their heads as our Bishops have, yet had they more within their heads, as the Scripture and Histories testifie. For they ap∣plyed all the wit they had unto the vocation, and ministry of the Church, whereunto they were called. But our Bishops have so much wit that they can rule and serve (as they say) in both States, in the Church, and also in the Civill policie, when one of them is more then any man is able to satisfie, let him doe al∣wayes his best diligence. If hee be so necessary for the Court, that in Civill causes he cannot be spared, let him use that vo∣cation, and spare the other: It is not possible hee should doe both well. See Rucerus d rgn Christi, l. 2. c. 12. It is a great oversight in Princes thus to charge them with two burthens: the Primitive Church had no such Bishops as wee, they had such Bishops, as did preach many godly Sermons in lesse time, than our Bishops horses be a bridling. Their house was a Schoole, or treasure house of Gods Ministers, if it be so now let every man judge. The Magistrates that suffer the abuse of these goods be culpable of the ault; if the fourth part of the Bishopricke remained to the Bishop, it were sufficient; the third part to Schoolemasters:Note. the second to poore, and souldiers were better bestowed; If any be offended with me for this my saying, he loveth not his owne soules health nor Gods Laws, nor mans; out of which I am alwayes ready to
prove the thing I have said to be true. Further, I speake of love, not of hatred. And in his Apologie hee saith, It is both against Gods Laws & mans, that Bishops and clergie men should be judges over any subjects within this Realme, for it is no part of their office, they can do no more but preach Gods Word, and minister Gods Sacraments, and excommunicate such as God Lawes do pronounce to be excommunicated; who would put a sword into a madmans hand? And in his exposition on Psal. 23.1580. f. 40. Although Bishops (saith hee) in the raigne of Constantine the Great obtained, that among Bishops some should be called Archbishops, and Metropolitans, &c. Yet this prehemi∣nencie was at the pleasure & discretion of Princes, & not alwaies tyed to one sor of Prelates, as the impiety of our time belee∣veth, as we may see in the Councell of Calcedon & Africke. So that it is manifest, that this Superior preheminency is not of Divine, but of humane right, instituted out of civill policie. So Hooper. The Booke of ordination of Ministers,The Booke of Ordination. and Consecraation of Bi∣shops, compiled by the Bishops in King Edwards dayes, ratified by 3 Edw 6. c. 12.8. Eliz. c. 1. two Acts of Parliament, and subscribed to by all our Canon. 36. Mini∣sters, hath this notable passage, and charge against the Lordli∣nesse, and secular imployments of Prelates and Ministers, pre∣scribing all Bishops, when they ordaine Ministers, Archbishops, or Bishops, to use this exhortation to them. Have alwayes prin∣ted in your remembrance, how great a treasure is committed to your charge, for they be the sheepe of Christ which hee bought with his death, and for whom he shed his blood the Church and Congregation, whom you must serve, is his spouse and body; And if it shall chance the same Church, or any member thereof to take any hurt or hinderance by reason of your negligence, yee know the greatnesse of the fault, and also of the horrible punish∣ment which will ensue. Whereore consider with your selves the end of your Ministry towards the children of God, towards the spouse and body of Christ; and see that you never cease your labour, your care, and diligence, untill you have done all that lyeth in you, according to your bounden duty to bring all such as are or shall be committed to your charge, unto hat ripenesse or perfectnesse of age in Christ, that there be no place left among them either for errour in religion, or for vitiousnesse of life. (And what Prelate or Minister hath done this?) And for this selfe same cause, yee see how yee ought to forsake, and se
aside (as much as you may) all worldly cares and studies. Wee have good hope, that you have well weighed, and pondered these things with your selves long before this time, and that you have cleerly determined by Gods grace to give your selves whol∣ly to this vocation, whereunto it hath pleased God to call you; see hat (as much as lyeth in you) you apply your selves wholy to this one thing, and draw all your care and study this way, & to this end; And that you will continually pray for the heaven∣ly assistance of the Holy Ghost, that by daily reading and weigh∣ing of the Scriptures, you may so waxe riper, and stronger in your Ministry. And hat this your promise shall more move you to doe your dties, yee shall answer plainly to these things which we in the name of the Congregation shall demand of you touching the same. Will you give your faithfull diligence alwayes to inister the Doctrine and Sacraments,The Bishop. and the Discipline of Christ, as the Lord hath commanded, and as this Realme hath received the same, according to the Commandements of God; so that yo may teach the people committed to your cure and charge, with all diligence to keepe, and observe the same? I will so doe by the helpe of God.Answer. Will you be diligent in Prayers,The Bishop. and in reading of the holy Scriptures, and in such studies as helpe to the knowledge of the same, laying aside the study of the World, and the Flesh? I will endeavour my selfe so to doe,Answer. the Lord being my hel∣per. And at the consecration of every Archbishop and Bishop, this charge by the direction of the said booke is given to him. Bee thou to thy flocke a sheepheard, not a wolfe; feed them, but devoure them not. And it is worthy observation, that the same Chapters and Epistles are read at the ordination of Ministers, and consecration of Bishops; which proves their office and function both one and the same by divine institution. The third part of the Homily, of the perill of Idolatry, ratified by the 35. Article of our Church; subscribed unto by all our Prelates and Ministers,The Booke of Homilies. published in King Edward he 6. his dayes, and reprinted by King Iames his speciall command. deter∣mines thus against the Courtship, and secular imployment of Prelates. That Bishops in the Primitive Church did most diligently, and sincerely teach and preach, for they were then preaching Bishops, and more often seene in Pulpits than in Princes Palaces; more often
occupied in his Legacie, who said, Goe yee unto the whole world and preach the Gospell unto all men; than in Ambassages and af∣faires of Princes of this world. And in the 5. and 6. part of the Homily against wilfull rebellion, and the second part of the Ho∣mily for Whitsunday, notably paints forth at large the treasons, conspiracies, practises, aud rebellions of Popes, and our Pre∣lates against the Emperours and our Kings in former ages, which hee that will may there read at his leasure, being too common and large to recite. Father LatimerM. Hugh Latimer (who gave over his Bishopricke out of con∣science, in K. Heny the 8. his raigne, and never resumed it againe; skipping for joy, he was rid of that heavie burthen,) In his in his Sermons, f. 17, 18, &c. Sermon of the Plough preached thus, God saith by the Pro∣phet Ieremy, Maledictus qui facit opus Dei fraudulenter, guilefully, and deceitfully: some bookes have, negligenter, negligently, or slackly. How many such Prelates, how many such Bishops (Lord for thy mercy) are there now in England? And what shall wee in this case do? shall wee company with them? O Lord, for thy mercy shall we not company with them? O Lord, whither shall wee flee from them? But cursed be hee that doth the worke of the Lord negligently or guilefully: A sore word for them that are negligent in discharging their office ill; Yee that be Prelates looke well to your office: for right Prelating is busie labouring, and not Lording, therefore preach and teach, and let your plough be doing. Ye Lords (I say) that live like loy∣terers, looke well to your office, the Plough is your office and charge; if yee live idle, and loyter, you doe not your duty, &c. They have to say for themselves long customes, ceremonies, and authority, placing in Parliament, & many things more And I fear mee this Land is not ripe to be ploughed, for as the saying is, it lacketh withering. This Land lacketh withering, at least it is not for mee to plough. For what shall I looke for among thornes, but pricking and scratching? What among stones, but stumbling?Note this. what (I had almost said) among Scorpions, but stinging? But thus much I dare say, that since Lording, and loy∣tering hath come up, preaching hath gone downe, contrary to the Apostles times; for they preached and Lorded not, and now they Lord and preach not; for they that bee Lords will ill goe to the Plough, it is no meete ofice to them, it is not see∣ming for their estate: Thus came up Lording loyterers: thus
crept up unpreaching Pelates: for how many unlearned Pre∣lates have wee now at this day? And no marvell, for if the ploughmen that now be, were made Lords, they would cleane give over ploughing,Note this wel. they would leave their labour and fall to Lording outright, and let the plough stand; & then both ploughs not walking, nothing should be in the Common-wealth but hunger: For ever since the Prelates were made Lords and No∣bles, their plough standeth, there is no worke done, the people starve: they hawke, they hunt, they card, they dice, they pa∣stime in their Prelacies with gallant Gentlemen, with their dauncing Minions, and with their fresh companions, so that ploughing is set aside, and by their Lording, and loytering, preaching and ploughing is cleane gone. And thus if the plough∣men in the Country were as negligent in their office, as Pre∣lates be, wee should not long live for lacke of sustenance. And as it is necesary to have this ploughing for the sustentaion of the body, so must wee have also the other for the atisfaction of the soule, or else we cannot live long ghostly: for as the body wasteth and consumeth away for lacke of bodily meate, so doth the soule pine away for want of ghostly meate; And as diligent∣ly as the Husband man plougheth for the sustentation of the Body, so diligently must the Prelates and Ministers labour for the feeding of the soule: Both the Ploughs must still be going, as most necessary for man: they have great labours and therefore they ought to have good livings, that they may commodiously feed their flocke; for the preaching of the Word of God is called meate: Scripture calleth it meate, not strawburies that come but once a yeare: and tarry not long, but are soone gone: but it is meate, it is no dainties: the people must have meate that must be familiar, and continuall and daily given unto them to feed on, &c. And wherefore are Magistrates ordained, but that the tranquillity of the Common-wealth may be confir∣med, limiting both Ploughes? But now for the fault of unprea∣ching Prelates, mee thinkes I could guesse what might be said for excusing of them: they are so troubled with Lordly living; they be so placed in Palaces, couched in Courts, ruffling in their rents, dauncing in their Dominions, burthened with Em∣bassages, pampering of their paunches like a Monke that ma∣keth his Iubilee, mounching in their maungers, and moyling in their gay Mannors and Mansions, and so troubled with loyte∣ring
in their Lordships, that they cannot attend it: they are o∣thewise occupied, some in Kings matters, some are Em∣bassadours, some of the Privie Counsell, some furnish the Court, some are Fathr Laymer would not have Bishops Lords of the Parliament, or to sit therein. Lords of Parliament, some aree Presi∣dents, and controllers of Mints. Well, well, Is this their duty? is this their calling? is this a meere office for a Priest, to be controllers of Mints? is this a meete office for a Priest that hath cure of soules? is this his charge? I would here aske a question, Who controlleth the Divell at home at his Parish whiles hee controlleth the Mint? If the Apostles might not leave the office of preaching to be Deacons, shall one leave it for minting? I cannot tell you; the saying is, that since Priests have beene Minters, money hath beene worse than it was before. And they say, that the evilnesse of money hath made all things deere. And in this behalfe I must speake to England: Heare my Country England, as Saint Paul said in 1 Cor. 6. (for Paul was no sitting Bishop, but a wal∣king and a preaching Bishop) Is there (saith hee) utterly a∣mong you, no wise man to be an arbitrator in matters of judgement? What? not one of all that can judge betweene brother and brother, but one brother goeth to Law with another, and that under Heathen Iudges Appoint those judges that are most abject and vile in the Congregation Which hee speaketh in rebuking them, or saith hee, ad eube∣scentiam vestram dico; I speake it to your shame. So England I speake it to thy shame, is there never a Nobleman to be a Lord President, but it must be a Prelate? Is there never a wise man in the Realm to be a Controller of the Mint? I speake it to your shame, I speake it to your shame: If there be never a wise man, make a water-bearer, a tinker, a cobler, a slave, a page controller of the Mint: Make a meane Gentleman, a Groome, a Yeoman, make a poore Begger Lord President. Thus I speake, not that I would have it so; but to your shame. Is there never a Gentleman meete nor able to be Lord President? For why are no the Noble men, and young Gentlemen of England so brought up in the knowledge of God, and in learning, that they be able to execute offices in the Common-wealth? the King hath a great many Wards,Note this. and I heare there is a Court of Wards; Why is there not a Schoole of Wards, as well as there is a Court for their Lands? Why are they not set to the Schooles where they may learne? or why are they not sent to Universities,
that they may be able to serve the King when they come to age? The onely cause why Noble men be not made Lord Presidents is, because they have not beene brought up in learning, yet there be already Noblemen enough, though not so many as I could wish, able to be Lord Presidents; and wise men enough for the Mint: and as unmeet a thing it is for Bishops to be Lord Presidents, or Priests to be minters, as it was for the Corinthians to plead matters of variance before heahen Judges: It is also a slaunder to the Noblemen, as though they lacked wisedome, and learning to be able for such offices: A prelate hath a charge and cure otherwise, and therefore he cannot discharge his duty and be a Lord President too, for a Presidentship requireth a whole man, and a Bishop cannot be two men; A Bishoop hath his office; a flocke to teach, to looke unto, and therefore he can∣ot meddle with another office which requireth an whole man hee should therefore give it over to whom it is meete, and la∣bour in his owne businesse, as Paul writeth to the Thessalonians, Let every man doe his owne businesse, and follow his calling: Let the Priest preach, and the Noblemen handle Temporall matters. Well, I would all men would looke to their duty as God hath called them, and then wee should have a flourishing Christian Commonweale, &c. You may read all the Sermon to this pur∣pose. In the close whereof he proves the devill to be the best Bishop in England, because hee alwaies followes his plough night and day, is never a Non-resident: and manifests our Bi∣shops, even in King Edward dayes when they were best, to be as bad or worse than the Devill, and chargeth the King in many of his Sermons to out with them, and make them all Quon∣dam. In his fift Sermon before King Edward, f. 61, 62. he thus prosecutes the same argument. Though, I say, that I would wish more Lord Presidents, I meane not, that I would have Prelates Lord Presidents, no that Lord Bishops should be Lord Presidents. As touching that, I said my mind and consience the last yeare. And although it is said, Praesint, it is not meant that they should be Lord Presidents, the office of a Presidenthip is a Civill office, and it cannot be that one man shall discharge both well, &c. In his Sermon at Stanford. p. 96. Christ was not the Emperours Treasurer, therefore he meddled not with that point, but left it to the Treasurer to define and determine. Hee went
about another vocation to preach unto the people their duty, and to obey their Princes, Kings, Emperours, and Magistrates, and to bid them give that the King requireth of them, not to ap∣point a King, what hee shall require of them. It is meete for every man to keepe his owne vocation, and diligently walke in it, and with faithfulnesse to study to be occupied in that God hath called him unto, and not to be busie in that God hath not called him unto, &c. In his Sermon on S. Iohn Evangelists day. f. 284. But it is a thing to be lamented that the Prelates and other spirituall persons will not attend upon their Offices, they will not be amongst their flockes, but rather will run hither, and thither, here, and there, where they are not called, and in the meane season leave them at adventure of whom they take their living; yea and further∣more, some will rather be Clerkes of Kitchins, or take other offices upon them, besides that which they have already: but with what con∣science these same doe so I cannot tell,The Spirituall Pastors have a great charge. I feare they shall not be able to make answee at the last day for their follies, as concerning that mat∣ter: for this office is such a heavie and mighty office that it requireth a whole man, yea and let every Curate or Parson keepe his Cure to wich God hath appointed him, and let him doe the est that he can, yet I tell you he cannot chuse but the Devill will have some, for he sleepeth not, he goeth about day & night to seek whom he may devoure. Therfor it is neede for every Godly Minister, to abide by his sheepe, seeing that the Wolfe is so neere, and to keepe them, and witstand the Wolfe. In∣deed there be some ministers here in England which doe no good at al, and therefore it were better for them to leave their benefices, and give roome unto others. Finally, in his Sermon Preached before the Convo∣cation Iune 9. in the 28. of Henry 8. he thus speaketh to the Cler∣gie of England,In his Sermons fol. 10.11. and Lordly Prelates touching the utilitie of their Councels and assemblies for the Churches good: The end of your Convocation shall shew what ye have done, the fruite that shall come of your consultation, shal shew what generation ye be of. For what have ye done hitherto I pray you these 7. yeares & more? What have ye engendred? What have yee brought orth? What fruite is come of your long and great assembly? what one thing that the people of England hath beene the bet∣ter of an haire? Or you your selves, either accepted before God, or better discharged toward the people, committed unto your cure? Or that the people is better learned and taught now, then they were in time past, to whether of these ought
we to attribute it, to your industry, or to the providence of God, and the foreseeing of the Kings Grace? Ought we to thanke you, or the Kings highnesse? whether stirred other first, you the King that ye might preach, or he you by his Letters, that ye should preach oftner? Is it unknowne thinke you, how both ye and your Curates were in manner by violence enforced to let bookes to be made not by you, but by prophane and lay persons, to let them I say, be sold abroad and read for the in∣struction of the people? I am bold with you, but I speake La∣tine and not English to the Clergie, no to the Laity: I speake to you being preent and not behind your backes. God is my witnesse, I speake whatsoever is spoken of the good will that I beare you, God is my witnesse which knoweth my heart, and compelleh me to say, that I say. Now I pray you in God his name what did you, so great Fathers, so many, so long a season, so oft assembled together? what went you about? what would ye have brought to passe? two things taken away, the one, that ye (which I heard) burned a dead man: the other, that ye (which I let) went about to burne one being alive. Him because he did, I cannot tell how, in his Testament withstand your profit, in other points, as I have heard, a very good man reported to e of an honest life, while he lived, full of good workes, both good to the Clergie, and also to the Laity; this other, which truely never hurt any of you, ye would have aked in the Coales, because he would not subsribe to ceraine Articles, that tooke away the Supremacie of the King. Take away these two Noble Acts, and there is nothing else left, that ye went about, that I know, saving that I now remember, that somewhat ye attempted against Erasmus, albeit as yet nothing is come to light. Ye have oft sit in consultation, but what have ye done? ye have had many things in deliberation, but what one put forth, whereby either Christ is more glorified, or else Christs people made more holy? I appeale to your owne conscience. How chanceth this? How came this thus? Because there were no Children of light, no Children of God among you, which setting the world at nought, would studie to illustrate the glory of God, and thereby shew themselves Children of light. So this godly Martyr, who hath sundry such like passage in his Sermons. In the Conference,Dr. Harpesfield & Iohn Bradford. Fox Acts & Monu∣ments v. 3. p. 293. Anno. 1555. betweene our Religious Martyr Iohn Bradford and Doctor Harpesfield Arch Deacon of
London. Master Bradford complaines, that the Pillars of the Church were persecuters of the Church, and tells him you shall no nde in all the Scripture this your essentiall part of succession of Bi∣shops: whereupon Harpesfield sayd, Tell me, were not the Apostles Bishops? To which Bradford replyed: No, except you will make a new definition of a Bishop, that is, give him no certaine place. Harpesfield, Indeede the Apostles Office, was not the Bishops office: for it was universall, but yet Christ instituted Bishops in his Church as Paul saith: he hath given Pastors, Prophets, &c. So that I trow it be proved by the Scriptures the succession of Bishops to be an essentiall point. Brad. The Ministry of Gods Word and Ministers be an essentiall point. But to translate this to the Bishops and their succession is a plaine subtilty. And therefore, that it may be plaine I will aske you a question; Tell me, WHETHER THAT THE SCRIPTVRE KNEW ANY DIFFERENCE BETWEENE BISHOPS AND MINISTERS, which ye called Priests? Harps. No. (So that by the joynt confession of Papists and Pro∣testants in Queene Maries time Bishops and Ministers by the Scripture are both one.) Brad. Well, then goe on forwards, and let us see what ye shall get now by the succession of Bishops, that is of Ministers, which can be understood of such Bishops as minister not, but Lord it.Edmund Alln. Lord Bishops than are none of Christs institution, nor of the Apostles succession. Master Fox his Acts and Monuments of our Martyrs Lond. 1610. p. 1796. I finde this Dialogue betweene Dr. Iohn Baker, Collins his Chaplaine, and Edmund Allin a Martyr. Baker, I heard say, that you spake against Priests and Bishops. Allin, I speake for them, for now they have so much living and especially Bishops, Arch-deacons, and Deanes, that they neither can nor will teach Gods Word. If they had a hundred pounds a peece,This is the pre∣sent objection for the continu∣ance of Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters. then would they apply their stu∣dy, now they cannot for other affaires. Collins, who will then set his children to schoole? Allin, Where there is now one set to schoole for that end, there would be 40. because that one Bishops living divi∣ded into 30. or 40, parts, would finde so many as well learned men as the Bishops be now, who have all this living; neithe had Peter nor Paul any such revenue.Not. Baker, Let us dispatch him, he will mar all. Collins, If every man had a hundred pounds, as he saith, it would make more learned men. Baker, But our Bishops would be an∣gry if that they knew it. Allin. It were for a Commonwealth to have such Bishoprickes divided, for the further increase of learning. Infinite are the declamations and complaints of our godly
Martyrs in Queene Maries and King Henry he 8. his raigne a∣gainst the Antichristian calling, Wealth, Temporalties, Tyranny, Pride, Pompe, Lordlinesse, and secular imployments of our Prelates which because they are ordinary, and every man may reade them in Master Fx his Acts and Monuments, I shall therefore passe them by in silence, and procede to some other Authorities. Our learned Ion BaleIOHN BALE. determins thus of our Lordly Bishops.His Image of both Churches on. Apoc. 19. & 20. part. 3. f. 195.208. The Bishops compasse every where about with tyran∣ny and malice possible, the holds, the dwelling houses and pla∣ces of resort petaining to the aithull brethren: they vexe their bodies on every side with rebukes, scones, blasphemies, lyes, scourgings, imprisonments, open shames of the world, and all manner of kindes of death: seldome escape any from the terrible hands of the Prelates and Priests, that sincerely avour the truth: every where have they their spies, their Judasses, their false accusers, their Sommoners, their Bayliffes, and their pick-thankes, with oher Officers to bring thm in. In all pla∣ces are they diligently watched, fiercely examined when they are taken, and cruelly enforced to accuse so many as they know of that beleefe. Every where have they spirituall prisons and Bishops Dungeons, with plenty of ropes, stockes, and irons, and as little charity else as the Devill hath in hell. This hath beene their order from the time of Satans Liberty, and this have they taken for an high point of Christian Religion. For this is the houre that Christ prophecied of, wherein men should thinke to doe God great service when they put one of his unto death. None other caused Herod and Pilate to put Christ to death, but Anns & Caiaphas. None other moved Felix the President of Iu∣ry to imprison Paul, but the puffed up Prelate Ananias. Trajanus the Emperour would never so extreamely have persecuted the Christian Church, nor yet oher cruell tyrants ever since, had they not beene propped forward by such pampred Palfryes of the Devill, the beastly Bishops. Whose calling and trayterly Practises he much declaimes against both there, and in his Cen∣turies, to which I shall referre you. Matthew arer Archbishop of Canterbury in the life of Hu∣bert his predecessor,MATTHEW PARKER. writes thus of Bishops intermedling with secular offices and affaires:Antiquit. Ecl. Brit. p. 139.140.141.142.143. that about the yeare of our Lord 197. there was nothing ound and sincere in the Christian republike, that the whole Clergie under a feigned and counter∣feit
shew of Religion, did wallow without punishment in wic∣kednesse, in bribes, in honours and rapinesse, neglecting utterly the preaching of Gods Word. The Originall (saith he) of this evill sprung from this, that the Clergie did too much intermed∣dle with worldly affaires, contrary to the Decrees of the Or∣thodox Fathers. For at that time the Deane of Pauls was made Lord Treasurer; who carrying that Office, quickly hourded up a great treasure; at last falling into a deadly disease past recove∣ry, he was exhorted by the Bishops and great men to receive the Sacrament of Christs body and blood, which he trembling at refused to doe: whereupon the King admonished and com∣manded him to doe it,A strange evill death of a Cler∣gie Lord Trea∣surer, who like Iudas Christs Treasurer and bag-bearer dyed in despaire. he promised him thereupon to doe it the next day: being admonished to make his Will, he commanded all to voyd the roome but one Scribe. Who beginning to write his Will in the accustomed forme; In the Name of the Father, of the Sonne, &c. The Deane perceiving it, commanded him in a rage to blot it out, and these words onely to be written; Lego omnia bona ma Domin Regi, corpus sepultur, Animm Diabo∣lo. Qu dict ex∣piravit, &c. I be∣queath all my goods to my Lord the King, my body to the grave, and my soule to the Devill; which being uttered, he gave up the Ghost. The king hereupon commanded his carcasse to be car∣ried in a cart, and drowned in the River. This kinde of exam∣ples (writes he) are therefore to be produced, that Clergie men may be deerred from being Lord Treasurers,Note. Collectors of the kings customes, and from civill and publicke imployments. In Huberts time all secular offices almost were in Clergie mens hands, for some of them were Chauncellours, some Justices, some Treasurers of the kingdome, others had other Ofices in all the kings Courts and Pluralities of many great livings be∣sides: which wealth, honours, offices, and dignities, as it made them like to kings in State and magnificence, so it puffed them up with such pride and arrogance, that in the 36. yeare of king Henry the third, they were removed from all Civill Offices and honours, at the instant request and desire of the greatest Noblemen to whom the same Offices were committed. Hence some of all orders in our present times have most See Nicholas de Clemangiis, De Corrupto Ecclesia statu. c. 17.18.19. an excellent Discourse a∣gainst Bishops intermedling in temporall af∣faires, and bea∣ring civill of∣ces. sharpely re∣prehended the Clergie for this very thing, that being advanced to the degree of Divinity, than which nothing in humane life ought to be deemed more holy, they should bee hindred there-from with secular businesses, as with servile workes, and being withdrawne from divine things, should give themselves
to pecuniary and Exchequer affaires which are most estranged from the dignity of their life, by which some (as appeares by the example of that Deane of Pauls) have made shipwracke both of Conscience and soule to. Willielmus Nubrigensis spea∣king of Hugh Bishop of Duresine, for intermedling with the pro∣curation of temporall affaires, hath these words. That Office (to wit of Lord Chauncellor or chiefe Justice) was committed by the King to the Bishop of Duresine, who did not so much as refuse, but cheerefully imbrace it, who verily contenting himselfe with his proper office, had much more decently beene a minister of Gods Law, than of mans; since no man can serve both, as hee ought. And that saying of our Lord to the Apostles, Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, did principally respect the Apostles Successors. For if a Bishop that he may please both the heavenly and earthly king, at once wil devide him∣self to both Offices; Verily the heavenly King, who wils that men should serve him with all the heart, with all the soule, and with all the strength, doth neither approve, nor love, nor accept his divine mini∣stry. What then will he doe, if a Bishop doth not give peradventure not so much as halfe of himselfe, to execute the things which are of God, and become a Bishop, but commits his cures to unworthy and remisse Executioners, that he may wholly serve an earthly Court or Palace? For no halfe man can sufficiently administer the Offices of an earthly Prince. By which sentences and examples we verily are admonished, that assiduous care and study of Clergie men, in worldly and Civill affaires, which makes them prove slow and unfit to divine things, is by all meanes to be reproved, and that the complaint of those is very unjust, who taxe them for not intermeddling with temporall affaires, and studie to call them backe from divine things, to which they ought with all their might to apply themselves. He further addes out of Roger Hoveden and others,Hvedn Al. pars postir. p. 779. Speed. p, 550 that the Pope enjoyned Hubert Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, without delay to lay downe all his Tempo∣rall Offices, as being contrary to the Canons o enjoy them, and against his honour and dignity; and further diligently ad∣monished King Richard the 1. with a atherly admonition, that as he tendred the Salvation of his soule, he should not per∣mit the sayd Arch-bishop any longer to enjoy his secular office under him, and that he would neither admit him nor any other Bishop or Clerke to any other secular administration: and hee likewise commanded all Prelates of Churches, by vertue of their
Canonicall Obedience; Ne ipsi ausu temerario seculares admini∣strationes susciperent; that they should not rashly attempt the ma∣naging of any worldly imployments; because being intang∣led in secular affaires, they could nor sufficiently attend their Ecclesiasticall cures, seeing the wise man saith, Pluribus intentus, minor est ad singula sensus. And hence Annal. pars po∣sterior. p. 767.768. Roger de Hoveden, thus exclaimes against Huber for resuming his temporall offices againe, after he had seemingl informed the King that he would give them over; seeing h charge of his Church (as he sayd) was worke enough or one man, whereunto onely he would gladly dedicate himselfe. O in∣licem Praesulem! licet saepius legisset, Neminem posse doubus De∣minis se ruire, aut enim umun odio habebit, & alterum diliget, au unumsustinebit, & alterum contemnet; praeelegit tamen officium sa∣cerdotale postpnere, quam regi terreno non adhaerere: & si accepta regn regiminis potestate officii administrationem ecclesiasici, cui professionis voto ast rictus fuerat, parvi pendens, pro castris Regis An∣gliae stare non recusavit. So this Historian. Thus this Bishop. THOMAS BEACON.Thomas Beacon a Prebend of Canterbury and a fugitive or Re∣ligion in Queene Maries dayes in his Catechisme in the first vo∣lume of his workes Printed at London, Cum privilegio, Anno, 1560. Dedicated to both Archbishops and all the Bishops of England, F. 499.500 And in his Supplication (written in Queene Maries time) Vol. 3. fol. 14. 23. resolves thus of the parity of Bishops and Ministers, and the Antichristianity, cruelty, wealth, and secular imployments of our Lordly Pre∣lates. Father. What difference is there betweene a Bishop and Spirituall Minister, or Presbyter? Sonne. None at all, their Office is the same, their authority and po∣wer is One; therefore S. Paul calls Spirituall Ministers sometimes Bishops, sometimes Presbyters, sometimes Pastors, sometimes Doctors, &c. Father. What is a Bishop in English? Sonne. A Watchman, or superintendent, as Paul saith to the Presbyters or Bishops of Ephesus, Acts 20.28. &c. Then hee addes that the first and principall point of a Bishops Spirituall Ministers Office is to teach and preach the Word of God. And concludes, that such a Bishop as either doth not, or cannot preach, is a Nicholas Bishop & an Idoll, and indeed no better than
a painted Bishop on a Wall: yea, he is as the Prophet saith,Isay. 36.10. a dumbe dogge, and as our Saviour Christ saith, unsavory salt, worth nothing but to be cast out,Mat. 5.13. and to be trodden under foote of men. Woe be to such Rulers that set such Idols and white daubed walls over the ocke of Christ, whom hee hath purchased with his precious blood. Horrible and great is their great damnation. Our Saviour Christ saith to his Disciples, As my Father sent me, so send I you.Joh. 20.21. Now who knoweth not, that Christ was sent of his Father to preach the Gospell? If they preach not (the case of many of our Lord Prelates) it is an evident token that Christ sent them no, but Antichrist and the Devill. After which he thus proceedes in his supplication; Thou callest thy selfe a jealous God, why then dost thou suffer thy people, thy Con∣gregation, thy flocke, thine heritage, to be thus seduced and led away from thee unto all kinde of spirituall fornication and abominable whoredome by that Antichrist of Rome, that great Baal, that stout Nemroth, that false Prophet, that beast, that whore of Babylon, that sonne of perdition, and by his ab∣hominable adherents, Cardinalls, Arch-bishops, Bishops, Suf∣fragans, Arch-deacons, Deanes, Provosts, Prebendaries, Com∣missaries, Parsons, Vicars, Purgatorie-rakers, Priests, Monkes, Fryers, Channons, Nunnes, Anckers, Anceresses, Pardoners Proctors, Scribes, Officialls, Somners, &c. with all the able of beastly hypocrites that have received the beasts Marke, which doe nothing else than seeke how they may establish their An∣ichristian Kingdome by suppressing thy holy Word, and lea∣ding the people into all kinde of blindnesse, errours and lyes, &c. But now the Shepheards,Wolvish Sheep∣heards. yea rather the Wolves, which are burst into thy sheepefold; and with violence have unjustly thrust out the faithfull and fatherly Pastors out of their cures, are Lordly, cruell, bloodthirsty, malicious and spitefull against thy sheepe. They are such Wolves as spare not the flocke, but scatter and destroy the flocke. They are theeves, robbers, murtherers and soule slayers. They feede themselves with the fattest, and cloath themselves with the finest wooll, but thy flocke they nourish not. The foode wherewith they Pasture thy sheepe, is the drowsie dreames and idle imaginati∣ons of Antichrist. In steede of the preaching of thy lively Word, they feede thy flocke with Latine mumblings, with dumbe Images, with Heathenish Ceremonies, with vaine sightes,
and such other apish oyes. In steede of the ministration of the holy and blessed Communion, they feede thy sheepe with vile stincking, abominable, devillish, blasphemous and Idolatrous Masses. And unto these unwholesome, pestilent, and poyson∣full Pasturs, they drive the sheepe will they, nill they; and if any of thy flocke refuse to come and to taste of those their pestilent poysons, and poysons full of Pestilences, him they accite to ap∣peare before the great Wolfe,The description of a certaine head Wolfe, clathed in a Bi∣shops rotchet. whose face is like unto the face of a she Beare that is robbed of her young ones, whose eyes con∣tinually burne with the unquenchable flames of the deadly Cockatrice, whose teeth are like to the venemous tushes of the ramping Lyon, whose mouth is full of cursed speaking and bitternes, whose tongue speaketh extreame blasphemies against thee and thy holy Anoynted, whose lippes are full of deadly poyson, whose throate is an open Sepulcher, whose breath foa∣meth and bloweth out threatning and slaughter against the Di∣sciples of the Lord, whose heart without ceasing imagineth wickednesse, whose hands have a delight to be embrued with the blood of the Saints, whose feete are swift to shed blood, whose whole man both body and soule goe alwayes up and downe musing of mischiefe. This Wolfe O Lord is so arrogant, haughty, and proud, seeing the government of the whole Realme is com∣mitted unto him, that he hath cast away all feare of thee. He ma∣keth boast of his owne wit, learning, and policy; his wayes are alway filthy, thy judgements are farre out of his sight, hee defieth all his enemies. For he saith in his heart, Tush, I shall ne∣er be cast downe, there shall no harme happen unto me. He sitteth lurking like a Lyon in his den; that he may privily murther the in∣nocent and sucke his blood. When such, O Lord God, as will not obey their Popish and devillish proceedings, are brought before that grievous Wolfe, they are miserably taunted, mocked, scorned, blasphemed, as thy deerely beloved sonne was in Bi∣shop Caiphas house, and afterward cruelly committed to prison, to the Tower, to the Fleete, to the Marshalseys, to the Kings Bench, to the Counters, to Lollardes Tower, to Newgate, &c. where they are kept as sheepe in a pinfold appointed to be slaine. And as this cruell and bloody Wolfe dealeth with the poore Lambes, even so doe the residue of that lecherous litter. He with all other of that Wolvish kind, hunger and thirst no∣thing so greatly as the devouring of the bodies, and the sucking of the blood of thy poore and innocent Lambes. Ah Lord
God, under that most wicked Queene Iezabel,A comparison betweene Queen Isabels time and ours. were not the Prophets, more cruelly handled, than thy faithfull Ministers be now? for as in the days of the wicked Queen Iezabel the Priests of Baal were had in great honour, & were chiefest and of highest au∣thority about the Queen, none bearing so much rule in the Court as they, none having so much reverence done unto them, as they had; even so now is it with the idolatrous Priests of Eng∣land;Priests chiefe in the Country, and thorow out Eng∣land. they alone be chiefest and of much estimation with the Queene. They alone uffle and raigne; they alone beare the swing in the Court; they alone have all things going forward as they desire; they alone be capped, kneeled, and crowched to; they alone have the keyes of the English Kingdome hanging at their girdles: whatsoever they binde or loose, whispering and trayterously conspiring among themselves, that same is both bound and loosed in the starre Chamber, in Westminster-Hall, in the Parliament house, yea in the Queenes privie Chamber, and throughout the Realme of England. The very Nobility of Eng∣land are in a manner brought to such slavery,Awake Nobi∣lity. that they dare not displease the least of these spitefull spirituall limmes of Anti∣christ. It is writ, that certaine men gave their judgements, what thing was most mighty and strongest upon earth. The first sayd wine is a strong thing. The second sayd the King is strongest. The third sayd, women yet have more strength, but above all things the truth beareth away the victory. But we may now say (unto such an height is the tyranny of the Spirituall Sorce∣rers growne) that Priests in England are mightier, than either Wine, King, Queene, Lords, Women, and all that is there besides. But how agreeth this with the example of Christ, which fled away, when the people would have made him a King or a temporall governour? Christ refused to meddle with any worldly matters, as the History of dividing the inheritance betweene the two brethren doth declare. Christ willed his Di∣sciples to refuse all worldly dominion and temporall rule. When they strove among them, who of them should be taken for the greatest: Christ sayd unto them, The Kings of the Gentiles reigne over them, and they that beare rule over them are called gra∣cious Lords, but ye shall not be so, for he that is greatest among you, shall be as the least, and he that is chiefe, shall be as the minister. Christ sent not his Disciples to be Lords of the Councell, Lords of the Parliament, Lord President, Lord Chauncellour, Lord Bishop, Lord Suffragan, Lord Deane, Master Queenes
Amner, Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Steward, Mr. Receiver, Sr. Iohn Massemonger, &c. but to be Ministers and disposers of the My∣steries of God, to be Preachers of the Gospell, to bee labourers in the Lords harvest, to be Pastors and feeders of the Lords flock, to be the salt of the earth, and the light of the world, to be an example to the faithfull in word and conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith and in purenesse, to feede Christs flocke so much as lyeth in their power, taking the oversight of them, not as though they were compelled, but willingly, not for the desire of filthy lucre, but of a good minde, not as though they were Lord over the Parishes, but that they be an ensample to the flocke, that when the chiefe shepheard shall appeare they may receive an uncorruptible crowne of glory.The ambition and security of the Papists. But these things O Lord, have they all forgotten. These ambitious Antichrists are so drowned in vaine glory, and in the desire of filthy lucre and worldly promotions, that they neither regard God, nor the higher powers, that they neither esteeme their office, nor any one point of godlinesse & honesty, that they neither think up∣on the dreadfull day of judgement, nor yet remember them∣selves to be mortall. Their whole study in the time of this their Lucifer like pride is nothing else but to suppresse thy holy truth, and to advance and set up their Antichristan Kingdome, that they as Gods may sit alone in the Consciences of men. But O Lord God, though thou sufferest these Priests of Baal for our unthankefulnesse a while to prosper, to raigne, to rule to ruffle, to flourish, to triumph, and to tread downe thy holy Word under their eete, yet are we certaine, that thou wilt at the last arise, defend thine owne cause against these Antichrists, bring thine enemies unto confusion, and set thy people (after they have unfainedly repented) in a quiet and blessed State. So he, and blessed be God that he after, and we now, live to see this verified in part. Miles Coverdale once Bishop of Exeter in King Edward the sixth his reigne,MILES COVER∣DALE. being deprived of it in Queene Maries, would Godwins Cat. p. 338. not returne thereto againe in the beginning of Queene Eliza∣beths raigne, but led a private life in London, where he writ a booke intituled an Apologie in defence of the Church of Eng∣land Printed at London 1564. wherein he writes thus of Bishops intermedling with secular affaires, and of their Treasons against
our Kings, by the Popes instigation. The Old Canons of the Apostles command that Bishop to be removed from his Office, which will both supply the place of a civill Magistrate, and al∣so of an Ecclesiasticall person. These men for all that both doe and will needes serve both places; Nay rather the one office which they ought chiefely to execute, they once touch not, and yet no body commandeth them to be displaced, &c. And as ou, we of all others most justly have left him. For our Kings, yea even they which with greatest reverence did follow and obey the authority and faith of the Bishops of Rome, have long since found and felt well enough the yoake and tyranny of the Popes Kingdome. For the Bishops of Rome took the Crowne off from the head of our King Henry the second, and compelled him to put aside all Majesty, and like a meere private man to come un∣to their Legate with great submission and humility, so as all his Subjects might laugh him to scorne: more than this, they cau∣sed Bishops and Monkes and some part of the Nobility to be in the field against our King Iohn, and set all the People at li∣berty from their Oath whereby they owed allegiance to their King, and at last wickedly and most abominably they bereaved the King not onely of his Kingdome, but also of his life. Besides this, they excommunicated and cursed King Henry the eight the most famous Prince, and stirred up against him sometime the Emperour, sometime the French King, and as much as in them was, put in adventure our Realme to have beene a very prey and spoyle, yet were they but ooles and mad, to thinke that either so mighty a Prince could be scared with bugges and rat∣tles, or else that so Noble and great a Kingdome, might so easily even at one morsell be devoured and swallowed up. And yet as though all this were too little, they would needes make all the Realme tributary to them, and exacted thence yearely most unjust and wrongfull taxes. So deere cost us the friendship of the City of Rome. Iohn Ponet sometimes Bishop of Winchester,JOHN PONET which hee after∣wards deserted, in his Apologie against Doctor Martin, in de∣fence of Priests marriage, c. 4.5. p. 44.52.53.54. expressely rec∣kons up Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Monkes, Cannons, Fryers, &c. to be the Orders of Antichrist, taxing them like∣wise severely, and comparing them with the Eustathian hee∣tickes for refusing to weare usuall garments, and putting upon
them garments of strange fashions, to vary from the Common sort of people in apparell: likewise of the name Bishop and Su∣perintendent. And urther whereas it pleaseth Martin not one∣ly in this place, but also hereafter to jest at the name of Super∣intendent, he sheweth himselfe bent to condemne all things that be good, though in so doing he cannot avoyde his open shame. Who knoweth no that the name Bishop hath so beene abu∣sed, that when it was spoken, the people understood nothing else but a great Lord, that went in a white Rotche, with a wide shaven crowne, and that carrieth an Oyle box with him, wh he used once in 7. yeares riding about to confirme children, &c. Now to bring the people from this abuse, what better meanes can be devised than to teach the people their errour by another word out of the Scriptures of the same signification? which thing by the terme Superintendent would in time have beene well brought to passe. For the ordinary paines of such as were called Superintendents, hould have taught the people to understand the duty of their Bishop, which your Papist would faine have hidden from them. And the word Superin∣tendent being a very Latine word made English by use; should in time have taught the people by the very Etymologie and proper signification, what things were meant, when they heard that name which by this terme Bishop, could not so well bee done, by reason that Bishops in the time of Popery were Over-seers in name, but not indeed. So that their doings could not each the people their names, neither what they should looke for at their Bishops hands. For the name Bishop, spoken a∣mongst the unlearned, signified to them nothing lesse than a preacher of Gods Word, because there was not, nor is any thing more rare in any order of Ecclesiasticall persons, than to see a Bishop preach, whereof the doings of the Popish Bishops of England can this day witnesse; but the name Superintendent should make him ashamed of his negligence, and afraid of his idlenesse, knowing that S. Paul doth call upon him, to attend to himselfe and to his whole flocke: of the which sentence our Bishops marke the first peece right well, that is, to take heede to themselves, but they be so deafe, they cannot hearken to the second, that is, to looke to their flocke. I deny not but that the name Bishop may be well taken; but because the evil∣nesse of the abuse hath marred the goodnesse of the word, it
cannot be denied, but that it was not amisse to joyne for a time another word with it in his place, whereby to restore that abu∣sed word to his right signification. And the name Superinten∣dent is such a name, that the Papists themselves (saving such as lacke both learning and wit) cannot finde fault withall. For Peresius the Spaniard and an Arch-papist (out of whom Martin hath stollen a great part of his booke) speaking of a Bishop saith; Primum Episcopi munus nomen ipsum prae se fert, quod est su∣perintendere, Episcopus enim Superintendens interpretant, visitans aut supervidens, &c. that is to say: the chiefe Office of a Bi∣shop by interpretation signifieth a Superintendent, a visitor, or an Over-seer. Why did not Martin as well steale this peece out of Peresius, as he did steale all the Common places that he hath for the proofe of the Canons of the Apostles, and of traditions in his second and third Chapters? Martin in the 88. leafe is not ashamed in his booke to divide the significations of the termes (Bishop and Super-intendent) as though the one were not sig∣nified by the other. But it may be that Martin, as the rest of the Popish Sect, would not have the name of (Superintendent) or minister used, least that name which did put the people in remē∣brance of Sacrificing and blood sapping, should be forgotten. Thus, and much more he. Walter Haddon,WALTER HADDON. Vice-Chancellour of the University of Cam∣bridge for sundry yeares in King Edward the 6. and Deane of the Arches in Queene Elizabeth raigne, in his Booke against Hierome Osorius, l. 3. fol. 251, writes short but sharpe, of the Treasons of our English Prelates against our Kings. There have beene few Princes in this our Britaine for the space of 5 hundred yeares to whom most sordid Monkes, but especially those who have possessed the See of Canterbury, have not procured some troubles. Anselme, how insolently opposed he himselfe to Wil∣liam Rufus and Henry the first? Theobald how proud was hee a∣gainst King Stephen? how great Tragedies did Thomas of Can∣terbury, whom you have canonized for a Saint for Sedition, raise up against Henry the second? William of Ely, and also Thomas Arundell of Canterbury, a nefarious Traytor, what wonderfull troubles procured he, not onely to King Richard the second, but to all estates of the Kingdome? What King Iohn suffered from Langton and other Bishops, (who procured him to be judicially deprived of his Crowne and Kingdome by the
Pope) is unknowne to none: neither was Edmund of Canterbury lesse opposite to King Henry the third: Edward the first succee∣ded Henry his Father in the government, whom Iohn Peckham of Canterbury resisted with incredible boldnesse, leaving Win∣chelsie his Successor, who nothing degenerating from his foot∣steps, had wonderfull contentions with the King: Both of them an Archbishop, each of them an arch-contemner of Maje∣sty. What shall I say of Arch-bishop Walter, to whom it was not sufficient by force to rescue Adrian (or Alton) Bishop of Hereford in despite of King and Parliament from his legall tryall in open Court, and to send him away uncondemned, unlesse he likewise conspired with Queene Izabel against King Richard the second. That I may in the interim omit the furies and bitter concertations of others with their Princes. So he. Bishop ALLEY Bishop PIL∣KINGTON. Mr. Nowel.Wil. Alley Bishop of Exeter in his poore mans library: par. 1. Mi∣scellanea. Praelect. 3. p. 95.96. Printed Cum Privilegio. Iames Pil∣kington Bishop of Durham, in his Treatise of burning of the Pauls Church: and in his exposition on Agge. ch. 1. v. 1.2.3.4.912.13. c. 2. v. 1.2.3.4.9.10. and on Abdyas. v. 7.8. and Mr. Alexander Nowel Deane of Pauls in his Reproofe of Dormans proofe Lon∣don. 1565. f 43.44.45. Conclude, that Bishops and Presbyters by Gods Word, are one and the same, citing S. Hieromes words on Titus, 1. and to Euagrius, and declaime much against the Pompe, wealth, and secular imployments of Bishops: their words for brevity I shall pretermit. BISHOP EL∣MER.Mr. Elmer, afterwards Bishop of London, in his Harborow for faithfull subjects, Printed at Strasborough, writes thus against Bishops Civill Authority, Lordlinesse, and wealth. Christ saith Luke 12. Who made me a Iudge betweene you? as though hee would say, it belongeth not to my Office to determine matters of Policy and inheritance, that belongeth to the Civill Magistrate. If he had thought it had beene within the Compasse of his fun∣ction, why and with what Conscience refused he to set them at one, who were at strife, and to put that out of doubt which was in suite? If he might doe it, and would not, he lacked Charity, and did not his duety. If it belonged not to him, how belon∣geth it to any of his Disciples or Successours? had he not as large a Commission as he gave? or could he give that he had not? But he knowing his Office, as the Prophet Esay had foretold; to preach the Gospell, would doe nothing without warrant.
And therefore being asked if he were a King, answered simply and by a plaine negative, My Kingdome is not of this world. If his Kingdome was not here, neither the ordering of Policies; yea when they would have taken him up to have made him a King, as one that refused that belonged not to him,Few of our Pre∣lates would now refuse such a proffer. he conveyed himselfe from among them. If imperiall jurisdiction belon∣ged to him, why refused he his calling? If it did not, where had Paul, Peter, or any other, any authority to meddle with that which he refused: seeing he saith, As my Father sent me, so send I you. In another place, Christ knowing the bounds of his cal∣ling, would not meddle with externe policy. Hence Bishops me thinkes by his example, should not give themselves too much the bridle, and too large a scope to meddle too farre with matters of policy. If these two Offices, I meane Ecclesiasticall and Civill be so jumbled in both functions, there can be no quiet or well ordered Common-wealth. Christ saith to his Di∣sciples: Princes of the Nations doe beare rule like Lords, it shall not be so with you. It falleth not into an Apostles or Church-mans Office, to meddle with such matters. For none going to warre, intangleth himselfe with the affaires of this life, it is enough for them to attend upon one Office; to attend as sole Priests nor as errant Bayliffes. (And elsewhere in that Booke he proceeds thus.) Come off ye Bishops, away with your superfluities, yeeld up your thousands, be content with hun∣dreds, as they be in other reformed Churches, where there be as great learned men as you are. LET YOUR PORTION BE PRIEST-LIKE, NOT PRINCE-LIKE. Let the Queene have the rest of your temporalties, to maintaine warres, and to build Schooles throughout the Realme, that every Parish Church may have its Preacher, every City her su∣perintendent to live not pompously, which will never be un∣lesse your Lands be disposed and bestowed upon many, which now feede and fat but one. Remember that Abimelech, when David in his banishment would have dined with him, kept such Hospitality, that he had no bread to give him but the Shew∣bread. Where was all his Superfluity to keepe your preten∣ded hospitality? for that is the cause that you alleadge, you must have thousand thousands; as though you were comman∣ded to keepe Hospitality, rather with a thousand than with an hundred: Remember the Apostles were so poore, that
when the lame man who lay at the Temple gate called beautifulAct. 3. to 7. asked an Almes of Peter and Iohn as they went about to goe, into the Temple; Peter answered him in this manner, Silver and gold have I none; and Paul was so far from having Lordships, that his owne hands ministred oft times to his necessities. If the Apostles of our Saviour had so small possessions and revenues,Cor. 4.12. why should our Prelats, who boast themselves to be their proper Successours enjoy or covet so great: when as Paul, enjoynes them, if they have but food and rayment,1 Tim. 6.8. therewith to be content, godlinesse alone with contentment being great gaine, and a sufficient portion. Nicholas Bullingham after Bishop of Lincolne,NICHOLAS BULLING∣HAM. in his Printed Letter to Master Bull Decemb. 5. 1564. writes thus from Emb∣den, where he arrived after many stormes: Would God Master Bull, that all the Prelates of England had beene with me, when we fell to cutting of Cables, & riding at Anchor in the raging Seas. There would have beene tearing of square Caps, ren∣ting of Rotchets, defying of Bishoprickes, despising of pompe, promising of new life; crying for mercy; O what a Tragedy would there have beene! Well, well, though now they walke dry shod in their Palaces, there is a God that will try them and all his people by fire or by water, unlesse we heartily repent. Grace to repent, grant us, O Lord, without delay, Amen, Amen. Iohn Bridges Deane of Salisbury afterwards Bishop of Oxford and a great stickler for Episcopacy,IOHN BRI∣DGES. in his Booke entituled, The Supremacy of Christian Princes, ver all persons throughout their Dominions, in all cases so well Ecclesiasticall at Temporall. Prin∣ted at London, 1573. p. 359. to 364 writes thus of the parity and identity of Bishops and Presbyters, and of clearing Aeriaus from Heresie in this point First, that Aerius said, there was no dif∣ference betweene a Priest & Bishop,Difference be∣tweene Priests and Bishops. and ye aske (Mr. Stapleton) how say we to him. Whatsoever we say to him, we have first to say to you, that saving the reverence of your Priesthood, there is no difference betweene you and a lyer, to object Aerius herein to us, whereas (ye know well enough) our Church doth acknow∣ledge in the ministry, a differene of Deacon and Elder, from a Bishop, although not according to your Popish Orders: For as neither Epiphanius, nor yet Augustine (quoted by you) speaketh there of any sacrificing Priest, so he never knew any such Pon∣tificall Prelates as your Popish Church breedeth; and yet of
those that were even then in Epiphanius time, and of their dif∣ference from the Elders or Priests, if yee know not how it came, Hirnius  Titum Dist. 63. Can. Oli idm. Hierome that lived in the same age will tell you; or if ye have not read him, your owne Canons will tell ye what he saith. Idem est ergo Presbyter qui Episcopus, & antequam Diaboli studia, &c. An Elder or Priest therefore is the same that a Bi∣shop, and before that the studies of the Devill were made in Religion, and that the people sayd, I hold of Paul; I of Apollo, I of Cephas, the Churches were governed by the Common Councell of the Elders; but after that every one did account those to be his, and not to be Christs, whom hee had baptized, in all the world, it was decreed, that one of the Elders being chosen, should be placed above the rest: to whom all the care or charge of the Churches should belong, and the seede of Schismes be taken away. And a little after, Sicut ergo Pres∣byteri, as therefore the Elders know that they by the custome of the Church are subject to him, that is set over them: so let the Bishops know, that they more by custome, than by the truth of the Lords dispensation, are greater than the Elders. This was the judgement of the ancient Fathers, and yet were they no Arians nor Aerians therefore. Yea Peer Lombard the master of the sentences, citing also Isidorus to witnesse, saith.Lib. 4. Dist. 24.1. Apud veteres idem Episcopi & Presbyteri fuerunt. Among the the Ancient Fa∣thers, Bishops and Elders were all one. And againe alleadging the Apostle S. Paul, he saith, Qualis autem, &c. But what manner an Eler ought to be chosen, the Apostle writing to Timothy declareth where by the name of Bishop he signifieth an Elder, Tim. 3 and a non after; Cumque omnes, and when all of them (he meaneth his false seven orders) are spirituall and holy, yet the Canons account onely two Or∣ders to be excelling holy, that is to say Deaconship and Eldership. Because the primitive Church is read to have these alone, and we have the Apostles Commandement of these alone, for the Apostles in every City ordained Bishop and Elders. Neither the Master onely wri∣teth thus; but almost all your Schoolemen, yea though they be themselves of the contrary opinion, yet they write this was the ancient opinion. And so Durandus, though he make a difference betweene the power of Jurisdiction, and the power of order, yet he sheweth that both the Scripture, and S. Hierome maketh no difference, but onely the custome and institution of the Church. The Apostle (saith he) writing to the Philippians cap. 1. saith, with
the Bishops and the Deacons, by them understanding the Elders, sith in one City as in Philippos, many Bishops ougt not to be. Againe, Act. 2. he saith, Looke to your selves and to all the flocke in which the Holy host hath placed you to be Bishops. And he spoke unto them of the onely City of Ephesus. But this appeareth more expressely to Titus the 1. Where he saith, For this cause I have left thee at Crete, that thou shouldst correct those things that want, and ordaine Elders throughout the Cities, even as I have appointed to thee, if any be blame∣lesse, the husband of one wife. And straight he setteth under it, a Bi∣shop must me blamelesse: and whom before he named an Elder hee calleth now a Bishop: and in the 4. of the 1. to Timothy, Despise not (saith he) the grace of God which is given to thee through the impo∣sition of the hands of an Elder, that is to say of a Bishop. S. Paul called himselfe an Elder, when he was the Bishop that ordained him. Thus farre and more at large Durandus, concluding at length Sic Ergo, Thus therefore saith S. Hierome, that a Bishop and an Elder, olim fuerunt synonyma, &c. were in the old time diverse names betokening one thing indifferently, and also of one administration; be∣cause the Churches were ruled by the Commune Counsell of the Priests. But for the remedy of a Schisme, lest each one dawing the Church after him, should breake her, it was ordained that one should be above the rest, Et quoad nomen, &c. And so farre forth as stretcheth to the name, that he onely should be called Bishop, and that so farre as stretcheth to the administration of some Sacraments & Sacramentals, they should be reserved to him by the custome and constitution of the Church: And this would Hierome, expressely 93. Dist. cap. legi∣mus, in Esa & super Epistolam ad Tit. & recitatur. Dist. 93. cap. Olim Presbyteri, &c. Consuetudo aut institutio Ecclesiae potest dare Iurisdictionem, sed non potestatem ordinis aut consecrationis, quare &c. He therefore that counteth this erronious or perrilous let him impute this to Hierome, out of whose saying in the fore al∣leadged Chapter Legimus in Esa, the foresayd authorities are taken. Where also he putteth an example. That is of a Bishop in respect of Priests, as of an Arch-Deacon in respect of Dea∣cons: unlesse the Deacons chuse one among themselves whom they call Arch-deacon, &c. In the end, Durandus reconciling Hierome, saith, and the authorities alleadged by Hierome withstand it not, because according to the name and the truth of the thing, every Bishop is an Elder, and on the other part, so farre as stretcheth to the name, every Elder having cure, may be called a Bishop, as Super∣attendent
on other, although the consecration of a Bishop, or the chiefe Priest, be larger than of a simple Priest or Elder, but peradven∣ture in the Primitive Church, they made not such force in the diffe∣rence of names as they do now; And therefore they called a Bishop every ne that had a cure. Thus writeth Durandus of the anci∣ent Fathers opinions. And will you count him or them Aerian too? And this also doth your Instiuti dctr. Christi, de shr ordinis. fol. 196. Institution in Colonie Councell confesse: Non est tamen putandum. Wee must not for all this tinke, that hee ordained Bishops another order from Priests, for in the primitive Church Bishops and Priests were all one. The which the Epistles of Peter and Paul the Apostles; Saint Hierome also and almost all the ancient Ecclesiasticall Writers do witnesse. And chiefly that place of the first Epistle of Saint Peter the fift Chapter, is evident to declare this: For when Peter had said, the Elders that are among you, I also an Elder with you beseech, which am also a witnesse of the passions of Christ, and partaker of the Glory to come that shall be revealed: He joyned under it, feed or guide the flocke of Christ that is among you, and oversee it, not by compulsion, but wil∣lingly, according to God, wherein it is spoken more expressly in the Greeke , that is to say, Super-attendent, from whence also the name of Bishop is drawne. Wherefore Priesthood is esteemed the highest order in the Church. In the meane time, no body is ignorant, that this order is distinguished againe, by a certaine or∣der of offices, and dignities. Thus do your Scholemen, and Divines winesse. First, that in the substance, order or character as they terme  it, there is no difference betweene a Priest and a Bishop. Secondly, that the difference is but of Accidents, and Cir∣cumstances, as degrees of dignity, jurisdiction, honour, &c. Thirdly, that in the Primitive Church this difference was  not knowne, but they were meerely all one and the same. Fourthly, that this difference was taken up by custome, con∣sent  and ordinance of the universall Church, when it once be∣gan to be dispersed in all the World. Fifthly, that it was done for the avoiding of factions and sects, that grew in the time of the Ministers equality, even anon after the Primitive Church. And some of them in the Apostles time But quite conrary, to this judgment of your Divines are all your Canonists, your Divines make seven orders; Et in hoc, saith, Summa Ang∣lica. L. Ord. An∣gelus de Clavisio, concordam communiter Theol. On this the Divines
agree commonly, but the Canonists hold that there are nine or∣ders, according to nine Hierarchies, that is to wit, the first notch or Psalmist, and the order of a Bishop, & that the first notch is an order, the text is in C. cu contingit & ibi do. Anto. & Canonistae de aeta. & quali or similiter quod Episcopatus est ordo, & quod im∣primatur character judicio meo, facit inconvincibiliter, tet. in C. i. de ordinatis ab Episcopo, &c. And so according to the Canonists there shall be nine Orders.The papist con∣troversie about their holy order. Great adoe your Schoolemen & Ca∣nonists make about this, insomuch that Aerius heresie will draw very neere to one of you, light on which side it shall. But your selfe may hold on both sides M. Stapleton, being both a Batche∣lor in the one, and a student in the other. But as for your Popish Clergy, there is indeed little difference in this point or none, which barrell is better herring, Bishop o Priest; both starke nought, or rather, neither of them, either true Priest or Bishop by Saint Pauls description. The Heavenly and earthly Kingdome are not  joyned that the Bishops may be earthly Kings.Afer this, p. 926.929. He writes thus concerning Bishops in∣termedling with temporall affaires. You say M. Sanders, the temporall Kingdome and the heavenly did indeed once jae, but now they agree, the heavenly and the earthly Kingdome are conjoyned together. Agreement is a good hearing M. San∣ders, but what meane you by this conjunction that the one is become the other, and not still distinguished from it? or that your Pope may be King, and his Bishops Princes of both? nay M. Sanders, you finde not that agreement and conjunction. For Christ hath put such a barre between them, that his spiritual Mi∣nisters cannot have earthly Kingdomes, nor that earthly Kings should in the estate of their earthly Kingdomes, become subject in such wise to his spirituall Ministers, otherwise than to yeeld their obedience to their spirituall ministry, representing the power and mercy of God unto them, &c. The objection you made was this.M. Sanders obje∣tion and answer. Whether Bishops and Pastors of the sheepe of Christ may rule temporall Kingdomes? you answer, properly and of it selfe in no wise: but as those Kingdomes do subject themselves to the Christian faith. This is a proper elusion, M. Sanders, thinke you to escape thus? is it all one to subject their Kingdomes to the Christian faith, and to subject their Kingdomes to the Bishops? Good right it is that the faith should beare the chiefe rule? But the objection was, Whether the Bishops should or no? and therefore this distinction serveth
not. For Christ simply without this or that respect debarreth all his spiritual ministers from ruling of temporall Kingdomes. Who knoweth not that properly, and of their owne nature tempo∣rall Kingdomes should not be ruled of spirituall Pastors, but of Temporall Kings? None is so simple to move such a fond objection: but the objection is, Whether the one be coincident to the other? whether a Bishop,Whether a Bi∣shop may take a Kingdome up∣on him poperly or unproperly. to whom properly by his Bishop∣ly office a Kingdome belongeth nor, may take upon him the go∣vernment of a Kingdome, that properly by his Kingly office be∣longeth to a King? this is the question. And you say properly he cannot, I say much lesse unproperly, but properly or unproper∣ly, Christ hath cleane debarred it vos autem non sic: But you shall not do so. These words strick dead, M Sanders, & therefore your nproper distinctions may goe pike him. Page 931 he writes that the deposings of Princes have not come so much by the vio∣lence of their unnaturall Subjects: as by the practises of the Po∣pish Bishops,Deposing of Princes by the Prelates practi∣ses. as the ensamples of King Iohn in England, of Childericke in France, the Henries, and other in Germany, and in other Countries, do testifie, yet were these dealings of those Bishops not allowable, but detestable: yea though it were gran∣ted that those Princes had deserved them; and broken their faith and promse, which (if it were a good faith, and promise) was no doubt an evill breach of it, and God will take the venge∣ance of it, it belongeth not to the people, nor to the Bishops Ven∣geance is mine, saith God, and I will render it He saith not my Bi∣shop shall, but I will render it.Heb. 10. He addes p. 980, 981.1026 Christs Kingdome is spirituall and not earthly, and his Ministers may not exercise in secular causes, an earthly Kings authority. M. Saunders pretendeth this is to promote the Church of Christ,The Churches promotion. but such promotion confounds devotion, and hath poysoned the Church of God, as they say, a voyce was heard what time Constantine (although falsely) is supposed to have endowed the Church with such royall honour, Hodie venenum intravit in Ec∣clesiam, This day entred poyson into the Church. But Christ hath flatly forbidden it,Matth. 2. and told his Disciples when they asked such promotion, that they knew not what they asked. But af∣terward, they knew and found the saying of Christ to be true, that their promotion lay in their affliction, and not in their King∣ly honour, &c.Glossa in Lypr Ih. And this your owne glosse out of your owne Pope Gregory might have taught you. Sicut isit me Pater, id
est, ad passiones, &c. As my Father sent mee, that is to say, to troubles and afflictions, so send I you to suffer persecution, not to raigne like Kings, and rule Kingdomes. And therefore sith this sentence of Christ is true, that he sent them as hee was sent, and he was not sent in his humane nature to depose Kings, nor to dispose of their Kingdomes, nor to governe them. Therefore his Disciples were not sent thereto. But the Pope saith he was sent thereto, and takes it upon him, therefore he is neither mi∣nister of Christ, nor successor of his Disciples; but his Disciple that hath offered him worldly Kingdomes, if hee would fall downe and worship him as he hath done, and s hath gotten his Kingdomes &c. Hofmeister one of your stoutest Champions hath these words:Hofmeister in Luc. 12. Truly those things that have beene spoken and heard from the beginning of this Gospell do enough declare the Kingdome of Christ, not to be of this world, neither that hee would raigne temporally in the world, sith hee taketh not souldiers that can oppugne others, but Fishermen, readier to suffer than to strike. And so in this place, with most manifest words Christ declaeth, that hee came not for this purpose, to take upon him the office of a Magistrate,Why Christ took not on him the office of a Ma∣gistrate. but rather, that hee might raigne in our hearts, so that it might be our hap to come to the ternall goods, whatsoever happened of our temporall goods. Therefore when hee was interrupted of a certaine Jew, that hee would helpe him in recovering his inheritance, hee answered, Man, who hath made mee a judge or divider over you? As though he should say, hath not this world Judges that may decide so base controversies? it is not appointed unto mee, that this or that man should waxe rich by inheritance, but that all men should come to the inheritance of life immortall. But in these words, Christ would be token many things, to wit, that he which hath an Apostolicall office, ought not to be wrapped with prophane and filthy affaires: for so the Apostle saith otherwhere, No man going warfare under God entangleth him∣selfe with worldly businesse. And the Apostles say all at once, It is not meete for us to leave the Word of God and attend on the Tables. Christ also by this reproving, would declare that this doctrine taketh not away the Magistrates offices, but rather confirmeth them. Whereupon hee saith also elsewhere, Ren∣der to Cesar that that is Cesars. And when his Disciples strived for preheminencie, he said, The Kings of the Nations governe them,
and so forth. Whereby he declared, that neither hee himselfe, nor his, ought (as they call them) to be secular Judges: neither did hee by this refusing abolish the order of the Magistrate, but much more (as we have said) confirme it.Christ abolished not the magi∣strates office, though he him∣elfe reused it. Thus farre your owne Doctor, Hofmeister against you, that the intent of Christ refusing to be a Judge herein was chiefely against such usurpa∣tion of worldly Magistracie, as the Pope and his Prelates too, exercise. Pag. 1095. he concludes, that a Bishop may in some cases lawfully excommunicate a wicked Prince. But who de∣nieth this (M. Sanders) that a godly Bishop may upon great and urgent occasion, if it shall be necessary to edifie Gods Church, and there be no other remedy, to flee to this last censure of ex∣communication against a wicked King. The Bishops need not therefore calumniate Presbyteries, upon pretence, that they hold it lawfull to excommunicate Kings, since they themselves averre, that Bishops may lawfully doe it, and de facto, have sun∣dry times put it in practise, both at home and abroad. So Bi∣shop Bridges. Our laborious Historian M. Iohn FoxM. Iohn Fox. in his Acts and Monu∣ments (highly applauded by the whole Convocation in their Canons, 1571. and enjoyned to be had in every Cathedrall and Collegiate Church, and in every Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Arch-Deacons and Canons residentiaries house for their servants, and strangers to read in) doth every where discoer con∣demne the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Warres, Wealth, pride, calling, and secular imployments of our Bishops: of which hee writes thus in particular. p. 1381. This hath bin one great abuse in England these many yeares: that such offices as beene of most importance and weight have commonly beene committed to Bishops and other spirituall men: whereby three devillih mischiefes, and inconveniences have hapned in this Realme, to the great dishonour of God, and utter neglecting of the flocke of Christ, the which three be these: First, they have had small leasure to attend to their pastorall cures, which here∣by have beene utterly neglected and left undone. Secondly, it hath also puft up many Bishops, and other spirituall persons into such haughtinesse, and pride, that they have thought no Noble man of the Realme worthy to be their equall or fellow. Thirdly, where they by this meanes knew the very secrets of Princes, they being in such high offices, have caused the same to
be knowne in Rome afore the King could accomplish, and bring his intents to passe in England. By his meanes hath the Papacy bene so maintained, and things ordered after thei wills and pleasures, that much mischiefe hah happened in this Realme, and others, sometimes to the destruction of Princes; and some∣times to the utter undoing of many Common-wealths. So he. Who page 216.358.359.360.414.430.432.434.439.517, 518.599.625.961.972.1009.1016.1463.1856. of the said Acts and Monuments. London, 1610. writes often in the magent, That Bishops and Presbyters are all one and the same, and that there was no difference betweene them in the Primitive times, which was the common received opinion of our Martyrs: yea of our learned D. Humfrey Regius professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford Puritanopap. Confut. ad Rat. 3. p. 262.265. and of D. William Fulke against Bristow Motive. 40. against Gre∣gory Martyn, p 172. and confuration of the Rhemish Testament Notes on Titus 1. sect. 2. and on Philip. I. sect. 1. Bishop Iul.Iohn Iuell the incomparable Bishop of Salisbury, in his de∣fence of the Apology of the Church of England Part. 2. cap. 3. disp. 5. p. 98, 99, 100, 101. writes thus of the equality of Bishops and Ministers.Ad Eagrium Saint Ierome saith, All Bishops wheresoever they be, be they at Rome, be they at Eugubiu, be they at Constantinople, be they at Rhegium, be all of like preheminence, and of like Priest∣hood. And as D simplicit. Prelatr. Cyprian saith, There is but one Bishopricke, and a peece thereof is perfectly & wholly holden of every particular Bishop. What Saint Ierome meant hereby; Erasmus, a man of great learning, and judgement expoundeth thus. Ierome seemeth to match all Bishops together,Easm. in Schol. in Epist. ad Eua∣grium. as if they were all equally the Apostles successors, and hee thinketh not any Bishop to be lesse than other for that hee is poorer, or greater than other, for that hee is richer: for hee makes the Bishop of Eugubium (a poore towne) equall with the Bishop of Rome. And farther hee thinketh that a Bishop is no better than any Priest, saving that the Bishop hath authority to order Ministers. Hereto M. Harding answereth thus.M. Harding. Erasmus saith within five lines following, that the Meropolitan hath a certaine dignity, and jurisdiction above other Bishops; take the one (saith hee) with the other; I am contented M. Harding: Erasmus saith, The Metropolitan had a dignity above other Bishops; but hee saith no, the Bishop of Rome had jurisdiction over all Bishops throughout the World. In Saint Hieromes time there were Me∣ropolitans,
Archbishops, Archdeacons and others. But Christ appointed not these distinctions of orders from the beginning. These names are not found in all the Scriptures.Hieron. i Epist. ad Titum, c. I. This is the thing that we deend. S. Ierome saith, Let Bishops understand (where∣unto wee adde further, Let the Bishops of Rome themselves undestand) that they are in authority over Priests more by custome than by order of Gods truth. These be Hieromes words truly translated: what he meant thereby I leave to the judgement of the Reader. Erasmus likewise saith in the selfe same place above alleaged,Erasm. in Schol. i Epist. ad Euagr. Whereas Saint Ierome yeeldeth lesse dignity and authority unto Bishops, than nowadayes they seeme to have, wee must understand he spake of that time wherein he lived. If hee had seene our Bishops that now bee, hee would have said otherwise. For now the Pope claimeth a power above all the powers in heaven and earth, as it is written in the Councell of Lateran. Againe, rasmus in another place speaking hereof, saith thus.Sub. Lne Sssi∣ne 10. Erasm. in Apologia ad Pi∣um. This holy man Saint Ierome saith plainly and freely, and as hee thinketh, that the Bishop of Rome is above other Bishops, not by Bishopricke but onely by riches. By riches onely, M. Harding, Erasmus saith, the Pope is above other Bishops. By riches onely (hee saith) not by right of Gods word, not by ver∣tue, not by learning, not by diligence in preaching, but onely by riches. Now it may please you to follow your owne rule, and to lay the one saying to the other. But Saint Ieromes words are plaine of themselves, and have no need of other expositor. Thus he writeth. Hieron. ad Eua∣grium. What doth a Bishop saving onely the ordering of Ministers, but a Priest may do the same? Neither may wee thinke that the Chuch of Rome is one and the Church of all the world be∣side is another, France, England, Affrica, Persia, Levante, India, and all barbarous Nations worship one Christ, and keepe one rule of the truth. If wee seeke for Authority, the whole world is greater than the City of Rome. Wheresoever there be a Bishop, be it at Eugu∣ium, be it at Rome, be it at Constantinople, be it at Rhegium, Be it at Alexandria, be it at Tanais, they are all of one worthinesse, they are all of one Bishopricke; The power of riches, and the basenesse of po∣verty maketh not a Bishop either higher or lower, for they are all the Apostles successors: What bring you mee the custome of Rome, being but one City? Here M. Harding findeth great fault, for that I have translated these words, Of one Bishopricke, and not as hee would have it, Of one Priesthood. God wo, a very simple quarrell. Let him take whether he liketh best, if either other of these words
shall serve his turne. Erasmus saith, Erasmus adver∣sus Albert. Pighi∣um. Bishop, Piest, and Presby∣ter, at that time were all tree all one. But M Harding saith, The Primates had Authority over other ineriour Bishops: I graunt they had so. Howbeit, they had it by agreement and custome, but neither by Christ, nor by Peter, nor Paul, nor by any right of Gods Word. Saint Ierome saith, Hiern. in Epist. ad Titum. c. 1. Let Bishops understand that they are above Priests, rather of Custome than of any truth or right of Christs institution, and that they ought to rule the Church altogether. And againe, Hieron. odem loc. Therefore a Priest and a Bishop are both one thing, and before that by the inflaming of the Devill, parts were taken in Religion, and these words were uttered among the people, I hold of Paul, I hold of Apollo, I hold of Peter, the Chur∣ches were governed by the common advice of the Priests. Saint Augu∣stine saith, August Epist. 9. The office of a Bihop is above the office of a Priest, (not by the authority of the Scripures, but) after the names of honour, which the custome of the Church hath now obtained. So part. 2. cap. 9. Divis. 1. p. 196 He brings in M. Harding the Papist writing thus. Even so they which denyed the distinction of a Bishop and a Priest, were condemned of heresie as we, find in Saint Augustine, in the Booke and Chapter aforesaid. And in Epiphanius Lib. 3. cap. 75. In the Councell of Constance, the same is to be found. To whom he answers in the Margent. Vntuth; for hereby both Saint Paul, and Saint Ierome, and other good men are condemned of Heresie. And p. 202. He gives this further answer. But what meant M. Harding here to come in with the difference betweene Priests and Bishops, thinkes hee that Priests and Bishops hold onely by Tradition? or is it so horrible an heresie as hee ma∣keth it, to say, that by the Scriptures of God a Bishop and a Priest are all one? or knoweth hee how farre, and unto whom, he reacheth the name of an Hereticke? Verily Chrysostome saith, Chrys. in 1 Tim. Homili 11. Hieron. ad Eua∣grium. Betweene a Bishop and a Priest, in a manner there is no difference. Saint Hierome saith somewhat in rougher sort: I heare say, there is one become so peevish, that hee setteth Deacons before Priests, that is to say, before Bishops: Whereas the Apostle plainly teacheth us, that Priests and Bishops he all one. Saint Augustine saith:Aug. in quaest. Novi & Vet. Testam q. 101. What is a Bishop but the first Priest, that is to say, the highest Priest? So saith Saint Ambrose.Amb. in 1 Tim. cap. 3. There is but one conscration of a Priest and Bi∣shop; for both of them are Priests, but the Bishop is the first. In his Sermon upon Haggai 1 p. 176. he writes thus, against the temporall possessions and secular Offices of Clergy men:
When Constantinus the Emperour endowed the Church with lands and possessions, Ioh. de Paristis. cap. 22. in vira Silvestri. they say there was a voyce of Angels heard in the ayre saying: This day poyson is powred into the Church. If there were poyson powred into Church then; I doubt there was nover Treacle powred into it since. This wee see, that from that time shee hath done worse and worse. Augu∣stine findeth fault with the multitude of Ceremonies, and saith, the Church in his time was in worse case by mans devises, than was the Church of the Iewes. Bernard said, There is no part sound in the Clergie. And againe, They which chuse te first places in the Church, are chiefest in persecuting Christ. And againe, they be not Tea∣chers, but deceivers; they are not feeders but beguilers; they be not Prelates, but Pilates. Which hee thus further prosecutes in his Sermon on Matthew 9. p. 198. And what shall I speake of Bi∣shops? Their cloven Miter signifieth perfect knowledge of the new Testament, and the old; their Crosiers Staffe signifieth diligence in attending the flocke of Christ; their purple Bootes and Sandals signifie that they should ever be booted and ready to goe abroad through thicke and thinne to teach the Gospell; and thereto they applyed the words of the Prophet, How beauti∣full are the feete of them which bring glad tydings of peace, which bring glad tydings of good things? But alas, in what kind of things do they beare themselves for Bishops? These mysticall titles and shewes are not enough to ech in the Lords Harvest; they are garments more meete or Players, than for good Labourers. Saint Bernard writes thus to Eugenius the Bishop of Rome, who sometime had beene his Scholler. De cnsidera ad Eug. lib. 4.  Thou which art the shepheard ettest up and downe shining in gold, and gorgeously attired: but what get thy sheepe? If I durst speake it, these things are not the fodder for Christs sheepe, but for devils. Whatsoever apparell they have upon them, unlesse they will fall to worke, Christ will not know them for labourers. How then can the Bishop of Rome be taken for the chiefe Pastor of Christ, which these 900. yeares hath not opened his mouth to feed the flocke? These 900. yeares I say? since Gregory the first of that name, it can hardly be found, that ever any Bishop of Rome was seene in a Pulpit. One of themselves Adrianus the fourth a Bishop of Rome was wont to say, Wee succeed not Peter in teaching but Romulus in murthering. And in the Canon of he Apostles it is decreed, That the Bishop that teacheth not his flocke, shuld be deposed: To which purpose
they alleage Aug. de Civit. De lib. 19. c. 19. Saint Augustine: A Bishops office i a name of la∣bour, not a name of honour: that hee which coveteth the place of pre∣eminence, and hath not a desire to do good, may know hee is not a Bi∣shop. Thus saith Origen; Thus saith Chrysostome: thus say di∣vers others of the old Fathers, whom it were long and needlesse to rehearse. Chrysost. Hom. 43 in opere im∣perfecto in Mat. There be many Priests, and few Priests, (saith Chry∣sostome) Many that beare the name, but few that be Priests indeed. Thus the Harvest is great and plentious, but the Labourers are but few. The labourers are but few, but the destroyers and wasters are exceeding many; Yea, such as should be the harvest men, most of all destroy the corne. I will not here report that I am well able, that your eyes have seene, and that many of you have felt; the state of our time hath beene such. Saint Bernard saw it in his time, and therefore saith, Serm. 33. in Cantica. All are riends, and all are enemies; all are helpers, and all are adversaries and hinderers. A∣gaine, Bern. Serm. 1. in Conv. S. Pauli. Alas, alas, O Lord God, they are the chiefest in persecuting thee, that seeme to love the highest roomes, and to beare rule in thy Church, (he cites their Latin, which I omi.) And in his De∣fence of the Apologie f the Church of England, part. 6. c. 9. Div. 3. p. 667, 568. hee writes thus of Bishops intanglement in worldly affaires, and bravery in apparell. Our Princes never tooke upon them the office of Bishops, but your Bishops have taken upon them the office of Princes. Of your Bishops it is written in your owne Conc. Macrse itatur. ab Illyr. intr tests verit. p. 121. Councels, Behold there is now in a manner no worldly affaire, but Priests and Bishops have it in hand. Such Bishops be they of whom Saint Chrysostome writeth thus, They that neither beleeve, nor feare the judgement of God, abusing their Ecclesiasticall dignity in se∣cular sort, turne the same into secular dignity. Such Bishops they be of whom Saint Hierome saith thus, They themselves be to them∣selves both Laymen and Bishops too. And againe, Chrys. in Mat. Homil. 35. They worship the Lord and Melchom both together, thinking that they may serve both the World and the Lord, and satisfie two masters at once, God & Mammon; who fighting under Christ, bend themselves to worldly af∣faires, and offer up one image, Both to God and Cesar. And there∣fore Cardinall Cuam saith, Hieron. contra Lucifrianos. Hereof groweth a great deformity, that Bishops are bent only to worldly cares. Marke these words M. Harding, hee saith,Hieron. in So∣phoniam, ap. 1. Your Bishops are bent onely to worldly cares. If yee will beleeve none of these,Conc. Trident. yet your Popes owne Le∣gates, in your late Chapter at Trident, speaking of your Priestlike apparell say thus: Sub Paulo 3. Admonitio Lega∣tor. Our Priests differ nothing from Laymen, saving only in apparel, nay indeed they differ not so much from
them, as in apparell. Yee say your Bishops be gay and gallant, attended and guarded with Princelike routs both behind and before: And therefore yee make no small account, specially in respect of our estate, which you call beggerly. In such dis∣daine the Heathen sometimes said, Avntinus, lib. 3. de Rupert. That Christ was the beg∣gerliest and poorest of all the Gods that were in heaven. Howbeit our Bishoprickes saving that certaine of your Fathers have shamefully spoyled them, are now even as they were before Certainly the poorest Bishopricke in England, as it is reported, is better in revenues than three of your Popes Italian Bi∣shoprickes in the Kingdome of Naples: Howbeit the Gospell of Christ standeth not by riches, but by truth: in comparison of the one, wee make small reckoning of the other. Neverthe∣lesse the wise and godly have evermore sound fault with the Ecclesiasticall bravery of your Roman Clergy. Ber. in Cantic. Serm. 33. Holcot. in sapient. lect. 23. Saint Bernard saith, Therehence commeth their whorelike finenesse, their players weed, their Princely apparell: therehence commeth their gold in their bridles, in their Saddles, and in their spurres. Againe hee saith, Bern. in Canti. Serm. 77. They goe trimly and finely in their colours, as if a spouse should come from her chamber: if thou shouldst suddenly see one of them jetting a farre off, wouldst thou not rather thinke it were a spouse, than the keeper of the spouse? Lau. Valla de Donat. Const. Pa∣ralipomen. Laurentius Valla, although bit∣terly, yet not unpleasantly thus expresseth your Lordly brave∣y.Vrspergen. I thinke if the Devill in the ayre have any games among them to make sport withall, they are most busily occupied in counterfeiting the apparell and tire, and pride and riot of Priests, and have greatest pastime. Pope Bonefacius the 8. in a great Iubilee; and in a solemne procession, went apparelled in the Empeours Robes, and had the Crowne Imperiall on his head, and the sword of majestie borne be∣fore him as an Emperour. This spirituall jolity M. Harding liketh you well. Notwithstanding Saint Bernard saith, Bernar. de consi∣deration ad Eu∣genium. l. 4 These be pa∣stures for Devils, not for sheepe; no doubt even thus did Peter. Euen such pastime plaid Saint Paul. Yee tell us further: though they teach not, though they say no, though they do not, though they live not as becommeth Bishops, nor as becommeth a Christian man, yet be they Bishops notwithstanding. Hereat wee will not greatly strive: for so the Wolfe, if hee once get a sheep-hooke, and a cloke, may be a shepheard: and a blind man, if hee get once into the watch-tower, may be a spie; But miserable are the poore sheepe that so are fed: miserable is
that poore Castle that so is watched. Saint Augustine saith8 Quast. 1. Qui Episcopatum. A Bishops office is a name of labour, and not of honour, that who so loveth to rule, and not to profit, may understand himsefe to be no Bi∣shop. Againe hee saith of such a one, August. 2. qu. 7. Qui nec. Aug. Hee ought rather to be called a shamelesse dogge than a Bshop. As for that yee say, Your Bishops be duly ordinated and consecrated. Saint Augustine re∣plieth; Aug. cont. Do∣natist. lib. 6. Touching the outward consecration of a Bishop, many give it to wolves, and be wolves themselves. Saint Bernard spea∣king of your Priests and Bishops saith, Bern. de con∣siderat. ad Euge∣nium. lib. 3. In their apparell they are Souldiers, in their gaines they are Priests and Bishops: But in effect and in deed they are neither of both: for neither do they fight in the field as do Souldiers, nor do they preach as Priests and Bishops. Of whether order therefore be they? Whereas they would be of both Orders,1 Cor. 15. they forsake both, and confound both. Saint Paul saith, eve∣ry man shall rise againe in his owne order: but in what order shall these rise? whether forasmuch as they have sinned without order, shall they perish without order? I feare me they shall be ordered none other∣where, but whereas is no Order, but disorder, and horror everlasting. Againe, in his Defence of the Apologie of the Church of England, Par. 6. chap. 2. Divis. 1. he writes thus concerning Bishops vo∣ting, and authority in Parliament in settling matters in Religi∣on. Where yee would seeme to say, that the Parliament holden in the first yeare of the Queenes Majesties Raigne was no Par∣liament: for that your Bishops refused wilfully to agree unto the godly Lawes there concluded, yee seeme therein to bewray in your selfe some want of skill: the wise and learned could soone have told you, that in the Parliaments of England, mat∣ters have evermore used to passe not of necessity, by the speci∣all consent of the Archbishops and Bishops, as if without them no Statute might lawfully be enacted, but onely by the more part of the voyces, yea altough all the Archbishops and Bishops were never so earnestly bent against it. And Statutes so passing in Parliament onely by the voyces of the Lords temporall, without the consent and agreement of the Lords Spiriuall, have neverthelesse alwayes bin con∣firmed, and ratified by the reall assent of the Prince, & have bin ena∣cted & published under the names of the Lords spirituall & Temporall. Read the Statutes of King Edward the first; There shall yee finde that in a Parliament solemnly hotlen by him at S. Edmundbury, the Archbishops and Bishops were quite shut forth: and yet the Parliament held on; and good and wholsome lawes were there enacted,
the departing, or absnce, or malice of the Lords Spirituall not∣withstanding. In the records thereof it is written thus A. Do. 19 The King keeping the Parliament wih his Barons, the Clergy (that is to say, the Archbishops and Bishops) being shut forth, it was enacted, &c. Likewise An. 1273. In provisione Mar∣ona. c. 9. In provisione de Martona in the time of King Henry the third. Whereas matter was moved of Bastardy, touching the Legitimation of Bastards, borne before Marriage; The Statute past wholly with the Lords Temporall, whether the Lords Spirituall would or no: yea, and that contrary to the ex∣presse Decrees and Canons of the Church of Rome. The like hereof (as I am informed) may be found,Extr. Qui silli sunt Legitime. Rich. 2. An. 11. c. 3. How∣beit in these cases (I must confesse) I walke somewhat without my compasse. Touching the judgement hereof, I reerre my selfe wholly unto the Learned. Further, whereas yee call the Doctrine of Christ, that now by Gods great mercy, and to your great griefe is universally and freely preached, a Parliament Re∣ligion, and a Parliament Gospell (for such sobriety becommeth you well, and may stand you in stead when learning fayleth) yee might have remembred that Christ himselfe at the beginning wa universally received, and honoured through this Realm by assent of Parliament; and further, that without Parliament your Pope himselfe was never received, no not in the late time of Queene May. Yea and even then his holinesse was clogged with Parlia∣ment conditions, that whatsoever had beene determined in Parlia∣ment, and was not repealed, were it never so contrary to his will and Canons, should remaine still inviolable and stand in force. Other∣wise his holinesse had gone home againe. Such, M. Harding, is the authority of a Parliament: Verily if Parliaments of Realmes be no Parliaments, then will your Pope be no Pope. Therefore as you now call the truth of God, that wee professe a Parliament Religion, and a Parliament Gospell, even so with like sobriety and gravity of speech yee might have said, Our Fathers in old times had a Parliamen Christ. And your late Fathers and Bre∣thren had of late, in the time of Queene Mary, a Parliament Faith, a Parliament Masse, & a Parliament Pope. Neither is it so strange a matter to see Ecclesiasticall causes debated in Parliament. Read he Lawes of K. Inas, K. Elfred, K. Edward, K. Ethelstane, K. Edmund, K. Edgar, K. Canute; and yee shall find that our godly fore-fathers, the Princes and Peeres of this Realme, never vouchsafed to intrat of matters of Peace, or Warre, or otherwise touching the Common
State, before all controversie of Religion, and causes Eclesia∣sticall had beene concluded King, Lges Canuti. Canut in his Parliament holden at Winchester upon Christmas day, after sundry Lawes and Orders made touching the Faith, the keeping of Hly-dayes, Publik prayers, learning of the Lords Prayer, receiving of the Communion thrice in the yeare, the manner and orme of Bap∣tisme, Fasting, and other like matters of Religion, in the end thereof saith thus: Iam sequitur institutio Legum Secularium: Now followeth an order of Temporall Lawes. In a Parliament hol∣den by King William the Conquerour, it is written thus. Rex, quia Vicarius Summi Regis est, ad hoc constituitur, ut Regnum & popu∣lum Domini, & super omnia sanctam Ecclesiam regat & defendat &c. The King for as much as hee is the Vicar of the Highest King, is thererefore appointed to this purpose, that hee should rule and de∣fend the Kingdome and people of the Lord, and above all things the holy Church, &c. Hereby it appeareth that Kings and Princes are specially and of purpose appointed by God, not onely to defend, but also to Governe and Rule the Holy Church. Thus farre Bishop Iewell, who here clearly affirmes, that Parliaments may be kept, and matters of Religion there determined without Bishops. Neither is this any strange doctrine, for not onely M. Richard Crompton in his Iurisdiction of Courts. fol. 19, 20. (who cites this passage of Bishop Iewell) is of the same opinion; but in the famous Robert Keil∣wey his Reports, f. 184. b. case of Doctor Standish in the 7. yeare of King Henry the eight, at a meeting at Blacke Fryers before the King himselfe, the whole Temporall Councell, and a Committee of both Houses of Parliament, it was resolved by all the Judges, Nostre Seig∣iour le Roy poit assets bien tener son Parliament perly, &ses tem¦porall Seigni∣ours, & per ses Commons, tout sans les spiritu∣als Seigniors; Carlos spiritual Signiors nont ascun place en¦ Parliament Chamber per Reason de lour spiritualty, mes solement per Reason de lour Temporall pos∣sessions &c. Bishop Latymer. Bishop Bilsn. That our Lord the King may very well hold his Parliament by himselfe, his Temporall Lords, and by his Commons, altogether without the Spirituall Lords, for the spiriuall Lords have no place in the Parliament Chamber of reason of their spirituality but only by reason of their Temporall possessions or Baronies. And if this be not sufficient evidence Bishop Latimer in his fourth Sermon of the Plough, p. 19, 20. complaines against Bi∣shops placing in, & being Lords of the Parliament; & makes this one chiefe cause, that they be unpreaching Prelates, lazie loyterers, and idle Ministers. Yea, Thomas Bilson Bishop of Winchester, a great Patriot of Episcopacie, resolves and proves as much in his Booke intituled, The true difference betweene Christian Subjecti∣on and unchristian Rebellion part. 3. p. 540, 541, 542. If her Ma∣jesy
receivd and stablished nothing but the truth of Christ in her Paliament,A Parliament taking part with truth hath the warrant of God and the Magi∣strate. in vaine do you barke against God and the Ma∣gistrate for lacke of competent Courts, Ecclesiasticall Judges, and legall meanes to debate and decide matters of Religion. Whn God commandeth, all humane barres and Lawes do cease: If they joyne with God; they may be used, if they impugne the truth, they must be despised. And yet in our case the Scepter united and adjoyned it selfe to the word of God, and therefore if Princes may command for truth in their owne dominions, as I have largely proved they may; why should not the Prince having the full consent of her Nobles and Commons restore and settle the truth of God within her Realme? Phil. Lay men may not pronounce of Faith. Theo. But Laymen may choose what faith they will professe,Laymen may make their choice what faith they will professe. and Princes may dispose of their Kingdomes, though Priests and Bishops would say nay. Phi. Religion they may not dispose without a Councell. Theo. Not if God command. Phi. How shall they know what God com∣mandeth unlesse they have a Councell. Theo. This is childish wrangling, I aske, if God command, whether the Prince shall re∣fuse to obey till the Clergy confirme the same? Phi. You may be sure a wise and sober Clergy will not dissent from Gods pre∣cepts. Theo. What they will doe, is out of our matter. But in case they doe; to which shall the Prince hearken, to God or those that beare themselves for Priests. Phi. In case they doe so, you need not doubt, but God must be regarded and not men. Theo. And hath the Prince sufficient authority to put that in re which God commandeth,The Prince is authorized from God to execut his Commande∣ment. though the Priests continue their wilfulnes? Phi. There is no Councell nor consent of men good against God. Theo. Hold you there; Then when Chistian Prin∣ces are instructed and resolved by learned and faithfull teachers what God requireth at their hands, what need they care for the backward disposition of such false Prophets as are turned from the truth and preach lyes? Phi. In England when her Majesty came to the Crowne, it was not so. The Bishops that dissented were grave, vertuous and honourable Pastors, standing in de∣fence of the Catholicke and ancient Faith of their Fathers. Theo. You say so, wee say no. Phi. Those be but words. Theo. You say very right; and therefore the more to blame you, that in both your bookes doe play on that string with your Rheto∣ricall and Thrasonicall fluence, and never enter any point or
proofe, that my profi your Reader: you presume your selves to have such apparent right and rule over the Faith, over the Church,The Jesuites presume that all is theirs. over Christian Princes, and Realmes, that without your consent they shall neither conclude, nor consult what religi∣on they will professe. Their acts shall be disorders, their Lawes injuries, their correction tyranny, if you mislike them. This dominion and jurisdiction over all Kingdomes and Countries, if your holy Father and you may have for the speaking; you were not wise if you would not claime it, but before we beleeve you, you must bring some better ground of your Title then such mag∣nificall and majesticall florishes. The Prince and the parliament, you say, had no power to determine, or deliberate of those mat∣ters And why so? you (to wit Bishops) did dissent. May not the Prince command for truth within her Realme,The Prince may command for truth, though the Bishops would say no. except your consents be first required and had? May not her Highnesse serve Christ in making Lawes for Christ, without your liking? Claime you that interest and prerogative, that without you no∣thing shall be done in matters of Religion, by the Lawes of God, or by the liberties of this Realme? By the Lawes of the Land you have no such priviledge. Parliaments have beene kept by the King and his Barons, the Clergy wholly excluded, & yet their Acts and Statutes good. And when the Bishops were present, their voyces from the Conquest to this day were never negative. By Gods Law you have nothing to do with making Lawes for Kingdomes and commonwealths: you may teach, you may not command. Perswasion is your part, compulsion is the Princes. If Princes imbrace the truth, you must obey them. If they pursue truth, you must abide them. By what authority then claime you this Dominion over Princes,The Jesuites have neither Gods Law, nor mans to make that which the Prince, and the Parliament did, to be void for lacke of the Bi∣shops assents. that their Lawes for Religion shall be void unlesse you consent? Phi. They be no Judges of faith. Theo. No more are you. It is lawfull for any Christian to re∣ject your doctrine, if he perceive it to be false, though you teach it in your Churches, & pronounce it in your Councels, to be ne∣ver so true. Phi. That proveth not every private mans opinion to be true. Theo. Not yet to be false, the greater number is not ever a sure warrant for truth. And Judges of faith, though Princes be not,The Kings Judah did com∣mand for truth without a Coun∣ll. yet are they maintainers, establishers and up∣holders of faith with publike power, and positive Lawes, which is the point you now withstand. Phil. That they may do when a Councell is precedent to guide them Theo. What Councell
had 2 Chron. 14. cap. 15. Asa the King of Judah when he commanded his peopl to do according to the Law, and the Commandment, and made a covnant, that whosoever would not seeke the Lord God of Israel should be slaine? Phi. He had Azariah the prophet. Theo. One man is no Councell, and he did but encourage and com∣mend the King, and that long after hee had established Religion in his Realme. What councell had 2 Chron. 9. Ezechiah to lead him, when he restored the true worship of God throughout his land, and was faine to send for the Priests and Levites, and to put them in mind of their duties? What Councell had Iosiah, when ten yeares after his comming to the Crowne he was forced to send for direction to Huldath the Prophetesse, not finding a man in Iudah that did or could undertake the charge?4 Kings 22. Phi. These were Kings of the Old Testament, and they had the Law of God to guide them. Theo. Then since Christian Princes have the same Scriptures which they had, and also the Gospell of Christ, and Apostolike writings to guide them, which they had not, why should they not in their Kingdomes retaine the same power,Christian Prin∣ces may do the lik. which you see the Kings of Judah had and used to their immor∣all praise and joy? Phi. The Christian Emperours ever called Councells, before they would attempt any thing in Ecclesiasti∣call matters. Theo. What Councell had Constantine au∣thorised Christi∣an Religson without any Cocell. Eusb. de vita Constant. lib. 2. Constantine, when with his Princely power he publikely received and settled Chri∣stian religion throughout the World, twenty yeares before the Fathers met at Nice? What councels had Iustinian for all those Ecclesiasticall constitutions and orders,Iustinian had no Councell for the making of his Constitutions which hee decreed and I have often repeated? What Councels had Charles for the Church Lawes and Chapters which he proposed and enjoyned as well to the Pastors as to the people of his Empire? Phi. They had instruction by some godly Bishops that were about them. Theo. Conference with some Bishops, such as they liked, they might have, but councells for these causes they had none. In 480. years after Christian Religion was established by Christian Laws, I mean from Constantine the first, to Constantine the seventh, there were very neere forty Christian Emperours, whose Lawes and Acts for Ecclesiasticall affaires were infinite; and yet in all that time they never called but sixe generall Councels,But 6. generall Councels in 790 yeares. and those for the Godhead of the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, and for the two distinct natures and wills in Christ. All other points of Christian Doctrine and Discipline they received, established,
and maintained without ecumenicall Councels, upon the pri∣vate instruction of such Bishops and clerkes as they favored or trusted. Sora. l. 5. c. 10. Theodosius made his owne choyse what Religion he would esta∣blish. Theodosius, as I shewed before, made his owne choyce what faith he would follow, & had no man, nor meanes to direct him unto truth, but his owne prayers unto God, and private rea∣ding of those sundry confessions that were offered him, &c. Pag. 543. he thus proceeds, Had you beene in the Primitive Church of Christ, you would have gallantly disdained these & other exam∣ples of Christian Kings and Countries converted and instructed by Merchants, somtimes by women,Realmes have beene Christned upon the perswa∣sions of Lay men and women. most times by the single per∣swasion of one man without all legall meanes or judiciall pro∣ceeding: the poore soules of very zeale imbracing the Word of life when it was first offered them, and neglecting your number of voyces, consent of Priest, and competent Courts, as frivilous excptions against God, and dangerous lets to their Salvation Ruff. l. . c. 9. And never as∣ked the Priests leave so to do. Soc. l. 1. c. 19. Frumentius a Christian Child, taken prisoner in India the farther,India converted by Merchants. and brought at length by Gods good Provi∣dence to beare some sway in the Realme in the non-age of the King, carefully sought for such as were Christians among the Roman Merchants, and gave them most free power to have as∣semblies in every place, yeelding them whatsoever was requi∣site, and exhorting them in sundry places to use the Christian prayers. And within short time he built a Church and brought it to passe, that some of the Indians were instructed in the faith and joyned with them. The Ruff. l. 1. c. 10. King of Iberia neere Pontus,Iberia converted by a woman. when he saw his wie restored to health by the prayers of a Christian Captive, and himselfe delivered out of the suddaine danger that he was in, onely by thinking and calling on Christ, whom the Captive woman named so often to his wife, sent for the woman, and desired to learne the manner of her Religion, and promised after that never to worship any other God but Christ:The Jesuites would have beene eloquent against this King that yeelded his Realme to Christ at the direction of a seely wench. The Captive woman taught him as much as a woman might, and admonished him to build a Church and described the forme (how it must be done;) whereupon the King calling the people of the whole Nation together, told what had befallen the Queene and him, and taught them the faith, and became as it were the Apostle of this Nation, though he were not yet baptized. The examples of England, France, and other Countries, are innumerable, where Kings and Com∣mon wealths, at the preaching of one man, have submitted
themselves to the faith of Christ, without Councels or any Sy∣nodall or judiciall proceedings. And therefore each Prince and people without these meanes have lawfull power to serve God and Christ his Sonne,Any man may serve Christ whosoever say nay. notwithstanding twenty Bishops as in our case, or if you will, twenty thousand Bishops, should take exceptions to the Gospell of truth, which is nothing else but to waxe mad against God, by pretence of humane reason and order. By all which it is evident that Parliaments may not onely be held and determine Secular matters, but likewise Ec∣clesiasticall and Religious, without the presence of Bishops which is no wayes necessary, if expedient. Touching the parity of Bishops & Presbyters by Divine institu∣tion & their difference only by custom, he determins thus, Ibid. part. 2. pag. 233.234. The title and authorithy of Arch-Bishops and Patriarkes was not or∣dained by the Commandment of Christ or his Apostles,Patriarkes not erected by Christ but by consent of Bishops. but the Bishops long after, when the Church began to be troubled with dissentions, were content to lincke themselves together, and in every Province to suffer one (whom they preferred for the worthines of his City and called their Metropolitane, that is, Bishop of the chiefe or mother City) to have this prerogative in all doubts of Doctrine and Discipline to assemble the rest of his brethren or consult them absent by Letters, and see that obser∣ved, which the most part of them determined. Hiero. in Epist. ad Ti. cap. 1. Ibid. Before there began Schismes in Religion the Churches, saith S. Hierome, were governed by the Common Councill of the Seniors. And therefore let the Bishops understand that they be greater than (Ministers or) Elders rather by custome, than by any truth of the Lords appoint∣ment, and that they ought to governe the Church in Common: and in his Epistle to Evagrius having fully proved by the Scriptures that the Apostles called themselves but Presbyters, Elders or Seniors, he addeth. Hiero. ad E∣vag. Epist. . That after their times, one was chosen in eve∣ry Church and preferred before the rest to have the dignity of a Bishop, this was provided for a remedie against Schismes, lest every man drawing some unto him should rent the Church of Christ in pee∣ces. For what doth a Bishop, except ordering of others,Ibidem. which an Elder may not doe? And lest you should thinke he speaketh not as well of the chiefe as of the meaner Bishops, he compa∣reth three of the greatest Patriarkes with three of the poorest Bishops he could name. Hiero Ibid. A Bishop of what place soever he be, either of Rome, or of Eugubium, or of Constantinople, or of Rhegium, or of Alexandria, or of Tajus hath the same
merit and the same (function or) Priesthood, abundance of riches or basenesse of poerty doth not make a Bishop higher or lower, for they all be successours to the Apostles. So that the Bishop of Rome by Commission from Christ and succession from the Apostles is no higher than the meanest Bishop in world.The Patriarchs grew by consent and custome. The Superiority which he and others had as Metropolitanes in their owne Pro∣vinces came by custome, as the great Councell of Concil. Nicen. cap. 6. Nice wit∣nesseth, not by Christs institution. Let the old use continue in Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria be chiefe over all those places, for so much as the Bishop of Rome hath the like cu∣stome. Likewise at Antioch, and in other Provinces, let the Chur∣ches keepe theer Prerogatives. The generall Councell of Ephesus confesseth the same. Concil. Ephes. 1. Decretum post quam Cypr. Episc. accessissent ad concil. It seemeth good to this sacred and Oecumeni∣call Synod to conserve to every Province, their right priviledges whole and untouched, which they have had of old according to the custome that now long hath prevailed. Next their authority was subject not onely to the discretion and moderation of their brethren assembled in Councell,Patriarkes al∣wayes subject to Princes and their Ecclesiasticall Lawes. but also to the Lawes and Edicts of Christian Princes, to be granted, extended, limited and ordered as they say cause. For example, the first Councell of Con∣stantinople advanced the Bishop of that City to be the next Pa∣triarch to the Bishop of Rome, which before he was not. And the Councell ofConcil. Chalced. acti. 16. Chalcedon made him equall in Ecclesiasticall ho∣nours with the Bishop of Rome, and assigned him a larger Pro∣vince than before he had. So Iustinian gave to the City in Afri∣ca, that he called after his owne name the See of an Arch∣bishop. Touching Bishops secular Jurisdiction, imprisonment, and temporall affaires he writes thus,Ibid. part. 2, 126.127. Bishops be no governours of Countries,What is meant by Governour. Princes be, that is, Bishops beare not the sword to reward and revenge, Princes doe: Bishops have no power to command and punish, Princes have. This appeareth by the Words of our Saviour, expressely forbidding his Apostles to be Rulers of Nations, and leaving it to Princes. Mat. 20. and Mark. 10. The Kings of Nations rule over (their people) and they that be great ones, exercise authority; with you it shall not be so, that is, you shall neither beare rule,Christ by that word distingui∣sheth the Mini∣sters from the Magistrate. nor exercise authority over your brethren. Phi. the Word is , they over-rule their Subjects with injustice and violence, you shall not doe so. Theo. So your new Translation over-ruleth the Word, howbeit Christ in that
place doth not traduce the power of Princes, as unjust or outra∣gious, but distinguisheth the calling of his Apostles frō the man∣ner of regiment which God hath allowed the magistrate. Christ saith not, Princes be Tyrants, you shall deale more curteously than they doe, but he saith,Luk. 22. Princes be Lords and Rulers over their people, by Gods Ordinance, you shall not be so. Againe the Word which Saint Luke hath is , without any composition. They be Lords and Masters, and S. Paul confesseth of himselfe and other Apostles, Not that we be Lords or Masters of your faith: yea the compound , is with power and force to rule men whether they will or no, not with wrong and injury to oppresse them, and therefore the conclusion is inevitable, that Princes may lawfully compell and punish their Subjects which Bishops may not.Publike Govern∣ment is by cor∣rection and com∣pulsion. This distinction betweene them is evident by their severall commissions which God hath signed: The Prince, not the Priest, Rom. 13. Mat. 26. 1 Tim. 3. & Tit. 1. Mat. 24. 2 Tim. 2. beareth the sword, Ergo the Prince not the Priest is Gods Minister to revenge malefactors. Peter him∣selfe was sharpely rebuked by Christ for using the sword, and in Peter all Pastors and Bishops are straitely charged not to meddle with it. All that take the sword shall perish with the sword. And of all men a Bishop must be no striker, for if he that should feed his Masters Houshold fall to striking, he shall have his portion with hypocrites. The servants of God must be gentle towards all, instructing those that resist with mildnesse,Bishops forbid to use violence. 2 Tim. 3. & 4. not compelling any with sharpenesse. Their function is limited to the preaching of the Word, and dispensing the Sacraments, which have no kinde of compulsion in them, but invite men onely by sober perswa∣sions to beleeve and imbrace the promises of God. To conclude, Pastors may teach, exhort, and reprove, not force, command or revenge, onely Princes be governours, that is, publicke Magi∣strates to prescribe by their Lawes, and punish with the sword such as resist them within their dominions, which Bishops may not doe: which he thus further prosecutes. Part. 3. p. 358. Pastors have their regiment but over the soules, not over the bodies or goods of men. The watch-men and Shepheards that serve Christ in his Church, have their kinde of regiment distinct from the temporall power and State, but that regiment of theirs is by counsell and perswasion, not by terrour or compulsion, and reacheth neither to the goods nor the bodies of any men, much lesse to the crownes and lives of Princes, &c.Ibid. Part. 3. p. 529.526. The Pastor can∣not force his flocke. Princes may force their Subjects, by the tempo∣rall sword which they beare, Bishops may not force their flock
with any corporall or externall violence. Chrysost. de acr∣dt. l. 2. Chrysostome largely debateth and fully concludeth this matter with us. If any sheepe, saith he, goe out of the right way, and leaving the plentifull Pa∣stures graze on barren and steepe places, the Sheepeheard somewhat exalteth his voyce to reduce the dispersed stragling sheepe, and to com∣pell them to the locke. But if any man wander from the right path of the Christian faith, the Pastour must use great paines, care and patience.Pastors may not constraine but onely perswade. Neque enim vis illi inferenda, neque terrore ille cogendus, erum suadendus tantum, ut de integro ad veritatem redeat. For hee may not be forced, nor constrained with terrour, but onely perswaded to returne to the truth. And againe, A Bishop cannot ure men with such authority, as a sheepheard doth his sheepe, for a sheepeheard ath his choyce: to binde his sheepe, to dyet them, to seare them and cut them but in the other case the facility of the cure consisteth not in him that giveth but onely in him that taketh the medicine. This that admirable teacher perceiving sayd to the Corinthians; not that we have any domi∣nion over you under the name of Faith, but that we are helpers of your joy: For of all men Christian (Bishops) may least correct the faults of men by force.Bishops least of all men may cor∣et with force. Iudges that are without (the Church) when they take any transgressing the Lawes, they shew themselves to be endued with great authority and power, and compell them in spite of their hearts to change their manners. But here (in the Church) we may not offr any violence, but onely perswade. We have not so great authority gi∣ven us by the Lawes, as to represse offendours, and if it were lawfull for us so to doe,Compulsio nei∣thr Lawfull nor expedient in Bi∣shops. we have no use of any such violent power, for that Christ crowneth them which abstaine from sinne, not of a forced, but of a willing minde and purpose. Hilary teacheth the same Lesson:Hillar. ad Const. . 2. imperfect. Bishops may not meddle with those that b illing. If this violence were used for the true faith, the Doctrine of Bishops would be against it. God needeth no forced service, he requireth no contrained confession, I cannot receive any man, but him that is wil∣ling, I cannot give are but to him that intreateth, I cannot signe any but him that (gladly) professeth.Origen in p. 13. Epist. ad Rom.God will not have crimes re∣venged by the ulers of the Church but by the judges of the world. Origen agreeth with them both. See the wisedome of the holy Ghost; because that other faults are judg∣ed by the Lawes of Princes, and it seemed superfluous now to prohi∣bite those things by Gods Law, which are sufficiently revenged by mans, he repeateth those and none else as fit for religion, of which mans Law saith nothing; whereby it appeareth that the Iudges of this world doe meddle with the greatest part of Gods Law. For al the crimes which God would have revenged, he would have them revenged not by the pp. & Rlers of the Church, but by the Iudges of the world, and that Paul knowing, rightly calleth (the Prince) Gods minister and judge of him
that doth evill. Phi. Bishops may not offer force with their owne hands, but they may command others to doe it for them. Theoph. A grosse shift. As though Temporall Princes or Judges did execute malefactours with their owne hands. Bishops by vertue of their vocation cannot claime the sword,Bishops by ver∣te of their cal∣ling cannot au∣thorize violence or armes. and conse∣quently they cannot command, or authorize any man to take the goods or touch the bodies of Christians o Infidels, which being a cleere conclusion it is most evident they can much lesse licence you to take the Crownes and take the lives of Princes, to whom Rom. 13. God hath delivered the sword to judge the earth, and made them servants onely to himselfe, since all other soules must be subject to them by the tenor of his owne prescription and their first erection as the Scripture witnesseth. And touch∣ing Bishops having Conusans in their courts of Tythes, &c. he writes thus. Ibid. par. 2. pag. 246. For Tythes, Testamets, Administrations, Ser∣vitude, Legitimations, and such like, you went beyond your bounds, when you restrained them to your Courts, and with∣ou Caesar, made Lawes for things that belonged unto Caesar. The goods, Lands, Livings, States and Families of Lay men and Clerkes are Caesars charge,The goods lands, & livings, of Clergie men be Cesars right. not yours, and therefore your decrees, judgements and executions in those cases, if you claime them from Christ as things spiritall, not from Caesar as matters committed of trust to you by Christian Princes, are nothing else but open and wifull invasions of other mens rights, you changing the names, and calling those things Spirituall and Ec∣lesiasticall, which indeede be civill and temporall, and shoul∣dering Prices from their cushins, who first suffered Bishops to sir judges in those causes, of Honour to their Persons and favour to their sunctions, which on your part is but a bad requitall of their Princely graces and benefits; He addes. Ibid. part. 2. p. 252.253. S. Paul expresse∣ly writeth of the Prince that He beareth the sword not without cause, and is Gods minister to revenge him that doth evill: And our Saviour severely forbiddeth Peer and the rest of the Apostles to meddle with the sword.The sword com∣mitted to the Prince. All that take the sword shall perish by the sword,Rom. 13. and to them all, you know that Kings of Nations raigne ver them and they that be great exercise authority, with you it shall not be so. The sword is but the signe of publicke and Princely power,His Apostles forbidden the sword. Mat. 20. Mat. 26. and where the thing is not lawfull the signe is unlawfull. Since then the Lord interdicteth his Apostles and messengers all Princely power, it is evident, the sword which is ut a signe threof is likewise interdicted them. Thus much Bernard
sticketh not to tell Pope Bernard de consi∣derat: l. 2. Eugenius to his face, It is the Lords voice in the Gospell, Kings of Nations are Lords over them, and they that have power over them are called gratious, and the Lord inferreth, you shall not be so. It is a cleare case, the Apostles are for∣bidden dominion. G thou then, saith Bernard to the Pope, and usurpe if thou dre, either an Apostleship, if thou be a Prince, or do∣minion if thou be Apostolike.Dominion inter∣dicted the Pope himselfe. Thou art expresly forbidden one of them. If thou wilt have both, thou shalt lose both. The patterne of an Apo∣stle is this, Dominion is interdicted, service is enjoyned, Gird thy selfe with thy sword, the sword of the spirit, which is the Word of God. And this Pope Caus. 33: Quaest. 2. ¶ Inter Haec. Nicholas fairely confesseth, The Church of God hath no sword but the spirituall, wherewith she quickneth, shee kil∣leth not. Your owne Law saith, Caus. 33. Quaest. 8. ¶ De Episc. It is easily proved of Bishops and other Clergy mn whatsoever, that they may not either by their owne authority, or by the authority of the Bishop of Rom, take weapon in hand (and excercise the materiall sword:) and addeth his reason, For every man besides him, and his authority which hath lawfull ∣wer, and which, as the Apostle saith, beareth the sword not without cause,No Clergy mn may use the Sword no not by the Popes authority. to whom every soule ought to be subject, every man I say, that without his authority taketh the sword, shall perish with the sword. He that beareth the sword may lawfully put malefactors to death, and wage warre with his enemies, when need so re∣quireth, which Bishops may not doe. 2 Cor. 10. The weapons of our warfare are not carnall, saith Saint Paul. Ad solir vitam agentes. Quid Episcopis cum bello? what have Bishops to doe with battle, saith Athanasius: and Ambros. l. 5. Epist. 33. Abrose, Pugnre non debo, I ought not to fight. If they may not fight, much lesse kill, if they may do neither, they cannot beare the sword, which is appointed by God, and received of men to do both. The words of our Saviour are cleare with us for the negative, My Kingdome, saith hee, is not of this World: if then your Priests, Prelates, and Popes will be the servants of Christ,The servants of Christ may have no earthly King∣dome since their master had none. they must challenge no worldly Kingdome as from him, or in his name. Iohn 8. The servant is not above his Master. If the ma∣ster with his owne mouth have denyed it, the servants may not affirme it, or usurpe it. The souldiers of Christ must not Matth. 10 intan∣gle themselves with secular affaires, much lesse make themselves Lords,Tim. 2. and Judge; of earhly matters, which office properly belongeth to the sword, and must be sustained of all those that beare the sword. The Popes themselves beore their power and pride grew so great, were of this opinion with us. Thus,
and much more Bishop Bilson to the same effect. Not to trouble you with more quotations of this nature, which are infinite, I shall conclude onely with two more auho∣rities of men of greatest eminence, and learning in our Church, in Queene Elizabeths later dayes. The first of them, is Dr. Whitakers,Dr. Whitakers, Regius Professor of Divinity in the University of Cambridge; he, in his Booke Contra Dueum. l. 6. sect. 19. & Controvers. 4. De Ecclesiae regimine. Quest. 1. c. 1. sect. 1. 2. c. 2. sect. 16. Quest. 4. c. 3. sect. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. De notis Ecclesiae, qu. 5. c. 6. p 509 and Contr. 2. Concil. qu. 3. c. 2. p. 586, 587. reciting Saint Ieromes words at large on Titus 1. and to Euagrius, concludes with him; That in former times Bishops and Presbyters were all one and the same: that every where a Presbyter was the same that a Bishop is: that ALL Chur∣ches were not under the Government of one man, but were governed by the Common Counsell of their Presbyters; Ecclesiae, inquit Jeronymus, gubernabantur, &c. id est, VBIQVE OMNES, fuit hi MOS Ecclesiarum gubernandarum. That this custome was not changed by the Apostles, sed POST, Ecclesie judicto. That Bishops are greater now than Ministers not by divine institution, but custome, and that humano, non divino jure totum oc discrimen constat: the whole difference betweene them is by humane, not by divine Law, or right. That by ancient, and divine right a Presbyter was lesse than a Bishop NIHILO, in nothing: After which he proceeds thus. If the Apostles had changed that order (as Sanders pretendeth) what had it profited Hierome with so great diligence to have colle∣cted testimonies out of the Apostles, whereby to shew, that they were sometimes the same? It might easily come into his memo∣ry, that this order was changed by the Apostles themselves, after the Church was disturbed and torne with discords. But wherfore then saith Hierom: Before it was said, I am of Paul, &c. the Church was Governed by the Common Councell of Presbyters, &c. I answer, this might deceive Sanders. Hierome onely alluded to the place of the Apostle, that hee might shew, that schismes were the cause of changing this order, as hee saith elsewhere, that this was done to remedy schismes. But this remedy was almost worse than the disease.Nota. For as at first one Presbyter was set above the rest, and made a Bishop, so afterwards, one Bishop was preferred before the rest: and so this custome brought forth the Pope with his Monarchy by little and little,
and brought it into the Church. Ierome so openly oppugneth the Pontificall Hierarchy, that the Papists know not what to deter∣mine or answere concerning Hierome. Lib. 1. c. 5. De Sacr. Hm. Cant. utia. Michael Medina doubts not to affirme, that Ierome was an Hereticke in this kinde, and that he held the very same opinion that Aerius did: verily Hie∣rome was of the same opinion with Aerius; whereby we may the lesse regard that Aerius is so often objected to us, AB IN∣SULSIS HOMINIBUS, by foolish men. If Aerius was an He∣reticke in this thing, he had Ierome a companion of his Heresie: and not onely him but also many other Ancient Fathers both Greeke and Latine, as Medina confesseth. In cap. de Epis. her. 2. Alphonsus de Castro saith, that the Church was sarre enough off from the minde of Hierome; and a certaine man hath written in the Margin, that Ieromes opinion is to be dissembled, not to be urged. De Hierarch. 2. c. lt. Pighius writes that Ierome is involved in such difficulties, out of which he could not winde himselfe, and that he fell into perplexed absurdities, no wayes cohearing and fighting among them∣selves. It is no wonder if they speake evill of us, who thus petulantly insult over Ierome:Annot. in Epis. 85. Hr. Marianus Victorius endeavours to excuse Ierome, and writes, that he speakes not of Bishops and Presbyters, but o Bishops onely; and that verily all these are equall, and that many did ill interpret Hierome otherwise. But Ierome most manifestly compares Presbyters with Bishops, and that Marianus had most easily seene unlesse he had beene mise∣rably blinde; yet at length by the opinion of Marianus, all Bi∣shops are equall.Lib. I. c. 22. de Ordinat. Hierarch Minist. Turrianus otherwise and more acutely an∣swers: Hieronymum non dicere Presbyterum idem, sed eundem esse cum Episcopo; What knots doth this Jesuie here seeke in a Rush? If a Presbyter be the same that a Bishop is, and the Bi∣shop the same that a Presbyter is, what at last good Jesuite canst thou thinke to be between a Presbyter and a Bishop? Thus verily our adversaries (yea Bpp) finde not how they may defend themselves from this sentence of Hierome; and truely all of them sticke in the same mire, albei some of them are more foulely plunged than others. The matter now returnes to Lib. 1. de Clericis . 15. Bellarmine as to the Triary, he most confidently pronounceth, that Ierome differeth as much from Aerius, as a Catholick from an Hereticke. I most firmely averre the contrary, that their opini∣ons concering this thing can by no meanes be disjoyned nor di∣stinguished. Aerius thought, that a Presbyter differed not
rom a Bishop by Divine right and authority: Hierome contends this very thing, and defends it by the same testimonies of Scriptures as Aerius doth. Now quam inepte & pueriliter, how foolishly and childishly Hart 5. Epiphanius answereth to those testi∣monies, all may perceive. For he saith, that the Apostle was wont to write thus, because that at that time, there were not any Presbyters in many Curches by reason of the paucity of Presbyters. I admire so great a Theologue, who tooke upon him to refute all Heretickes, saw not how shamefully he was mistaken. For what? was the at that time greater plenty of Bishops than of Presbyters, that whereas there were many Bishops in one City, yet there were no presbyters there. The notable absurdiy of this an∣were Bellarmine himselfe acknowledged. And yet this is that Epiphanius who first of all proscribed Aerius as an Hereticke, absque Synodi aut Ecclesiae judicio, without the judgement of a Synod or of the Church. But what saith Bellarmine? he pro∣poundeth a double difference betweene Aerius and Hierom. The first is that Ierom writes everywhere, That a Bishop is grea∣ter than a Presbyter as to the power of Order. I answere, that it is most false; Hierome never writ so, neither doth he by any meanes acknowledg a Bishop to be greater than a Prebyter, un∣lesse it be by custome, which he distinguisheth from divine dispo∣sition. And if there were so great a difference, wherefore doth Ie∣rome, that he may revok Deacons to modesty, & reduce them into order, affirme that Presbyters are Bishops? Whence doth he ad∣monish that this contention taken up against Presbyters, belongs to Bps themselves, seeing Presbyters by the first institution of this order and Ministry are Bps? Now if there were the greatest difference between these in the power of order, had not Ierome bin very sottish in his argument? Now whereas, he saith, Epist. ad Eva.What doth a Bp except ordination, which a Presbyter may not do? He speaks of the custome of those times; that not even the when by the custome of the Church, a Bishop was greater then a Presbyter, could a Bishop doe more then a Presbyter in any thing, ex∣cept in ordination: yea elsewhere Hierom himselfe attributes ordination to Presbyters: (And indeed so he doth, for in Zoph. 1. 2. Tom. 5. pag. 218. D. he writes thus; Sacerdotes, &c That Priests who baptize and consecrate the Lords Supper, which is the greater; MANVS IMPONVNT, LEVITAS ET ALIOS CON∣STITVVNT SACERDOTES; lay on hands, ordaine Levites and other Priests, which is in truth but the lesse:) The second is, that
although Ierome doth not acknowledge any difference jure di∣vino betweene the jurisdiction of a Bishop and Presbyter, yet he grants that this was lawfully introduced by the Apostles, and that necessarily to avoyd Schismes. I answere first, that Bellar∣min hath resolved out of the opinion of Ierome, that there is no difference in the Jurisdiction of a Bishop and Presbyter: whence it is manifest, what Ierome thought of the Jurisdiction and Pri∣macy of the Pope. For seeing the Primacy of the Pope con∣sists in Jurisdiction, & Ierome thinks that Iure Divino the Jurisdi∣ction of a Bishop is not greater than that of a Presbyter, it fol∣lowes from Ieromes opinion, that the Papacy (and Prelacy) Divino mullo ju nitatur, rests upon no divine Law. Secondly, llarmine fights with himselfe, and makes Ierome to speake contradictions. For if Ierome thought that jurisdiction of a Bi∣shop not to be Iuris Divini, how the was that difference in∣troduced by the Apostles? or how could Ierome prove out of the Apostles writings, that there was not any difference be∣tweene them? Certainely, that which the Apostles instituted and introduced, hath the force of divine right: Finally, this profound Doctor, in his Respons. ad 0. Printed by it selfe London, 183. Rationem Campiani. p. 51. concludes thus of Aerius is opinion. And ruely, if to condemne prayers for the dead Et Episcopo Presbyteros aequare sit hreticum, NIHIL CATHOLICVM ESSE POTEST; and o equall Presbyters to a Bishop he Heretiall, nothing can be Catho∣like: Thus this great Doctor, William Whitaker; with whom his Coaetaneans Doctor Willet, in his Synopsi Papismi, Contro∣versie Generall. 5. part. 2. in the Appendix. p. 272. to 284. in the last Edition; and Master William Perkins in his Reformed Catholicke. Cont. 18. c. 21. concurre. I wonder therefore with what impudency and shamelesse brow In his 3. last Bookes, Bishop White and Do∣cto Hylin. Bishop Hall and others dare condemne the defenders of the identity and Parity of Presbyters and Bishops by Divine right for Aerian Heretickes, Schismatickes, Novillers, and oppugners of the received Do∣ctrine of the Church of England; when as the learnedest Pre∣lates, Martyrs and writers of our Church (as appeares by the premises) have proessedly justified this opinon as Apostolicall, Orthodox, Ancient, and Catholike, warranted by the unani∣mous consent both of Scriptures and Fathers; s will further appear by the next Authority, with which I shall con∣clude.
And that is our incomparably learned Doctor Iohn Rainolds once professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford;Doctor Iohn Ray∣nolds. who in his Letter to sir Francis Knoles, Sept. 19. 1598. (concerning some passages in Doctor Bancrofs Sermon at Pauls Crosse) Prin∣ted in King Iames his time, and now reprinted, writes thus, both touching the pretended heresie of Aerius, and the Divine right of Episcopacy. Page 2. to 9. It appeareth, by the aforesayd words of Doctor Bancroft, that he avoucheth the Superiority which Bi∣shops have over the Clergie to be of Gods owne Ordinance, for he improveth the impugners of it, as holding with Aerius, that there is no difference by the Word of God, betwixt a Priest and a Bishop, which he could not doe with reason, unlesse he himselfe proved the Bishops superiority, as established by Gods Word; and he addeth, that their opinion who gainsay it is Heresie, whereof it ensueth he thinketh it contrary to Gods Word, sith Heresie is an errour repugnant to the truth of the Word of God, as (according to the 1 Tim. 6.3. Titus 3.10.  Pet. 1.19.21.Scriptures) our owne Church The defence of the Apolog: Part. 1. & 7. de∣vision. 2. answere to the Rhem. Tit. 3.10. doth teach us. Now the arguments which he brin∣geth to prove it an Heresie, are partly over-weake, and partly untrue. Overweake, that he Pag. 18. beginneth with, out of Epi∣phanius: Utrue, that he adjoyneth of the Generall consent of the Church. For though Epiphanius doe say, that Aerius his as∣sertion is full of folly, yet he disproveth not the reason which Aerius stood on, out of the Scriptures; nay he dealeth so in see∣king to disprove it, that Bellarmine the Jesuie, Tom. 1. Cant. 3. lib. 1. c. 15. though de∣sirous to make the best of Epiphanius, whose opinion herein he maintaineth against the Protestants, yet is forced to confesse, that Epiphanius his answere is not all of the wisest, nor any way can fit the text. As for the generall consent of the whole Church which Doctor Bancrof saith, condemned that opinion of Aerius for an Heresie & himself for an Hereick, because he persisted in it, that is a large speech, but what proofe hath he, that the whole Church did so? It appeareth he saith in Hrs 15. Epiphanius. It doth not, & the contrary appeareth by In Epist. ad Ti∣tum & Epist. 85. ad Evagrium. S. Ierome & sundry others, who lived some in the same time, some after Epiphanius, even Saint Augustine himselfe, though Doctor Bancroft cite him, as bearing witnesse thereof; likewise I grant Saint Augustine in his booke of ap. 53. Heresies, ascribeth this to Aerius, for one; that he sayd Presyterum ab Episcopo nulla differentia deberi discerni; but it is one thing to say, there ought to be no difference betweene them,
(which Aerius saying condemned the Churches order, yea made a Schisme therein) and so is censured by S. Austin, counting it an heresie as Epiphanius from whom he tooke it recorded, him∣selfe, as he In Argu. praefix. lib. 3. witnesseth; not knowing how farre the name of He∣resie should be stretched, another thing to say, that by the Word of God there is no difference betwixt them, but by the order and custome of the Church: which S. Austin saith in effect himselfe; so farre was he from witnessing this to be Heresie by the generall con∣sent of the whole Church:Epist. 19. which untruth how wrongfully it is fathered on him, and on Epiphanius (who yet are all the witnes∣ses, that Doctor Bancroft hath produced for the prooe hereof, or can for ought that I know) it may appeare by this that our learned Country man of godly memory, Defence of the Apolog. Part 2. c. 9. divis. 1. pa. 198. Bishop Iuel, when Harding to convince the same opinion of heresie, alleadged the same witnesses, citing to the contrary Chrysostome, Ierome, Au∣stin and Ambrose, knit up his answere with these words: All these, and other Holy Fathers, together with the Apostle S. Paul, for thus saying, by Hardings advice must be held for Heretickes. And De Sacror. Hom. Orig. & consecr. l. 1. c. 5. Michael Medina, a man of great account in the Councell of Trent, more ingenuous herein than many other Papists, affirmeth not onely the former ancient writers alleadged by Bishop Iuel, but also that another Ierome, Theodoret, Primasius, Sedulius, and Theophylact, were of the same mind touching this matter with Aerius: with whom agree likewise 1 Tim. 3. Oecumenius, and In Epist. ad Titum. An∣selmus Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and an other Collect. Can. l. 7. cap. 87. Anselmus, and Polyc. lib. 2. Tit. 1.9. & 39. Gregory, and Cap. legi∣mus dist. 39. cap. Olim. dist. 95. Gratian, and after them how many It being once inrolled in the Canon Law for sound and Ca∣tholike Doctrine, and thereupon publickely taught by learned Author Glossae in ca. dist. citat hodorieus caol; in con∣cil. Basil. Dua∣rn. de sacri Ec∣cles. minist. lib. 1. cap. 7. men. All which doe beare witnesse against Doctor Bancroft of the point in question, that it was not condemned for an Heresie by the generall consent of the whole Church. (And the rather which is observable, because Isiodor Hispalensis, Originum lib. 8. c. 5. and Gratian himselfe Caus. 24. qu. 3. reciting the he∣resie of Aerius, omits his equalizing of Bishops and Presbyters, out of the li of his errours, because an Orthodox truth, approved by themselves and other Fathers; which is worthy observation.) If he should reply, that these latter witnesses, did live a 1000. yeares after Christ, and therefore touch not him, who sayd, Pag. 19. it was condemned so in the time of S. Austin,Pag. 69. and of Epi∣phanius, the most flourishing time of the Church that ever hap∣ned since the Apostles dayes, either in respect of learning or of
zeale. First, they whom I named, though living in a latter time, yet are witnesses of the frmer. Oecumenius the Greeke Scholiast treading in the steps of the old Greeke Fathers, and the two Anselmes, with Gregory and Gratian, expressing S. Ieromes sentence word by word. Besides that, perhaps it is not very likely that Anselme of Canterbuy, should have bin Canonized by the Pope of Rome, & Worshipped for a St, that the other Anselme & Gregory hould have such place in the Popes Library, and be esteemed of as they are; that Gratians workes should be allowed so long time, by so many Popes for the golden foundation of the Canon Law, if they had taught that for Catholike, and sound, which by the generall consent of the whole Church, in the most flourishing time that ever happened since the Apostles dayes, was condemned for Heresie, chiefely in a matter of such waight and moment, to the Popes supremacy which as they doe claime over all Bishops by the Ordinance of God, so must they allow to Bishops over Priests by the same Ordinance, as they saw at length, and therefore have not onely decreed it now in the Sess. 23. c. 4. Canon. 6. & 7. Councell of Trent, but also in the Annot Marg ad cap. legimus dist. 43. new edition of their Canon Law, have set downe this note; that one Hughs Glosse allowed by the Arch-deacon (saying, that Bishops have differed from Priests alwayes as they doe now in Government, and Prelateship, and Offices, and Sacraments, but not in the name and Title of Bishop, which was common to them both) must be held hereaf∣ter for S. Jeromes meaning; at least, for the meaning of the Canon taken out of S. Ierome, though his words be flat & plaine against this Glosse, as Tom. 1. Co∣tro. 5. l. 1. c. Bellarmine himselfe confesseth. Where∣to may be added, that they also who have laboured about the reformation of the Church these 500. yeares, have taught that all Pastours be they entituled Bishops or Priests, have equall authority and power by Gods Word. First the Aeneas Sil∣vius Hist. Bhem. cap. 35. & Pigh. Hierarch Eccles. l. 2. c. 10. Waldenses, next Defens. pacis Artic. 2. c. 15. Marsi∣lius Patavinus: then Th. Walden Doct. fidei Tom. 1. lib. 2. c. 60. & Tom. 2. c. 17. Wickliffe and his Scholars; afterwards Aeneas Sil∣vius loco citato. Husse, and Hussites; last of all Adversus fal∣so nominat or∣din. Epist. & ad∣ver. Papa. Rom. Luther, In Epist. ad Philip. & Tit. 1. Calvin, Apol. Confes. Wittenh. c. 2.21. Bren∣tius, Decad. 5. Ser. 2. Bullinger, Loc. Com. Tit. de minist. verbi. Musculus and other, who might be reckoned particularly in great number, sith as here with us, both Iuel loco citat, & Pilkington in the Treatise of burning Pauls Church. Bishops, and the Queenes D. Humphrey in Camp. & in Dureum Jesuitam part. 2. rat. 3. & D. Whit. ad rat. Campiani. & Confuta. Durei Jesuitae. lib. 6. proessors of Divinity in our Universities, and Mr. Bradford. Lmbert and others. Mr. Fox Acts, & Dr. Fulke against Briow motives 40. and answere to the Rhmists, Tit. 1.5. other learned men doe consent therein:
so in orraigne Nations, all whom I have read treating of this matter, and many more (no doubt) whom I have not read. The siting & examining of the Trent Councell, hath beene undertaken by onely two, which I have seene; the one a Divine, the other a Lawyer Part. 2. Kemnisius, and Lb. 4. Gentilletus: they both condemne the contrary doctrine thereunto, as a Trent errour, the one by Scriptures, and Fathers; the others, by the Canon Law. But what doe I further speake of severall persons? It is the com∣mon judgement of the reformed Churches of Helvetia, Savoy, France, Scotland, Germany, Hungary, Poon, the Low Countries, and our owne, witnesse the Harmony of Confessions. Wherefore sih Doctor Bancroft, I assure my selfe, will not say that all these have approved that as sound and Christian Doctrine, which by the generall consent of the whole Church in a most flourishing time, was condemned for Heresie: I hope he will acknow∣ledge, that he was overseene, in that he avouched the Superiority which Bishops have among us over the Clergie to be of Gods owne Ordinance. Thus Doctor Rainold: of whom you may reade more to this purpose, in his Conference with Hart, Aug. 1584. London. 1609. p. 12.123.185.218.41.540.541. I could recite many more of our owne writers and records to the same effect, but because I have published, A Catalogue of them, and of such Testimonies in all ages, as plainely evidence Bishops and Presbyters to be both one and the same in Iurisdiction, Oce, Dig∣nity, Order, and Degree, by Divine Law and Institution, and their Disparity to be a meere humane Ordinance long after the Apo∣stles times, &c. and because I have at large manifested this trth, in my Vnbishoping of Timothy and Titus; and in my Breviate of the Prelates intolerable Vsurpations, both upon the Kings Prero∣gative Royall and the Subjects Liberties, I shall for brevity sake referre you to them; and proceede to answere some principall Objections in defence and maintenance of Episcopacy, and then cast Anchor.
CHAP. IX. Comprising an Answer to the Principall Objections al∣leadged by the Prelates in defence of the Divine pre∣tended Institution, and for the continuance of their Episcopacy in our Church. HAving thus given you a taste what our owne Au∣thors ancient and Modene, Protestants and Pa∣pists, Martyrs, and Prelates have formerly writ∣ten touching the pretended Divine Jurisdiction, the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Antimo∣narchicall practises, Lordlinesse, secular imploy∣ments, courtship, and great Temporall possessions of our pre∣lates, I shall onely Answere two Aguments, or rather bare Alle∣gation now principally insisted on, for the maintenance of Epis∣copall Superiority by a Divine right, with three more Objecti∣ons for the continuance of Episcopacy still in our Church, and so conclude. The first Allegation for Episcopacies Divine institution;Allegation. I. For the Divine right of Episco∣pacy. is ta∣ken  rom the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, whom An humble Remonstrance.p. 27. Defence of the humble Re∣monstrance. p. 103. to 127. and in his former Bookes for Epis∣copacy. Bshop Hall, The judge∣ment of Doctor Raiolds, &c. more largely confirmed out of antiquity by Iames Bishop of Armagh. Bishop Vsher WillimBi∣shop of Rchester Sem. 1. at Ham∣pton Court. Sept. 21. 1606. and Sir Thomas A∣stons briee Re∣lation of Episco∣pacy, Sect. 2. p. 6.7. others will neds have o be a Bishop Superiour in Authority and Jurisdiction to other Ministers, because he writes onely in the singular number to the Angel, not to the Angels of that Church, which say hey implies a Supriority of one speciall Minister in that Church, to whom this Epistle is principally directed, over the other Presbyters not once mentioned in this Epistle. To which I answere: First, that his word Angel is but a metaphoricall Title, proper onely to the heavenly Spirits in
strictnesse of speech, and in a large sense, as it signifies a Angelus nomen est Offici, non na∣turae, &c. Age∣us enim Graco vo∣cabulo, Ltine di∣citur nuntius, si quas nomen na∣turae, spiritus est; si officium Ang∣ls: ex eo quod subsistit siritus est; ex eo quod mittitur Angelus. Remigius Explan in Epist. ad He∣baeos, c. 1. Mes∣senger, or Servant, it may as aptly denoe a Minister or Presbyter, as a Bishop. The Tile therefore of it selfe, as it is used by S. Iohn, makes nothing or Episcopacy, since ordinary Presbyters are in Scripture sometimes stiled 1. Cor. 11.10. Rev. 1.20. c. 2.1.8.12.18. c. 3.1.7.14. Angels, but Bishops (distinct rom Presbyters) are never so named there. Secondly, our Bishops themselves if not the whole Church of England with our late famous King Iames, in the Contents an∣nexed by them to the Bibles of the last Translation, now onely used & permitted in our Churches, in expresse Termes, expound the Angels of he 7. Churches to be the Ministers of them, the Contents of the second Chap. of the Revelation running thus. What is commanded to be written to the ANGELS, that is, The Mi∣nisters of the Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thiatyra, &c. had these Angels beene such as you now call Bishops, you would have rendred the Contents thus, What is written to the Angels, that is, to the Bishops of Ephesus, &c. But since you ex∣pound Angels thus, to be the Ministers of these Churches, who in vulgar appellation and acception are distinct from Bishops, and as you hold inferiour to them; you must now either re∣nounce your owne and our Churches exposition, or your Epi∣scopacy: For if the Angels of these Churches be the most emi∣nent persons and rulers in them, as you argue; and these, as the Contents testifie, be not Bishops, but Minister, it followes in∣fallibly, that Ordinary Ministers and Presbyters, are superiour to Bishops, not Bishops to them. And that these Angels were the Ministers of these Churhes, is evident by the expresse re∣solution of our owne learned Iames Pilkington, late Bishop of Durham, in his Exposition upon the Prophet Aggeus. cap. 1. v. 13. London. 1562. where he writes thus: That more worshipfull names are given to the Preaching Minister, than to any sort of men. This name Angell, is given to the Preachers for the heaven¦ly comfort that they bring to man from God, whose Messengers they be. In the Revel. of S. Iohn, he writes to the 7. Angels, . to the 7. Ministers (not Bishops) of the 7. Congregations or Chur∣ches in Asia. By this Bishops resolution then, and by Saepe sacram Scripturam prae∣dicatores Ecclesiae pr eo quod Patris gloriam annunci∣ant Angelor, nomi∣ne solere designare; & hinc est quod Joannes in Apo∣calypsi septem Eccless, scribens, Angels Ecclesia∣rum loqtur, id est, Praedicatoribus populrum Mora∣liuml. 34. in Job c. 4. Pope Gregory the firsts too, these seven Angels are seven Preaching Mi∣nisters, not Lordly Non-Preaching Prelates. And Master Fox in his Meditations on Apoc. c. 2, p. 27.28. concurres with them; averrig, That by the seven Angels, is meant either the Mini∣sters
of the seven Churches, or the Churches themselves; which exposition is as ancient as Lib. 1. c. 1.2.9.10.Aretas, In Apoc. c. 2. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 6. pars. 1. p. 523. Primasius, andLib. 2. in Apoc. Am∣brosius Ansbertus, who in their Commentaries on Apocalypsis, write thus. Septem stellae Angeli sunt septem Ecclesiarum. Nec pu∣tandum est quod hoc loco Angeli singuli singulis deputentur hominibus, quod incongrue ab aliquibus aestimatur, sed potius Angeli Eccles. hic intelligendi sunt rectores populi, qui singulis Ecclesiis praesidentes, verbum vitae cunctis annunciant. Nam & Angeli nomen, nuncius in∣terpretatum dicitur. Et Angelo Ecclesiae Ephesi scribe. Darivo hic casu Angelo posuit, non genitivo. Ac si diceret, Scribe Angelo huic Ecclesiae, ut non tam Angelum & Ecclesiam separatim videatur dix∣isse, quam quis Angelus exponere voluisset, unam videlicet faciens Angeli Ecclesiaeque personam. Quamvi enim Sacramenti dispensa∣tione praeponatur, compaginis tamen unitate connectitur. Nam hanc regulam a principio servans, non septem Angelis, sed Septem Ecclesiis scripsisset; Iohannes, inquiens, Septem Ecclesiis quae sunt in Asia, & dominus quem vidit; Scribe, inquit, in libro quae vidisti, & mitte septem Ecclesiis. Postea tamen Angelis jubet scribi, ut ostenderet, unum esse. Sed etiam siqua singulis partiliter Ecclesiis praedicat, uni∣versam generaliter convenre docetur Ecclesiam. Neque enim dicit, Quid spiritus dicat Ecclesiae, sed Ecclesiis. Angelum ergo Ecclesiam significans, duas in eo partes ostendit, dum & laudat & increpat. In consequentibus autem manifestatur non eandem increpare, quam lau∣dat, sic ut Dominus in Evanglio omne praepositorum corpus, Luc. 12. Mat. 24. unum servum dixit beatum & nequam, quem veniens Dominus ipse dividet, & non tantum servum sed partem, inquit, ejus cum hypocritis ponet: Yea, Ludovicus ab Alcasar a late Iesuite, in his Commentary on the Apocalyps. See Gersomus Bucerus de Gu∣bern. Ecclesiae. p. 205.393.408.419.422.433. Antu. 1614. Proem. in c. 2. K 3. Notatio. 1. p. 250.251. writes, That Andreas, Aretas, Ansbertus, Anselmus, Pererius, Victo∣rinus, Ticinius, Ambrosius, Haymo & Beda are of this opinion. Augelarum & stellarum nomine designari Ecclesias ipsas; That by the name of Angels the Curches themselves are signified; not the Lordly Prelates in them, not one ancient Commentator on this that I finde, and few moderne expounding these Angels to bee Bishops, as our Prelates against all sense will make them: yea, Andreas Cesariensis, Comment. in Ioan Apoc. c. 3. p. 8. writes, Probabile fit per 7. Angelos totius universi gubernationem, quae in dextera Christi, sicut omnes quque terrae fines, sita est, hoc loco significari. Since hen by Angels is here meant either the Mini∣sters of the Church of Ephesus, or the whole Church it selfe, or
Christs government over the Universe, as these Authors a vre; this Text makes nothing at all for our Prelates Hirarchy. Thirdly, it is observable that Saint Iohn neither in his Gospel nor Epistle, nor in his Booke of he Revelation, doth so much as once use the name or word Bishop, but the name of Elder, or Presbyter very often, both in his Epistle, and in the Apocalyps. I then appeale to any reasonable Creature, whether it is not more probable, that Saint Iohn by this word Angell, should ra∣ther meane the Elders or Presbyters of those Churches; (a Title which he gives himselfe, 2 Iohn 1. 3 Iohn 1.) and which Title and Office he so Rev. 4.10. c. 5.5.8.11.14. c.  11.13. c. 11.16. c. 19.4. c. 14.. frequently mentions in the 4. and 5. and 7. Rev. 4.4. c. 5.11. c. 7.11. Chapters of the Apocalyps next ensuing, rather than the Lord∣ly Bishops of those Churches superiour to Presbyters, whose office (for ought appeares) he never knew, and whose Title he never useth in his writings? Fourthly, it is remkeble, that S. Iohn doth ever place the 24. Elders, sitting on so many seates, next unto the throne of Christ himselfe; and the Angels standing further off from the Throne without the Elders. If then by the Elders (as is gene∣rally agreed by all) be meant the Presbyters or Ministers of the Church, and by Angels as you pretend, be meant Bishops; then the Presbyters must needes be more honourable by di∣vine institution than Bishops, because they are next to the Throne of Christ, and Rev. 4.4. c. 11.16. sit on seates or chaires whiles the An∣gels Rev. 7.11. stand about them. Adde to this, that these Elders are still introduced by S. Iohn in this booke, Rev. 4.10.11. c. 5.8.9. c. 11 16.17.18. Worshipping and adoring God and Christ, and giving thankes, honour, praise, and glo∣ry unto them: That they onely are sayd to have Rev. 4.4.10 Crownes of gold upon their heads (the badge of Soveraignty and Superiori∣ority) and Rev. 5.8.9. harpes  Golden Vials in their hands, full of Odours, which are the prayers of Saints: That they Rev. 5.9. sing the new Song; And among other passages prayse Christ for this in speciall manner. Rev. 5.10. And hast made VS (not Bishops) unto our God KINGS and PRIESTS, and we shall raigne on the Earth. Thereore Presbyters doubtlesse are the chiefe and prin∣cipall Ministers and Priests in the Church of Christ by divine in∣stitution; and being thus made Kings and Priests, and adorned with Crownes, to the end that they may raigne upon the Earth; no Prelates or Lord Bishops ought to rule over them, or climbe Paramount them, as they doe. Besides, these Elders no Bishops
informed S. Iohn himselfe and instructed him in the things hee doubted of Revel. 5.4.5. c. 7.13.14.15.16. Therefore these Elders must certainely be the better, the most eminnt Scient men, and so Paramount the Angel-Bishops. Fifthly, though the Angel be here put in the singular num∣ber, yet the Elders are still mentioned in the Plurall. And as for the Church of Ephesus in those dayes, it is most certaine by Acts 20.17.28. 1 Tim. 5.17. That there were divers Elders, of equall authority uling in it, whom the holy Ghost expressely not onely calleth, but made Bishops and Overseers of that Church, both to Rule and Feede it. To make therefore one speciall Bishop and Superintendent in this Church, superiour to all the rest, and he onely graced by the name of an Angel, is but a crazie conceipt of a proud Episcopall braine, contrary to apparent Texts. Sixthly, This Angel is not sayd to have any Jurisdiction or  Superiority over other Ministers or Presbyters in the Church of Ephesus, nor to be the supreame or generall Superintendent Prelate of that Church, neither is there any thing spoken of him with reference to any other Minister of Ephesus: What then can this poore title make for Episcopall priority and Jurisdi∣ction? The Spirit writes to the Angell of the Church of Ephesus: Ergo this Angell was a Bishop, and supriour to all other Mi∣nisters of Ephesus, is a strange non sequitur, and yet this is all this ext affords you. Seventhly, Bishop Hall and other contenders for Episcopa∣cy, grant that there were divers particular Churches & Congre∣gations  in and about Ephesus, every one of which had its seve∣rall Minister or Presbyter to instruct them; else they could prove no Episcopacy or Diocaesan superintendency from one particu∣lar Congregation. This being granted by him and his party: Let them then tell me seriously, whether this Angell, (which they will not have taken collectively and Plurally, for the whole Presbytery and Ministery of that Church as many anci∣ent and moderne Commentators expound it, but individually for one particular person) should not rather be one particular Pastor of one of the Churches of Ephesus onely, who had lost his first love, and therefore was worthily reprehended, then a Diocaesan Bishop or Arch-bishop of that Church to whose Jurisdiction all other Presbyters and Bishops of that Nationall
Church were subordinate; for which there is no ground in Scripture. Eighthly, our Downham, Hall, Vsher, and others. Prelates all plead very hard, That Timothy was ordained the first Bishop of Ephesus, and dyed Bishop of that See: which if I admit (though I thinke untrue) then it is cleare that this Angel of Ephesus, who lost his first love, was famous and zealous, Timothy not dead when this Epistle was written, as In Apoc. c. 2. Disp. 2. Pererius and Com. in Apoc in c. 2.3. Notatio 1. p. 251. where he cites Lyra and Ribera to this effect. Alcazar both Jesuites, with Lyra, Ribera, Nt. in vita Polycarp. c. 7. P. Halloix, and others confesse. And who dare be so pre∣sumptuous as to thinke Timothy a man so eminent, famous, zea∣lous, and so much applauded in Scripture, would prove an Apostate or backeslider; and lose his first love? Either therefore you must deny Timothy, or this Angell to be the Bishop of this Church. Ninthly, grant this Angell to be a Bishop, yet it was onely such a Bishop as was all one and the same with Presbyters,Centur. Magd 1. l. 2. . 10. col. 626 Nicph. l. 3. c. 71. Vincntius. spec. Hist. l. 38. c. 10. Fasciculus Temporum. and of which there were many in one Church (no one over many Churches) according to the holy Ghosts and the Apostles owne institution as appeares by Act. 20.17.28. Phil. 1.1. Tit. 1.5.7. compared with the 1 Pet. 5.2.3. Iam. 5.14. Act. 14.23. 1 Tim. 5.17. which maketh nothing for, but directly against that Episcopacy, you contend for. Tenthly, and finally, grant him such a Bishop as you would make him; yet at the best he was an Apostate, who had fallen from, and lost his first love, by being made a Lord Bp: And it will be but little credit for our Prelates, to found their Hierarchy up∣on an Apostate: And if I conjecture not amisse, this may bee one probable reason, why so many Ministers prove turne-coates, and Apostates, losing their first love and zeale to God when they are made Lord Bishops, because they have an Apo∣state Angel, both for their foundation, and imitation; Happy man be their dole; let them make the best of this Apostate; I will not hinder but rather pitty them in this folly. The second Allegation for the divine right of Episcopacy is,Allegation. that Timothy and Titus were Bishops (such as our Lordly Pre∣lates now are, the one of Ephesus, the other of Crete) which Preface to his Treatise of he Sabbath. Bi∣shop White, and others endevour to prove, especially by the Post-script of the second Epistle to Timothy. The second Epistle unto Timotheus, ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Ephe∣sians was written from Rome, when Paul was brought before Nero
the second time: And by this Postscript to the Epistle to Titus: It was writen to Titus, ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians, fom Nicopolis of Macedonia; which Post-scripts they say are very ancient, if not Canonicall and irrefra∣gable. I shall not here enter into a large discourse to prove Timothy neither a BishopAnsw. nor first, nor sole, nor any Bishop at all of Ephesus (who as some say preached the Gospell in our Island of Britaine, whiles our Prelates would creae him the Apostate Angel residing in the Church of Ephesus to whom Christ writ an Epistle by S. Iohn Rev. 2.1.2.) or to disprove Titus to be Lord Bi∣shop, or rather Lord Arch-bishop of Crete,Mercatrs Atla London. 1635. p. 812. which had an hun∣dred Cities in it in Homers dayes, and no lesse than 4. Arch-bishops, and 21. Bishops in former times; since I have sufficient∣ly manifested this long since, in The Vnbishopping of Timothy and Titus, not hitherto answered. And indeede were there no other Arguments but two, First, that though Paul in his Epistles, mentions Timothy and Titus more frequently than any other persons; yet we never finde him so much as once stiling them Bishops, no not in the Epistles to them. Secondly, that Paul doth never write to them in the Ordina∣ry  stile of our Lordly Prelates (which it seemes he was not then acquainted with, and so not with their Office) viz. To the Right Reverend Father in God, Timothy, Lord Bishop of Ephesus: To the Most Reverend Father in God Titus, Lord Arch-bishop of Crete his Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all that Island; which doubtlesse he would have done had they beene such Bishops as ours are, and this stile had beene due or fitting for them; but onely: To Timothy my owne sonne, or dearely beloved sonne in the faith. To Titus mine owne sonne after he common aith, &c. these were sufficient to satisfie any indifferent man, that neither of them was a Bishop or Arch-bishop of these pla∣ces; or at least, that they were no such Lordly Prelates as ours now are, who may well be ashamed of these pompous swelling Titles, which no Apostle nor Apostolicall Bishop ever usurped. But the onely thing I shall here insist on, shall be to take away he grounds of this false Allegation, to wit, the pretended Au∣thority and Antiquity of these two Post-scripts, wih which the world hath beene much abused.
For their Authority, It is confessed by all: First, that they are no part of the Text or Canonicall Scripture. Secondly, that they are not of infallible truth, many of  them being dubious, others directly false as Baronius, the Rhe∣mists, Estius, Mr. Beza, Mr. Perkins, and sundry others prove. Thirdly, that they were not added to the Epistles Paul b himself, when he writ the Epistles, as some have dreamed, but by some third peson since, as the whole frame of the words, running only in the third person imports. For their Antiquity, when, and by whom they were first added? will be the sole question. To cleare this doubt, I shall have recourse to the Post-script of the first Epistle to Timothy, which runnes thus: The first to Timo∣thy, was written from Laodicea, which is the chiefe City of Phrygia Pacatiana. This Post-script of the first Epistle, no doubt was written either before, or at the same time when the Post-script of the Second Epistle was penned, and that must needes be af∣ter Phrygia was commonly stiled Pacatiana, since it is thus named in this Post-script. Now we shall not finde Phrygia so stiled in any Authors, till about 340. yeares after Christ, in the reigne of Constantine the great, at which time it begun to be called Pa∣catiana, and that as some conjecture from Pacatianus, who (as the Code of Theodosius,Cambdens, Brit. p. 75. Speeds Histor¦ry. p. 159. M. Cambden and Speede affirme) was Vice∣gerent of Brittaine some 330. yeares ater Christ. Who it was who first annexed these Post-scripts to Pauls Epistles onely [or the other Apostles Epistles have none] will be the grea∣test question. For resolution whereof, I take it somewhat cleare, that Theodoret was the man, who flourished about the yare of our Lord .430. For I finde these Post-scripts added to his Commentarie upon Pauls Epistles, and in no other Com∣mentator before nor in any after him till Oecumenius, his Ape, and transcriber, who lived about the yeare 1050. Theodoret then being the first in whom Post-scripts are extant, and Oecumenius his follower,Operum Tom. 2. Parisis 1608. p. 645.646. the next, it is probable that he was the first Author of them. And that which puts it out of doubt is this, that Theo∣doret in his Preface to his Commentaries on Pauls Epistles, is the first who doth modestly undertake (with scriptum esse existimo onely) to shew both the time when, and the place from whence Paul writ his severall Epistles, which Preface fully accords with the Post-scripts placed, not after the text it selfe, but after the end of his Commentaries on every Epi∣stle.
Since then this Preface and Post-scripts both accord: and seeng there are no Post-scripts in any Ancient Latine Au∣thors or Coppies of the new Testament, nor in any Greeke ones, but those who followed Theodoret, and no Post-scripts added to any but Pauls Epistles on which hee onely Commen∣ted, not to Peters or Iohns which he interpreted not, I presume I may safely conclude, that Theodore was the Originall Author of these Post-scripts. But then I pray take notice of these mate∣riall observations. First, that these Post-scipts were added to Pauls Epistles at  least 430. yeares after Christ and not before. Secondly, that they are extant onely in Theodore, and not  found in any Commentator or ancient Coppy of the new Testa∣ment succeeding him till Oecumenius time, Anno. 1050. Thirdly, that these Post-scripts both in him, and Oecumenius are placed, not immediately after the Originall text, as now they are in our Bibles, and some late Commentators; but after the end of their Commentaries, as a part thereof, and no part or appurtenance of the text it selfe. Fourthly, that these clauses (ordained the first Bishop of the  Ephesians, and ordained the first Bishop of the Cretians) where∣on our Prelates found the Episcopacy of Timothy and Titu, and their owne Hierarchy too, are not extant in Theodorets Post-scrips to the Epistles of Timothy and Titus: which runne onely thus, The second to Timothy was written from Rome, when Paul was brought before Nero the Roman Emperour the second time. The E∣pistle to Titus was written from Nicopolis:Scunda ad Timo∣theu scripta est Romae, quando ad, Neronem addu∣ctus; est Romano∣un Caesarem. Epi∣stola ad Titum Cretensis Ecclesiae scripta est Nico∣polioppd Mace∣doniae. his Post-scripts there∣fore will no wayes ayde but confound their cause, since I may well argue, neither Paul in his Epistles, nor Theodoret in his Post-scripts terme Timothy or Titus Bishops of Ephesus or Crete, there∣fore they were no Bishops of these places, unsse better proofe than these Epistles and Post-scripts be produced to evidence it. The rare Ancient Manuscript Parchment Coppy of the Greeke Bible, sent to his Majesty by Cyrillus late Patriarch of Constanti∣nople, remaining in his Majesties Library at Saint Iames, suppo∣sed by some to be as Ancient as Tecla: but undoubtedly one of the ancientest Copies this day extant; hath no other Post-script to the first Epistle to Timothy, but this;  A. : No other to the second to Timothy, but this;  B. : not from Rome:
And no other Post-script to Titus but,  (all written in Capitals) with which the Syriac Cop∣pies accord. So that all the residue is but a late spurious ad∣dition. The first man I finde these additionall clauses (ordained first Bishop of th Ephesians, and ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians) extant in, is Oecumenius, who flou∣rished not till the yeare 1050. being a patcher together onely of other mens Commentaries and none of the Orthodoxest wri∣trs. And withall, this is observable, First, that Oecumenius placeth these Postscripts after his Com∣mentaries, as a part of them, not immediately after the Text as a Part, or appendant thereof. Secondly, that he first cites his owne additions to these Post-scripts after his Commentaries in one distinct line, and then placeth Theodorets Post-script in another different line some good distance under it, in this manner, . . . . Thirdly, from Oecumenius till about 450. yeares after that those  Additionall clauses are not extant in any Commentators or Translations of the Epistles into any other Language, and but in few greeke Coppies, and those taken out of Oecumenius. Therefore doubtlesse he was the first Author of them. And so they are of no great Antiquity or credit. Now that you may more clearely discerne what a sandy foundation these Post-scripts are to build the weighty Hierar∣chy of our Lordly Prelates on, give me leave to informe you of some observable particulars touching these Post-scripts upon mine owne search and observation. First, that Athanasius, Ambrose, Ierome, Sedullus, Chrysostome,
Primasius, Remigus, Beda, Rabaus Maurus, Haymo, Hugo Car∣dinalis, Bruno, Aquinas, Nicholaus de Lyra, Ghorran, Dionysius Carthusianus, Iohn Salesbury, Anselme, and Peter Lombard, the ancientest Commentators on the Epistles of Paul, have no post∣scripts at all extant in them, neither after the text, nor after their Commentaries; no nor yet Erasmus, Melancton, Zuinglius, Zanchius, Alfonsus Salmeron, Benedictus Iustinianus, Ambrosius Caterinus, Cornelius a Lapide, Claudius Espencaeus, Antonius Scay∣nus, Estius, Hemingius, Ioannis Arboreus, Sotto Major, nor any other Commentator almost, whether Protestant or Papist. Secondly, That in sundry ancient English and Latine Manu∣scripts, New Testaments and Bibles which I have seene; in the Printed New Testament, set forth in Greeke and Latine by Francis∣cus Xemenez, in Academia Complutensi; in the Bible of Isiodor Clarius Venetiis, 1557. in all the Latine vulgar Bibles, attributed to Saint Ierome; In the New Testament, set forth by Erasmus; in the Latine Bible Printed at Rome by command of Pope Sixtus the fifth, Anno 1592. In the New Testament, comprising the La∣tine vulgar translation, that of Guido Fabricius out of the Syri∣acke, that of Arias Montanus and Erasmus, set forth altogether by Laurentius Bierlinke Anwerpiae, 1616. In the New Testa∣ment set forth by Miles Coverdale in Latine and English, Anno. 1536. in Master Tyndalls English Bible, and in the English Tran∣slation, which Doctor Fulke followes in his answer to the Rhe∣mish Testament, and in many ancient Greeke Coppies, there is no Postscript at all to be found. Thirdly, That in the Latine Bible, set forth and Printed by  Robert Stephen, Parisiis 1532. And in the Latine Bible of Io∣annis Benedictus, Parisiis 1558, the Postscripts are thrust out and put into the Margin, as nor worthy to stand under the Text, and being of small or no account. Fourthly, That in the Latine Bible set forth by Robert Stephen Parisiis 1532. In the Latine and Greeke Bibles of Philip Melanc∣tons Edition Tiguri 1543. and Basileae 1545. In Sebastian Casta∣lio his Edition of the Bible, Basileae. 1551. In the Translations of the New Testament out of the Syriacke both by Guido Fabri∣tius, and Emanuell Tremelius, in the Dutch Bible set forth by David Walderus, Hamburgae 1596. In the Frenc Bible set out by the Doctors of Louvaine a Paris 1616. In the Latine Bible of Io∣annis Benedictus, Parisiis, 1558. In the Bible translated into Eng∣lish
by Thomas Matthew. Anno. 1537. In he English Bible set forth by diverse excellent Learned men, Printed Cum privilegio, by Thomas Petit and Robert Redman. London 1540. In the English Bible appointed to be read in Churches, Printed at London, 1568 And in sundry other Bibles and New Testaments which I have seene, these clauses (Ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians, and ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians) are not to be found in the Postscripts to the Epistles to Timothy and Titus; And indeed, you shall sel∣dome finde them in any but Master Beza, and in those that fol∣low his Edition, (as Master Calvin and some few others doe in their Commentaries) whereas both he and they are professed Enemies to Episcopacy, and disclaime those Postscripts as false and spurious. Fithly, Master Beza, and the eters forth of the Greeke Bible, Printed by the Heires of Andrew, Francofurti. 1597. passe this sentence upon these Postscripts: and this clause, Ordained the first Bishops of Ephesus, or, of the Church of the Ephesians. Non exta in quibusdam vetustis Codiibus, & sane supposttum fuisse puo. And Guilielmus Estius, a famous Roman Doctor, in his Commen∣tary on 2 Tim. 1.4. writes thus of the Postscript to it. Graea subscriptio post finem Epistolae sic habet; Scriptae Roma ad Timo∣theum secunda, cum Paulus iterum sisteretur Caesari Neroni, (where he omits this addition Ephesiorum Ecclesiae primus Episcopus) and then passeth this verdict upon it, Sed hujusmodi Graecae sub∣scriptiones, ut incerti sunt authoris, ITA NON Magnae authori∣tatis. And Thoms de vio Cajetanus, Andreas Hyperius, Estius with others, de the subscription to Titus; That this Epistle was written from Nicopolis of Macedonia; and the Con. Mag. 2. ol. 597. Century writers with others, that the Second to Timothy was written from Rome a Pauls second appearing before Nero, a meere falshood and mistake: All which considered, I wonder our great learned Prelates, B∣shop Downeham, Bishop White, and Bishop Hall, and especially our great Antiquary, The judge∣ment of Dr. Rei∣nolds touching the originall of Episcopacy, more largely confir∣med out of an∣tiquity by Iames Archbishop of Armagh. p. 5. Bishop Vsher, should so much insist up∣on these spurious false postscripts, and draw a maine Argument from, to prove their Episcopacy of Divine Institution; when Bellarmine and those Papists, who write most eagerly for the Prelates Hierarchy, are ashamed to produce such a false and impotent proofe for their groundlesse Episcopall jurisdicti∣on. If these Answers satisfy not this Objection from these Post∣scripts,
you may receive more full satisfaction and further An∣swers to it in my Vnbishoping of Timothy and Titus. p. 52. to 58.Object. 1. To which I shall remit the Reader. From these two Arguments for the pretended Divine right of Episcopacy, I shall next proceed to answer the most consi∣derable reasons produced for the continuing of Lordly Prelates in our Church. The first, for order and moment, is the Antiquity of Lordly Bishops in our Church, who (if we credit Episcopacy by divine right, 2. part. p. 110, 111, 113. His humble Remon∣strance, and de∣fence of the humble Remon∣strance, p 40. Bishop Hall, and Sir Thom. A∣ston his remonst. epistle to the Reader, & briefe review of Epis∣copacy, sect. 1, 2 3, 4. and the conclusion. others) are not onely of Divine institution, but their Episcopall Government hath continued in this our Island, ever since the first plantation of the Gospell, without contradiction: Therefore, it will be neither decent, nor expedient, but dangerous and incon∣venient to remove them now. To this I answer; first, that though Bishops have been ve∣ry ancient in our Church,Answ. 1. yet how ancient, and what kinde of Bishops these were, will be the question. De Pe & Paulo ad diem 29 Ianuarii Ba∣rnius annal. om. 1. ann. 61. sect. 4. Hen. Spelman Concilia. p. 4, 5. Metraphrastes writes, that Saint Peter continued long in Britaine, constituted Churches, and ordained Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, and then returned to Rome, the 12 yeare of Nero Caesar. But as this Authour is very fabulous in other things, so without doubt he is false and sin∣gular i this, as I could easily manifest, did not Bishop De Brit. Eccle. Primr. c. 1. p. 7. Vshers, siquidem Symeoni Metaphrastae credimus; and Annal. Ecles. tm. 1. ann. 44. p. 371. Godwins discourse of the conversion of Britaine p. 3. Baronius his sicut in aliis multis ibi a se positis errare Metaphrastum certum est, ita in his hallucinatum esse constat,History l. 6. c. 9. p. 74. Iohn Speed his, For a dreame we leave it, &c. and Francis Godwin Bishop of Landaffe, in his Dis∣course of the first conversion of this Island of Britaine unto Christi∣an Religion, p. 3, 4, 5, 6. (where he largely and professedly proves against this Impostor, That Peter was never in Britaine) ease me of this Labour, and sufficiently refute the vaine confi∣dence of See a Roman∣strance against Presbytery, Epi. to the Reader. those, who have lately produced this branded Au∣thority to derive the Antiquity of our Lordly Prelates from the Apostles themselves, as if they had first planted them in our Church. That which is likewise alledged out of the Greeke Martyro∣loge and Dorotheus his Synopsis, See Bishop Vser de Brit. ec∣cles. primer. c. 1. p. 9. and Sir Tho∣mas Astons Epi∣stle to the read. That Aristobulus was ordained Bishop of the Britaines by Paul, and by him sent Bishop into Eng∣land; seemes to be of the same stampe with the former in A discourse of the converson of Brit. c. 2. p. 8. Bi∣shop Godwins judgement, who rejects it as fabulous, because none of our owne Authors or Histories so much as once mention his so me∣morable
labour and martyrdome among us. But grant it true, ye since the word Bishop, is here used onely for an ordinary Mini∣ster or Preacher of the Gospell, and Aristobulus (sent onely to convert our Nation being Pagans) had no Bishopricke or Diocesse here, nor any Inferiour Presbyters under him for ought ap∣peares, over whom to play the Lord, as our Lordly Prelates have, this Authority will stand those in small steed, who with more confidence then judgement have objected it in defence of our Lordly Bishops, which by the common consent of all our Writers, began not till King Lucius his raigne, about the yeare of Christ 179. So that from the Preaching of the Gospell in our Island Bishop Vsher. de Britan. Eccles. Primor. c. 1. p. 1. to 17. and p. 1072. to 1078. Godwins dis∣course of the Conversion of Britaine. c. 1, 2, 3 Antiquit. Eccle. Brit. Speeds Hist. l. 6. c. 9. p. 73. t. Henr. Spelm. Concil. Tom. 1. p. 1. to 16. Balae∣us Cent. 1. p. 23, 24. by Iacobus Zebedeus, Anno Christi 41. of Simon Zelotes, Anno 47. of Ioseph of Araataea, Anno 48. of Saint Paul Anno 60. of Philip the Apostle and his twelve associates. Anno 63. till Lucius erected Bishops and Bishoprickes; to wit, for the space of about one hundred and forty yeares after the first Preaching of the Gospell here, our Church of Britaine had no Bishops at all to governe it, but onely Presbyters, for ought appares by any credible Authour, the Christian faith all this while continuing un-extinguished among us at Glastenbury, and in some other places; as our Antiquaries manifest. If then that rule of Tertullian be infallible, De Praescript. advers. haeretic. That is best and truest which is first: and that of Ad Evagrium & Comment, in Tit. c. 1. See cha. 8. throughout. Hierome most certaine: That the Church of God, immediately after the Apostles times, before the erection of Lord Bishops, was governed by a common Councell of Presbyters, not by Bishops; and our Church, as is probable, and the Church of Scotland (as Iohn Fordon Scotch. in. l. 3. c. 8. Iohn Major de Gestis Scotorum, l. 21. c. 3. Bishop Vsher de Brit. ∣cle. Primor. p. 800 some Authors write for certaine) was gover∣ned in this manner by Presbyters, for above an hundred yeares, together; it will rather follow, that our Lord Bishops should now be totally suppressed, and a Presbyteriall government re-erected in our Church, because it is ancienter than that of Bi∣shops, and planted among us by the Apostles when our Island first received the Gospell; then that the government of our Lordly Prelates should be perpetuaed among us, because an∣cient onely, yet not so old as that of Presbyters, by above one hundred yeares. The Originall of Bishops in our Church.Touching the first erection of Arch-bishops, Bishops, and Bishoprickes among us, there is great variance, obscurity and incertainey in Writers; yet this is the generall verdict, both of our owne and forraigne Authours; That in King Lucius his
time, before the conversion of our Island to Christianity, there were in it 28 Some write but 25. Flamines and three Arch Flamines, to whom the other Iudges of manners and Priests were subject; that upon the conversion of King Lucius and his people to the Christian Faith, by Fagan and Dewan, they by command from Pope Eleutherius, with the Kings consent, placed Bishops where there were Flamines, and three Arch∣bishops where there were Arch Flamines, turning the three Archflamines Sees in the three chiefe Cities, into Arch-bishoprickes, and the 28. Flamines Sees into 28 Bishoprickes. This is punctually averred for Truth by Geofry Monmoth: Histor. Brit. l. 2. c. 1. Edit. Ascent, & l. 4. c. 19. Edit. Heidelb. by Gilds in his Booke, De victoria Aurelii Ambrosii, by Gervasius Tilburiensis, de Otiis Im∣perialibus ad Othonem Imperatorem, Historiolae Wintoniensis Eccle∣siae, Alphredus Beuer lacensis, Radulphus de Diceto, Bartholomaeus de Cotton, Gerardus Cornubiensis Ranulphus Cestrensis, the Au∣thors of the History of Rochester, of the Chronicles of Hales, and Dunstaple, of the Booke of Abingdon, of the Geneologicall Chro∣nicle of the Monastery of Hales, and of the Abbreviated Chroni∣cle of the Britaines, Thomas Rudburne, Thomas Stubs, Thomas Har∣field, Ponticus Virunnius, Polydor Virgil, Martinus Polonus, Po∣lomaeus Lucensis Tuscus, cited by Ioannis Leydensis in Chronico Belgico, l. 2. c. 1. Ioannis Bptista Platina, in vita Eleutherii, Ia∣cobus Philippus Bergomiensis. Suppl. Chron. l. 8. Nauclerus. vol. 1. Chronograph. gen. 30. & Vol. 2. Gen. 6. Tritemius com∣pend. l. 1. Pope Leo the ninth Epist. 4. Guilielmus Durandus, Ra∣tionale l. 2. c. 1. n. 21, 22. Polydorus Virgilius, de Jnvent re∣rum l. 4. c. 11. All quoted to my hand by that excellent lear∣ned Antiquary, Bishop Vsher. De Britannicarum Ecclesiarum pri∣mordiis. c. 5. p. 56, 57, 58, 59.99.100. To whom I might adde Matthew Parker his Antiquitates. Ecclesiae, Brit. p. 7. Iohn Fx his Acts and Monuments: Edit ult. Vol. 1. p. 138, 139. Iohn Speed in his History of Great Britaine, p. 132. Richard Grafton in his Chronicle, part 7. p. 83. William Harrison in his Description of England. l. 2. c. 1, 2. With many more of our owne Writers, and generally all the Canonists and Glossers on Gratian, Dictinctio 80. and the Schoolemen on Peter Lombard, sent. l. 4. distinct. 24, who concure in this opinion. For in Gra∣tian distinct. 80. f. 130. I find these two decrees cited; the one of Pope Lucinus with this Rubricke prefixed. In what places Primates and Patriarches ought to be ordained. The Cities and places
wherein Primates ought to preside, were not ordained by moderne times, but long before the comming of Christ, to whose Primates even the Gentiles did appeale for their greater businesses; In those ve∣ry Cities after the comming of Christ, the Apostles and their Suc∣cessors placed Patriarches and Primates to whom the businesses of Bishops (yet saving the Apostolicall authority in all things) and the greater causes after the Apostolike See are to be referred. On which Iohn Thierry and others make this glosse. Primates are constituted there, where heretofore the proto-Flamines of the Gen∣tiles were placed, Arch-Bishops, where there were Arch-Fla∣mines, Bishops where their Flamines were, and this for the most part (if wee may credite them) was done by Saint Peters appointment. The second is this Decree of Pope Clemens, which warrants this glosse. In those Cities wherein heretofore among the Ethnickes, their chiefe Flamines and prime Doctors of the Law were placed, Saint Peter commanded (but God knowes when and where) Primates or Patriarches of Bishops to be placed, who should agitate the causes of the rest of the Bishops, and the grea∣ter businesses in Faith. But in those Cities in which in times past among the foresaid Ethnickes, their arch-Flamines were, whom yet they held to be lesse than their foresaid Primates, he commanded Arch-bishops to be iustituted; but in every other particular City he commanded one sole Bishop and not many to be ordained, who should onely btaine the name of Bishops, because among the Apostles themselves, there was the like institution, sed unus praefuit omnibus, but one had authority over the rest, (which is most false:) On which the glosse thus descants. The Gentiles had three Orders of Priests: to wit proto-Flamines, arch-Flamines, and Flamines. In the place of the proto-Flamines, Peter commanded Patriarches to be placed, who should take conusance of the greater causes of other Bi∣shops; in the place of arch-Flamines, Arch-bishops, in the place of Flamines, Bishops, of whom there ought to be but one in every City. Which Graian himselfe thus backes in his 21 Distinction. There is a certaine distinction observed among Priests, whence others are called simply Priests, others arch-Priests, others chorall Bishops, others Bishops, othrs Arch-bishops or Metropolitanes, others Pri∣mates, others chiefe Priests; Horum discretio a Gentibus maxi∣me introducta est; The distinction of these was principally into∣duced by the Gentiles, who called their Flamines, some simply Fla∣mines, others Arch-flamines, others Proto-flamines. All which Pe∣ter
Lombard the Father of the Schoolemen affirming after Gra∣tian in his lib. 4. Senteniarum Dist. 24. made this to passe as an undubitable verity among all the Canonists and Schoolemen. There is onely one thing needs explanation in these Popes d∣crees, and that is what is meant by Saint Peter, who is made the Author of this Institution? For this we need resort no further then to the Decree of Pope Nicholas recorded by the same Gra∣tian: Distinct, 22. c. Omnes f. 33. Omnes sive Patriarchae cujusli∣bet apicem, sive Metropoleon primatus, Episcopatuum cathedras, vel Ecclesiarum, sive cujuscunque ordinis dignitatem instituit Romana Ecclesia. By which it is evident, that by Saint Peter, is meant the Church and Popes of Rome, who stile themselves oft times Peter, in their bulls and writings, as well as his successors. By all these Authorities compared together, it is evident, that our Arch-bishops and Bishops had their Originall Institution from the Church and Popes of Rome, and that not out of their imi∣tation of any divine patterne, or forme of government prescri∣bed by Christ in Scripture, and setled in those primitive Chur∣ches of the Geniles, which the Apostles planted, and to whom they directed their Epistles, but out of an apish imi∣tation of the Heathenish Hierarchicall government of the Ido∣latrous Proto-Flamines, Arch Flamines, and Flamines used among the Pagan Gentiles, and Britaines before their conversion to the Christian Faith, in whose very places, Sees, and forme of government they succeeded; Eleutherus instituting and ordai∣ning, that all, or the most part of the Arch-Flamines, which is to meane Arch-bishops, and Bishops of the Pagan Law, which at that day were in number, three Arch Flamines, and 28 Flamines should be made Arch bishops and Bishops of the Church of Christ, as Part. 7. p. 83. Grafon and others write in positive termes: which if it be true, (as this cloud of witnesses averre) it will thence necessarily follow, that our Archbishops and Bishops are not of divine and Apostoli∣call, but rather of Papall and Ehnicall institution, and a meere continuance of the Diabolicall, heathenish Hierarchy, exerci∣sed among the Idolatrous Priests in times of Paganisme, within our Iland; and so by necessary consequence they and their go∣vernment, are rather to be utterly extirpated then perpetuated in our Christian reformed Church, which ought 2 Cor. 6.14c 15, 16, 17. Deut. 12.30, 31, 32. Jer. 10, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 10.19.20, 21. wholly to aban∣don all Reliques of Idolatry, and to have no fellowship nor commu∣nion with Infidels and unbeleavers in their discipline or Church go∣vernment.
Wherefore to avoid this dangerous rocke and ne∣cessary consequence, some of our Prelates (as Defence of the Apolog. part. 2. c. 4. divis. 2. Bishop Iuell, Bishop A discourse of the Conversion of Brit. p. 26, 27, 28. Godwin, De Brit. Eccles. primor. p 57, 58 92, 99, 100. Bishop Vsher, together with Doctor Subversion of F. persons, 3. conversions. Sutcliffe, and that learned Knight, Sir Concilia. Tom. 1. p. 13.14. Henry Spelman, reject this originall of our Archbishops, Bishops, and Bishoprickes as false and fa∣bulous, informing us: First, that Roger de Wendover, Matthew Paris, Matthew West∣min. William of Malesbury, the Poet under the name of Gildas, Giraldus Cambrensis and Radulphus Niger (to whom I may adde William Caxton in his Chronicle. part. 4. in the life of King Lucie) omit this figment of the Arch Flamines and Flamines, (which they say, was first invented wihout any ground by Galfridus Monuetensis) and relate onely that Lucius erected 28 Bishops and three Arch bishops among us, but record not that it was done in imitation of the Arch Flamines or Flamines, or that they were substituted in their places, and enjoyed their Lands, and Sees, as the former Historians write. But this is no ar∣gument to disprove the premised Authours, farre more in num∣ber, since these few Historians silence of what sundry others re∣cord expressely, is no conviction of their falshood, seeing one may relate, what another pretermits, either out of brevity, ig∣norance, or negligence. Wherefore in the Second place A dicourse of the Conversion of Brit. p. 26, 27, 28, 29, Bishop Godwin affirmes; that there is nothing more absurd in this History, then the imagina∣tion of itting the Sees of Bishops and Arch bishops, according to the place and number of Flamines for sooth, and arch Flamines of the Pa∣gans. A devise (writes he) so childish and ridiculous as I cannot but wonder, that any man of learning and judgement should approve it, and yet I perceive not (saith he) any that have gainsaid it before Ma∣ster Sutcliffe, but contrariwise dives, both ancient and learned are to be found, that have partly broached and partly applauded the same; among whom he reckons up two, especially; Fenestella de Sacrif. Rom. c. 5. and Gratian Distinct. 21. & 80. To confute whose mistakes he produceth these two Reasons. First, That not so much as the name of proto Flamin, or Arch Fla∣mine is to be found in any authour or monument of credit, before Gra∣tians time. Secondly, that it is manifest, that divers Cities had many Colled∣ges of Priests and consequently many Flamines, which he proves at large. Therefore it is not possible that there should be any man∣ner
of proportion at all, betweene our Bishops and their Fla∣mines, they having divers Flamines to almost every towne, and we one Bishop not so much as for every whole shire. To which Sir Concil. Tom. 1 p. 13.14. Henry Spelman addes in the third place: That the Fla∣mines were no other but ordinary Priests among the Romanes, so called, a filo, quasi Filamines, or a pilo, quasi Pilamines: that every one of them received his name from the God hee served, as Flamen Dialis, Flamen Martialis, Flamen Quirinalis, Vulcana∣lis, Floralis, Volturnalis, Pomalis, Furinalis, Falacer, Caesaris Flamen, and the like. That none of these had any Priestly Ju∣risdiction over any certaine Province, or did solely administer in any one cure, but that every cure or Parish had two Flamines at least set over it. Neither were these subject to any superiour Flamin who from thence might be called an Arch-Flamin or Proto-Flamin, (whose names are no where to bee found among the ancients unlesse it be in Fenestella, which Author he proves to be spurious) Sed toti Pontificum Collegio, but to the whole Colledge of Pontifs, and to the chiefe Priest that governed it, not to an Arch-Flamin: and though some Flamines were called greater, others lesser, yet this (writes he) was not from their po∣wer, but from their Antiquity, the three first being instituted by Numa and the Senators, the others afterwards by the people. Admit then these their reasons true, that the Flamines were but ordinary Priests among the Pagans, and not in nature of Arch-bishops or Bishops: that they were all of equall authority and had no Jurisdiction one over another: that there were many of them in every City, and not one of them set over an whole City, much lesse a Diocesse; and that they were subject onely to the whole Colledge of Priests, and not to any Arch-Flamin, or Proto-Flamin: I our Arch-bishops and Bishops bee derived from them, and successors to them in our Island, as the first recited Authors affirme; this quite overturnes their Archiepis∣copall and Episcopall, pretended Jurisdiction over other Mini∣sters, and their sole Episcopacy and Jurisdiction in or over one City and Province; since the Flamines were all equall, and ma∣ny in each Parish and City; and directly proves, that there ought to be a parity betweene Arch-bishops, Bishops and our Ministers now, and no disparity, because there was none a∣mong the Flamines, & that no Ministers ought to be subject to our Arch-bishops and Bishops but onely to the whole Synod or Convocation of Presbyters, because the Flamines were so:
and that there ought to be not one sole, but many Bishops of e∣quall Authority in every City, because it was so among the Fla∣mines their Predecessor, yea in the first Christian Churches, (plan∣ted by the Apostles) as appeares by Act. 14.23. c. 20.17.28. Phil. 1.1. Tit. 1.5.7. 1 Tim. 5.17, Jam. 5.14. with other Texts. If they be not these Arch-Flamines and Flamines Successors, as these last Authors testifie, then I feare our Prelates can hardly derive their pedegree as high as King Lucius, nor yet certainely define at what time, or by whom Arch-bishops and Bishops were first erected in our Island: For A discourse of the Conversion of Brit. p. 23.24.25. Bishop Godwin, (who rejects the conceipt of King Lucius his erecting of Arch-bishops and Bishops in steede of Arch-Flamines and Flamines) gives these three very probable Reasons against his erecting of three Arch-bishoprickes, and 28. Bishoprickes in this Isle, or any Bishoprickes at all. First, because he saith and proves by Histories, that Lucius was never King of all Britaine, but rather some petty King, or King happily of some principall part thereof; therefore hee could not erect Archbishoprickes and Bishoprickes through∣out the Island, as the recited Authors Fable. Secondly, because the multitude of Bishops and Bisho∣prickes sayd to be ordained at that time, seemeth unlikely, and that they had any fixed Sees: For in the Councell of Arles in the yeare 325. mention is made of one Restitutus a British Bi∣shop, not intituled to any certaine See, but onely called Bri∣anniarum Episcopus; and even so likewise after him Fastidius, is mentioned by Gennadius by the same stile, which being consi∣dered (saith he) together with the rare and seldome mention that we finde of Brittish Bishops, whose Antiquities I have hun∣ed ater with all diligence, I cannot but rest perswaded, that our Brittaines had very few Bishops untill the comming over of Germanus and Lupus to suppresse the Pelagian Heresie; which after they had rooted out, the History of Landaff saith, they Consecrated Bishops in many places of Brittaine, and over all the Brittaines dwelling on the right side of Brittaine, they consecrated for Arch-bishop, Saint Dubritius who was chosen for the Supreame Doctor by the King and all the Diocesse: which dignity being be∣stowed upon him by Germanus and Lupus, they with the con∣sent of Maurice the King, the Nobility, Clergie and people, appoin∣ted his See to be at the manner of Lantani, and founded his See
there This was about the yeare of Christ 430. about which time also, or somewhat later, Palladius, did first appoint Bi∣shops and ordaine Bishoprickes in Scotland, as Buchanan hath delivered. Upon these testimonies, I reason thus: If before these times we had so many Bishops, and Bishoprickes, how com∣meth it to passe, that in no Monument whatsoever, wee finde any name or mention of any Bishop of this Land, saving some few that (as we say) had their See at London? and if so many Sees had beene furnished before, what occasion had Germanus and Lupus to consecrate so many Bishops (and erect new Bi∣shoprickes too) as is before mentioned in the History of Lan∣daff? Thus Bishop Godwin argues, against the pretended first erection of our Bishoprickes and Arch-bishoprickes, most of which now extant, (London onely excepted) were erected long after King Lucius reigne, See Antiqui∣tates Ecclesiae, Brit. p. 19. to 29. William Har∣rison Description of England l. 2. c. 1.2. God∣win Catalogue of Bishops. 33. H. . c. 31.31. H. 8. c. 8.34. & 35. H. c. 17. Eadme∣rus Hist. Noverum l. 4 p. 95.96.165.166.167.168. above 600. yeares after Christ, and five of them in King Henry the 8. his raigne; so that William of Malmesbury one of our most juditious writers, and the most di∣ligent searcher out of the Antiquities of our Bishops Sees, who writ the History of our Bishop and their Sees above 500. yeares since could finde no Arch-bishops See in our Island an∣cienter than Canterbury (erected See. part. 1. p. 153. about the the yeare of Christ 600. or 602.) and determines positively n Prologo ad. l 1. De Gesti Pontif. p. 195. Ibi Prima sedes Archiepiscopi habteur, qui est totius Angliae Primas & Patriarcha. Caeterum ubi fuerit Archi-Episcopaus (if there were any such) tempore Britonum, cognitio lhat, quia vetustas consumpsit nostri se∣culi memoriam; Whence our most diligent Antiquary Concil. Tom. 1. p. 16. Sir Henry Spelman concludes thus, concerning the Originall of our Arch-bishops and Bishops, (the certaine time of whose Primi∣tive institution among us he cannot determine) Sufficit quidem, &c. Truely it is sufficient that we had many Bishops here, and some Metropolitans; either under Lucius himselfe, or soone after his age, licet de ipsorum sedibus aque numero lucide satis non consti∣terir; although their Sees and number doe not plainely enough appeare. So that upon the whole matter, when all things are throughly scanned, we can finde no undoubted Bishops at all in our British Church till Restitutus his time, who was present at the Councell of Arles about the yeare of Christ 325. and hee a Bishop without any particular See or Diocesse knowne onely by the name of Britanniarum Episcopus, as Godwin writes (though Spel. Concil. Tom. 1. p. 24. others stile him Civitate Londinensi Restitutus Episcopus)
who for ought we finde had no Presbyters at all under his Jurisdiction, and was no more than an ordinary Minister as the Bishops in the Apostles time were. Act. 20.17.28. Phi. 1.1. Tit. 1.5.7. And so by this computation, our Church after the first preaching of the Gospell among us continued without Lord Bishops and Archbishops, about 280. yeares or more. And if she remained and flourished without Bishops for so many yeares then, why may she not without any great Soloecisme or prejudice remove, and flourish without them now? yea, why should she not (by the Objecters owne argument from antiqui∣ty) now quite abandon them, and set up a Presbyteriall govern∣ment without any scruple, since Presbyters by some hundred of yeares, are the ancientest, and those by which our Church, and the Church of Scotland were first governed, for so long a space before any Lord Bishops were instituted in them? Answ. 2.Secondly, grant our Bishops as ancient as King Lucius, yet these ancient Bishops, no doubt, were farre different from ours. For first, I conceive it cannot be proved, that they had any Diocesse, Parishes or Presbyters under them: for there was no division of Parishes made in England Spelm. Concil. Tom. 1. p. 152. till Archbishop Theodo∣res time, who first divided the Province of Canterbury into Pa∣rishes about the yeare of Christ 670. And for ought appeares they were no more than ordinary Presbyters. Secondly, they had no great but very small revenues, as appeares by three of the British Bishops present at the Councell of Ariminum, under Constantius, Anno 379. who were so poore Sulpitius Se∣verus, Hist. Sacr. l. 2. Vssrius de Brit. Eccles. Pri∣mord. p. 196. that they were maintained at the Emperours cost, inopia proprii publico usi sunt, cum collatam a caeteris collationem respuissent, san∣ctius putantes fiscum gravare, quam singulos. By the Bishopricke of Rochester,Godwins Ca. p. 392.393. Putta and Quichelmus the 6. and 7. Bishops of this See, being forced to leave it through want and poverty; and by other  of our ancientest Bishops, who lived commonly upon Almes, or contribution, and had no temporall Lands or possessions. Thirdly, they had no stately Palaces and Cathedralls, as is evident by the first Bishops of Yorke and Lindisfarne, who lived in See Godwin in the life of Paulinus Adan and Fi∣an, p. 435.495. Spel. Concil. Tom. 1. p. 5.11. poore Cottages, and had either no Cathedralls a all, or some built onely of wattle or boords, and covered over with reede; stately stone Churches being not in use among the Britaines, Scots, or Irish, for many hundred yeares, as De Brit. Eccl. Primordis, p. 114.661.736.737.13.14. Bi∣shop
Vsher proves out of Beda, Eccles. Hist l. 3 cap. 4.5. and S. Bernard in the life of Malachy. Therefore stone Altars (no doubt) were not then in use, when as the very walls of their  Churches were but wattle or Timber. Fourthly, they had no stately Coaches and Palfryes as our Lord Bishops have, neither were they unpreaching, or rare-preaching Prelates, but they went about the Country on foote from place to place (as Mat. 10.5. to 15 9.35. Mar. 6.6. Act. 20.13. Luk. 13.22. Christ and his Apostles did at first) and Preached the Gospell to the people day by day: Witnesse Aidan the first Bishop of Lindisfarne (now Durham and a Count Palatine) who purposely avoyding the Pompe and frequency of Yorke chose the little Island of Lindisfarne for his See, and for 15. yeares space together travelled up and downe the Country , even Discurere per cuncta urbana & rustia loca non e∣quorum dors, sed pedum incessu ve∣ctus, nisi si mra forte necssitas compulisst, sole∣bat. Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 5. Godwins Cata∣logue. p. 495. on foote, to preach the Gospell to the people, not seeking nor ha∣ving any thing in this world, and giving whatsoever he could get unto the poore: So Godwins Ca∣talogue. Malmes. de Gestis, Pontif. Agl. l. 3. Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 14. Paulinus, the first Arch-Bishop of Yorke for 36. dayes together never rested one moment, but either instructed the people by preaching that flocked continually about him, or else imparted Christ unto them in Baptisme, and that in the open field and Rivers, there being then no Churches built. Fifthly, they intermedled not with any secular affaires; and when some began to tamper with them they made this Canon  in the Spel. Concil. Tom. 1. p. 246. Councell of Cloueshow under Cuthbert Anno. 747. That Bishops should follow their pastorall cure with their uttermost indeavour, and instruct the people with wholesome doctrine, and not addict themselves to secular affaires more than to Gods srvice, as most of our Lordly Prelates doe now. Sixthly, Bishops in those dayes were not reputed very ne∣cessary  nor usefull in the Church: for after the death of Godwins Ca∣talogue. p. 435.136. Paulinus the first Bishop of Yorke, that See continued voyd of a Bishop 30. yeares. So after the translation of Mellitus to Canterbury, Anno. 617. that See continued voyd neere 40 yeares: and how these and other Bishoprickes have continued voyd in severall ages, 2.3.4.6.10.15.20. and 30. yeares to∣gether without any prejudice, I have A Cata∣logue, &c. p. 16.17.18. elsewhere manifested more at large. If then our Bishoprickes may want Bishops for so many yeares space without any inconvenience to our Church (when as no Parish Church by our Rastall Ad∣vouson 1.2. Conci. Later aens. 2. Can. 29. Summa Angelica, Benefi∣cium; 31. Summa Rosella. Benefici∣um 1. Common, and the Ca∣non Lawes, ought to be voyd above sixe moneths at most) I presume by the selfe-same reason, our Church may well subsist without
for all future times, especially now when there are so many complaints and petitions against them, and so many Bisho∣prickes voyde of Prelates already. Finally, in those primitive times, Bishops were not so great but that some of them, were subject unto Presbyters: For our venerable L. 3. de Gestis, c. 3. Spelm Concil. Tom. 1. p. 118. Beda informes us of an Island in Ireland, which in those dayes had an Abbot Presbyter for its governour, to whose jurisdi∣ction the whole Province, Et etiam Episcopi sunt subjecti, and even Bishops themselves were subject, according to the example of the first Teacher thereof, who was no Bishop, but a Presbyter and a Monke. So the Abbot of Henrici Spel. Concil. Tom. 1. p. 229. Glastonbury exempt from all Episcopall Juris∣diction, had a kinde of superiority above the Bishop of Bath and Wells, which Bishop by the Charter of King Ina, was bound with his Clerkes at Wells every yeare, Ipsam matrem suam Glasto∣niensem Ecclesiam feria secunda post ascensionem Domini cum Lita∣nia recognoscere, to doe his homage to his mother Church of Glastonbury with a Letany; quod si superbia inflatus distulerit, and if he refused to doe it out of pride, then hee was to forfeite two houses which this King gave him. And in the Hen. Spelm. Concil. Tom. 1. p. 261.263. Excerptions of Egbert Archbishop of Yorke, Anno. 750. I finde these Ca∣nons of the fourth Councell of Carthage revived here among us, as Ecclesiasticall Lawes, That Bishops and Presbyters should have Hospitiolum, a little Cottage (not a Lordly Palace) neare the Church. That the Bishop in the Church by the consent of the Presby∣ters should set somewhat above them, but within the house, Collegam Presbyterorum se esse cognoscat, should know himselfe to be the Colleague (or Companion) of the Presbyters. That a Bishop should not ordaine Clerkes without a Councell of his Presbyters. That a Bishop should heare no mans cause without the presence of his Clerkes, except the cause of confession, because a decree cannot be firme which shall not seeme to have the consent of many. All which considered, it is evident, that our Bishops in those dayes had no Lordly Juris∣diction over other Ministers, no such sole power of Ordination and judicature as our present Lord Bishops now claime and exercise as their peculiar right. Therefore their Antiquity and Episcopacy, can be no warrant at all for the lawfulnesse or con∣tinuance of our Lordly Prelacy. Thirdly, admit our Bishops as ancient as King Lucius dayes, or there abouts, yet this is no good Plea for their continuance. First, because our Abbots, Priors, Monkes could make as
good if not a better prescription for themselves as our Lordly Prelates, who can alleadge nothing for their continuance but what these either did or might have done when they were sup∣pressed. For first our Monkes, Abbots, Priors and their Abbeyes were every way as ancient, if not elder then our Lordly Bishops and Bishoprickes, the Monkes and Abbey of See Iacobus Vsserius de Brit. Eccles. Primordiis c. 2.6 8. Guiliel∣mus Malmesb. de Antiqu. Ecclesiae Glaston Camden in Sommersetshire. p. 164. &c. Hen∣rici Spelmans Concil. p. 4. to 22. Glastonbury de∣riving their pedegree from Ioseph of Aramathea (which Church and Abbey our writers call, Prima Ecclesia; fons & Origo totius Religionis, &c. the first Church, the fountaine and Originall of all our Religion.) And many other of our other Abbies [as that of Winchester, S. Albans, Westminster with others] being anci∣enter than all or most of our Bishoprickes. Secondly, Most of them were confirmed by more Acts of Parlia∣ment,228.229.427.483. to 489. See Speeds Cata∣logue p. 1058. to 1060. Bulls of Popes, and Charters of our Kings, endowed with grea∣ter priviledges than any of our Bishoprickes whatsoever, as is evi∣dent by the See the Au∣thors in (v) Sir Edward Cooke his Preface to the 9. Report, & Mat. Westminster, Mat. Paris, Heveden, In∣gulply, and Wil. Malmes. sparsim, Spelmanns Glos∣sarium, & Concil. Tom. 1. Mr. Sel∣dens Titles of Honour, and Spicilegium in Eadmerum. Charters, Bulls, and exemptions, granted to Glaston∣bury, Saint Albans, Berry, Redding, Westminster, Saint Augustine, of Canterbury, Abingdon and Wster. Thirdly, many of our Abbots and Priors, (sometimes above an hundred) were mitred, had Episcopall Iurisdiction, and sate in See Mr. Sel∣dens, Tit. Hon. p. 700. to 736. Henrici Spel. Concil. Tom. 1.347. & Glossa∣rium, Tit. Abbas Cowel Interpret. Tit. Abbot. Parliament as Barons and Peers of the Realme as well as Bishops; yet notwithstanding they were all See Rastall Tit. Monasteries. suppressed by Acts of Parliament even in time of Popery, though double in number to our Bishops; therefore our Bishops and Bishoprickes being now found by long experience not onely unprofitable, but pernitious to our Kings and State, as here I have manifested, and to our Church, our Religion, as our Booke of Martyrs largely demonstrates, may lawfully be extirpated, notwithstan∣ding this Plea of Antiquity, as well as they. Fourthly, the Bishops in other reformed Churches, could and did plead as large Antiquity and prescription for their con∣tinuance, as our Prelates doe: yet that could not secure them from dissolution, but these Churches wholly suppressed them: therefore it is no good Plea for us to continue our Prelates; yea, in my weake judgement it is an argument not for, but a∣gainst our Bishops continuance, that they have beene tolerated so long, since evils and grievances [as our Lordly Prelates have ever beene to our Church and Kingdome] are so much the more speedily and carefully to be suppressed, by how much the more
inveterate and lasting they have beene. In a word, the govern∣ment of our Church by a Presbytery hath beene more ancient, more profitable, and lesse prejudiciall to our State, Kings, Church, than the Government of our Lordly Prelacy: there∣fore it is most reasonable that it should be revived, reestablished, and the Prelacy suppressed. All which I hope, may suffice in Answere to the first part of this grand objection, which hath stumbled many. To the second branch of it, touching the danger and incon∣venience of this change in suppressing Episcopacy.Answ. 2. I answer: First, that there can bee no danger or inconveni∣ence  at all therein, because the people generally most earnestly desire, pray for, expect it, and have preferred many Petitions to the High Court of Parliament to effect it. Secondly, because all things are now prepared for this al∣teration, the wickednesse, misdemeanors, prophanenesse, su∣perstition, oppression of our present Prelates, with the great troubles and combustions they have raised in our Church, our State, to their intolerable charge and molestation, deserve and call for this alteration; the present constitution of our Church, State, people: yea our correspondency with Scotland, with other reformed Churches requires it: the divisions and distra∣ctions in our Church (which in many wise mens apprehensi∣ons cannot be reconciled, nor any unity or uniformity in Gods worship established among us without it;) call for it Episcopacy being now growne such a roote of bitternesse, and wall of partition, as there is little hope of any unity, peace, or harmony in our Church if it continue. Thirdly, admit some petty inconveniences may arise by such an alteration and extirpation of Episcopacy, yet these are nothing comparable for weight or number to those mis∣chiefes which will certainely accrue by its continuance: Since therefore of two evils the lesse is ever to be elected, it will bee farre more expedient to our Church and State totally and fi∣nally to suppresse, then to support our Lordly Prelacy. And thus much for this Capitall Objection.Object. 2. The second Allegation for the continuance of Episcopacy is this, See Bishop Halls. 3. last Bookes, the Ox∣ford Petition. Sir Tho. Astons Peti∣tion and booke. that if Bishops be taken away, we shall have nothing but Sects, Schismes, and divisions in our Church, and almost as many Religions as men.
To this I answere.Answ. 1. First; that the tyranny, Lordlinesse, pro∣phanenesse, Superstition and Innovations of our Prelates both in Ceremones, Doctrine, Worship, have beene the Originall, Principall, if not onely cause of all those Sects, divisions, and Separations lately sprung up in our Church; for proofe of which I appeale onely to every mans conscience and experi∣ence, it being a most knowne undubitable truth: the removing therefore of our Bishops (the Sublata causa tollitur effectus, Kickerman. cause of all our Schismes and devisions) must needes be a meanes of future peace and unity, not cause of Schismes, or divisions in Religion, as is vainely suggested. Secondly, Episcopacy it selfe is now a See all the Seperatists late Pamplets and Bookes. maine ground of  Separation from our Church, the great stumbling blocke which causeth many dayly to fall off from us, and hinders others from closing with us; all other grounds of Separation and division depending on, or arising from Episcopacy. And unlesse this be removed, in my poore apprehension, there can be no hopes at all of any reconciliation of those who are fallen off from us, or keeping others from separation, but the rent will still grow greater, what ever course else be taken to effect a Union. There∣fore questionlesse the abolishing of Episcopacy cannot be a meanes of increasing Schismes or divisions, but the best, and rea∣diest way to remedy and prevent them. Thirdly, Saint Hierome, & sedulius Com. in Tit. 1. with o∣thers who fol∣low them. Ierome and others informe us, that Epis∣copacy  was first instituted to prevent and extirpate Schismes; but it hath beene so farre from effecting this, that it hath on the con∣trary occasioned all or most of those See Ioannis Marius, Zaba∣rella, and Theode∣ricus a Niem de Schismate. Cen∣tur. Magd. Cent. 3.5.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13. 6.10. Schismes and divisions that ever happened in the Church of God since its first institution, both at home and abroad, as is evident by all Ecclesiasticall Histories, by the severall Schismes of the Popes and other Pre∣lates in forraigne parts; of Canterbury, Yorke, and other Lordly Prelates at home, which if God send life and opportunity, I shall irrefragably manifest in a peculiar Treatise of that Sub∣ject, if there be occasion. It cannot be then, but that their suppression should rather remedy than procure Sects and Schismes. Fourthly, in the reformed Churches of France, and Geneva, where there are no Bishops, there are no Sects, or Schismes at all, or at least not so many as where there are Bishops. And though im Germany and the Netherlands there bee many Sects,
yet this is not through want of Bishops, but by reason of the con∣nivance of the temporall Magistrates who permit them, and wil neither suppresse them themselves, nor suffer their Presbyteries to doe it, out of I know not what State policy, permitting all Religions and Sects. Fifthly, our Bishops ever since the Reformation, and before, have beene the greatest opposers and hinderers of the refor∣mation of those abuses and fooleries, the introducers and main∣tainers of those Ceremonies and Superstitions which have beene the grand occasions of Schismes and Separation. How often have Pluralities, Non-residence, abuses of Excommu∣nication, Ex Officio Oathes and proceedings, Visitation, Fees and extortions, abuses of Ecclesiasticall Courts and processes, Sel∣ling of Orders, of licenses to preach, keepe Schoole, and the like, commutations of penance, admission of prophane and scandalous persons to the Sacrament, toleration of scan∣dalous, superstitious, lasie, non-preaching, rare-preaching and insufficient Ministers, Altars, Images, Tapers, Cathedrall chaunting and musicke, bowing at Altars, and to the name Jesus, with those Superfluous Ceremonies of the Crosse, Ring, Surplesse, and kneeling at the Sacrament, which scanda∣lize many, and may be better omitted than retained, beene complained against from time to time in Parliament and else∣where, without any the least redresse or reformation; and all by reason of our Prelates obstinacy, who peremptorily main∣taine, and will not suffer them to be either amended or remo∣ved to the glory of God, the honour of our Religion, the sa∣tisfying of tender Consciences, the peace of our Church and State; and doe they not now in this present Parliament, which threatens ruine to their Lordly chaires, oppose with all their might the reformation of all or most of those corruptions which are the occasions of our Schismes and distractions? Yea did they not in their late new Canons, in affront of the whole Parliament and Kingdome, not onely justifie, but establish as much as in them lay, and that for perpetuity, all those Innova∣tions, extravagances and grievances which were chiefe occa∣sions of our late unhappy divisions, and of many thousands se∣parations from our Church? This being then an experimentall knowne ruth, the removing of these incorrigible Prelates, who will neither refome themselves, nor suffer any abuses in our
Church to be redressed, must of necessity be the onely cure of our rens and divisions for the present, and the best meanes to prevent them for the future. Sixthly, I appeale to all indifferent men, whether Schismes  and diversities in matters of Religion may not be better pre∣vented, suppressed by good Lawes, by godly Magistrates and Ministers, specially authorized to suppresse them, than by a company of corrupt Prelates and their Officers, who for their owne private Lucre (as experience manifests) will bee content to tolerate, and connive at any erronious doctrines, Sects and Schismes (especially Papists and Arminians, the chiefe patriots and supporters of their Hierarchy) but those who directly op∣pose their Prelacy and corruptions, as hose they nickename Puritanes doe, who shall be sure to smart and feele the Bishops severity to the uttermost, how ever others scape. If so; then I hope there is no neede at all to continue our Lordly Prelates to suppresse these mischiefes, which may be better reformed, and suppressed by others, than by our Bishops and their Of∣ficers. I shall conclude this point with the words of learned Rspnsi ad Turriani Sophis∣mata, par. 2. L∣ctio. 18. Antonie Sadeel, in his answere to Turrian the Jesuite, who made the same objection for the defence and continuance of Bishops, as our Prelates doe here. I answere in few words, That this superiour degree of Bishops is an ancien, but yet ONELY a humane Institution, whereby the pious Ancients intended to pre∣vent Schismes. And although perchance considering those times, this remedy was not unusefull, yet experience hath taught us, that these good Fathers while they desired to shun Charybdis, fell into Scylla. For the ambition of Prelates which followed soone after, was no lesse pernicious to the Church than those Schismes. And to speake truely: THIS WAS THE MOST PERNICIOVS SCHISME OF ALL OTHERS, when a Divorce was made from the parity and true doctrine of the Gospell, and the Spirituall Discipline of the Church changed into a kinde of Regall Authori∣ty, and terrene power. This I hope will abundantly answere this second Objection for Episcopacy. The last Objection is this.Object. 3. That by the Statute of 16. R. 2. cap. 5. Sir Thomas Aston, Briefe re∣view of Episco∣pacy. p. 54. to 78 Bishops are declared to be profitable and necessary to our Lord the King and to all his Realme, and that by the removall of them the Realme should be destitute of Counsell. That they are 8. Elz. c 1. one of the greatest States of the Land setled by many Acts
of Parliament, which cannot well be held without them. That the removall of them will breede a great confusion both in the Common and Statute Law; and that the King is sworne to defend and pro∣tect them to his power: Therefore it must needes be dangerous and inconvenient to remove them. Answ.This Objection consists of severall heads, to all which I shall give a particular answer, with as much brevity as may bee. First, for the words of the Statute of Richard the 2d. I doubt not but they were inserted into that Act by the Bishops them∣selves, or by their procurement, who ought not to be Trumpe∣ters of their owne prayses, nor witnesses in their owne cause. Secondly, I hope the premised Histories of their Treasons, Rebellions, Oppressions, and desperate Counsells in all times, will manifestly declare the contrary to this Act, That Bishops are neither necessary, nor profitable to the King, nor to all his Realme, but pernicious to both, and that the Kingdome will be no wayes de∣stitute of Counsell if they should e removed, especially in our dayes when there are so many learned Lords, Lawyers, and Gentlemen of all sorts, to Counsell and advise his Majestie in all State affaires. Thirdly, The Prelates in this very King Ricard the second his time, were so farre from being profitable and necessary to him, as their Lord and King, and to all his Realme, that some of them were the chiefe men that miscounselled him, as appeares by the Statut of 11. R. 2. c. 15.6. which recites; that for cause of great and horrible mischiefes and perills, which were fallen by evill Governance which was about the Kings person by all his time before, by Alexander late Arch-Bishop of Yorke, Thomas Bi∣shop of Chichester and other their adhaerents, thereby the King and all his Realme were very nigh to have beene wholly undone and destroyed, for which cause these Prelates were attainted, removed from the King, and their lands confiscated by this Act. And the residue of them were the principle agents that opposed, depri∣ved, and thrust him (as they did King Edward the second be∣fore him) from his Crowne and royall dignity, as appeares by the premises. Now if this were to be profitable and necessary to our Soveraigne Lord the King, let all men judge. How necessa∣ry they were to all the Kingdome in his time, let the Histories of this Kings life, and the Treasons of Arch-Bishop Arundell, fore related declare. How well they used the people and their
tenants, you may see by a Commission granted about this time, to enquire of he Bishop of Winchesters oppressions and abuses of the Kings people, recorded in the Register of Writs,See Part 1. p. 72 73. part. 2 f. 125. b. De audiendo & terminado con∣tra Episopum Wintonen sembal∣livos, constabulari∣s & ministrs su. Rex Vicecomiti salutem. Ex clamosis quermo∣nis diversorum hominum de comitatu tuo ad nostium saepius per∣venit auditum, quod A Episcopus Wintoniensis, nec no ballivi, cn∣stabulari & alii ministri & servientes ipsius Episcopi, pluimas & diversas oppressiones, extortiones, duritias, damna, excessus, & gravamina intolerabilia, dictis ominibus in diversis partibus Comitaus praedicti, tam infra liberates quam extra multiplici∣ter & diversimode intulerunt, & de die in diem inferre non de∣sistunt, plures de dictis hominibus vi & armis multotiens verbe∣rando, vulnerando, eosque capiendo, imprisonando, & in prisona forti & dura super terram nudam & absque alimento, fame, frigore, & nuditate fere ad mortem cruciando, & eos in prisona ujusmodi, donec fines & redemptiones ad voluntatem suam fecerint, null modo deliberari permittendo, nec non domos quorundam hominum hu∣jusmodi vi armata, & bona & catalla sua capiendo & asportando, eosdemque uxores & servientes suos verberando, vulnerando, & male tracando, & hominibus super hujusmodi duriiis conqueri vo∣lentibus in tantum comminando, quod iidem homines in hundredis & aliis curiis dicti Episcopi vel alibi negocia sua inde prosequi metu mortis non sunt ausi, & alia hujusmodi mala, damna, & excessus in∣humaniter indies perpetrando, in nostri dedecus & contemptum, & populi nostri partium praedictarum destructionem & depressionem manifestam, unde plurimum conturbamur, Nos oppressiones, durias damna & excessus ac gravamina praedicta, si perpetrata fuerint no∣lente relinquere impunita, volentesque salvationi & quieti dicti populi nostri in hac parte prospicere ut tenemur, assignavimus dilectis & fidelibus nostris, &c. sciri poterit, de oppressionibus, extotio∣nibus, duritiis, damnis & gravaminibus praedictis, per dictos episco∣pum, ballivos, constabularios, ministros & servientes suos & alios quoscunque de confederatione sua in hac parte existentes qualitercun∣que perpetratis, & de praemissis omnibus & singulis plenius verita∣tem, & ad querelas omnium & singulorum pro nobis vel prose ipsi inde conqueri & prosequi volentium, nec non ad praemissa omnia & singula tam ad sectam nostram quam aliorum quorumcunque audien∣dum & terminandum secundum legem & consuetudinem regni no∣stri Angliae, Et ideo tii praecipimus quod ad certos &c. quos, &c. tibi scire facias, venire facias coram, &c. tot & tales probos &
legales homines de balliva tua tam infra libertates quam extra, per quos rei vertas in praemissis melius sciri poterit & inquiri, Et ha∣beas, &c. For their profitablenesse and necessary use in our Church in that Kings raigne, let the Statute of 5. R. 2. c. 5. See Part 1. p. 73. &c. surreptitiously procured by te Prelates, and complained a∣gainst by the Commons the next Parliament, and with severall bloody persecutions of the true Christians in that age under the name of Lollards by William Caurtney, Thomas Arundell and other our Prelates (related at large by Master Fox in his Acts and Monuments) testifie to the world. For mine owne part I could never yet finde any good at all that our Lordly Prelates ever did in our Church or State, quatenus Prelates. If any o them have done any good by their preaching and writing (as some of them have, which is rare,) I answere, that the most of them who have done any good in this kind, did it not as, or whiles they were Pelates, but as, or whiles they were Private men, their Episcopacy making none of them to preach, or write more than otherwise they would have done, but lesse, as expe∣rience manifests. So that their Bishoprickes made them not to doe more good, but rather hindred them to doe so much good as they would have done, had they still continued private Mi∣nisters onely. For the second, that they are one of the greatest States of the Land, setled by many Acts of Parliament, and necessary members of the Parliament, which cannot well be held with∣out them. Answ. 1.I answere, first, that our Lord Abbots and Priors might and did pleade this as well as Bishops, yet this was held no Plea at all, no not in times of Popery, and shall we allow it now in times of clearer light? Secondly, the wohle body of Popery it selfe, toge∣ther with the Pope, his Popish Clergie, Orders and Ceremonies were all setled among us by sundry Acts of Parliament, and the Statutes of Magna Charta, c. 1. with all 1 Rich. 2. c. 1.3. R. 2. c. 1.5. R. 2. c. 1.6. R. 2. c. 1.7. R. 2. c. 1.9. R. 2. c. 1.12. R. 2. c. 1.21. R. 2. c. 1.4. H. 4. c. 1 2. H. 4. c. 1.4. H. 4. c. 1.7. H. 4. c. 1.9. H. 4. c. 1.13. H. 4. c. 1.3. H. 5. c. 1 2. H. 6. c. 1. other Acts of Parliament since, enacting, that holy Church, (or the Church of England) Bishops and Churchmen shall en∣joy all their ranchises, Rights, Liberties, Priviledges, &c are meant onely of our Popish Prelates, Abbots, Priors, Monks Nunnes, Masse-Priests; and of exemption from secular Jurisdi∣ction, Sanctuaries, with other Anti-Monarchicall priviledges
granted to them by Kings, Popes, or Parliaments in times of Popery? shall then our Popish Recusants or any other argue thence, therefore it is fit that Popery, with all Popish orders, Bishops, Sanctuaries, and exemptions should be now revived and perpetuated among us, because established by so many Lawes? If this be no argument for the continuance of Popery, or Popish Prelates, who were principally established by these objected Lawes, then certainely it can be no good Plea for the continuance of such of our Prelates who are true Protestants, whom most of these Acts never established, nor intended to continue. Thirdly, It is a rule in Philosophy and Law, Eodem modo  quo quid constituitur, dissolvitur: Since therefore our Lordly Bi∣shops were first erected and constituted such Bishops and States of the Land by Acts of Parliament onely, not by any divine in∣stitution, which prohibits them all such secular Lordly Sove∣raignty, and dominion, as I have largely manifested in the pre∣mises, They may lawfully without any injury or inconveni∣ence, by an Act of Parliament, be unbishopped, unlorded a∣gaine, and thrust out of our Church as well as the Pope, Abbots, Priors, Monkes and Masse-Priests were, upon the reformation of Religion, both at home and in forraine parts. As for our Prelates necessity of sitting in Parliament; I answer. First, that though they have beene anciently admitted to it in Parliament, yet there is no necessity of their sitting there, seeing it hath beene long since resolved, and Bishop Iuell, with Bishop Bilson, confesse and prove at large, that a Parliament may be, and some Parliaments have beene kept without Bishops, as I have page 458. to 465. Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts. f 19. b. formerly demonstrated. Secondly, many imes all, some, or a great part of our Bishops have beene secluded the Parliament, and yet this hath beene  no impeachment to the proceedings there. In the Parliament  See Hus. p. 449, 460. Saint Edmonds-bury, Anno 1296. all the Bishops were brought in a Premunire, and secluded the House. In King Edward the sixt his time, Fox Acts, and Monuments, old∣dest Edition. p. 748.902.907.927. b. 1708. b 1717. b. Mar∣tins History. p. 450 to 454. Speed. p. 1156. Stephen Gardner Bishop of Winchester, and Bonner Bishop of London were sequestred and kept out of the House: In the first yeare of Qeene Mary all the Married Pro∣testant Bishops; and in the first of Queene Elizabeth, many of the Popish Prelates were secluded and thrust out of the Parliament. yea, many Parliaments have beene held when one, or both the
Arch-Bishoprickes, with many other Bihoprickes have beene voyd, and no Proxies admitted to supply their places: All which proves, that there is no necessity of their Session there, and that all of them may be excluded thence at all times as well  as all of them at sotimes, and most of them at others. Thirdly, our Bishops sit not in the Parliament, quatenus Bi∣shops but as they ae Atiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 299.300. Here pars. 1. pag. 71.72. Crompton Iurisdiction. p. 12 19. Kelwayes Reports. f. 184. Stamfords Pl. f. 153. Mr. Sl∣dens Titles of honour p. 690. to 736. Barons, and hold by Barony, as is cleere both by our Histories, Law Bookes, and their owne confessi∣ons: Now most of them at this day are no Barons, nor hold of the King by Barony; therefore they have no legall Right to sit there, being no Peers of the Realme nor yet to be tryed by their Peers in case of Treason or Felony, but onely by an Or∣dinary Jury, as hath been adjudged in our Law Bookes, & pra∣ctised in point of experience. Fourthly, Henrc Spel∣mani Glossarium. Tit. Abbas. Mr. Seldons Tit. Hon. p. 700. to 735. Cowels Interpreter Abbot. Abbots and Priors who were spirituall Lords  of Parliament as well as Bishops, and more than treble in num∣ber to them, have beene long since suppressed and cast out of the house without any prejudice: Therefore Bishops by the same reason may be suppressed and put out of Parliament without any inconvenience, being sewer in number han they. Fifthly, In cases ofAntiq. Eccle. Brit. p. 299.300, See Part. 1. p, 71 72.10. E. 4. F. 6. Stamford Plee. .3. c, 1 f. 153. Felony and Treason, the Bishops by their owne Lawes and practise neither are nor ought to be present in the  House, nor to give any vote at all but onely the Temporall Lords; And in cases of Lands and possessions, or in passing of Lawes for the Civill Government of the Realme, they have no judiciary nor Legislative power at all, as Bishop Bilson and othersSee. p. 459.  465. fore∣cited prove at large; therefore their Session in Parliament is not necessary nor expedient by way of vote. Sixthly, the Temporall Lords and Prelates make but one house,Br. Coone 153. Walsingham. Hist. Anglia, An. 1.3.9.7. p. 392. Ypo∣digna Neustria, p. 151. and if all the Bishops be dead or absent, or if present, if all the Temporall Lords vote one way, and the Bishops, the lesser number, another: the vote is good. Therefore their pre∣sence and votes in Parliament are nor simply necessary, and may be spared withou any mischiefe or inconvenience. Seventhly, if reason might determine this conroversie, I suppose every man will grant, that it is farre more necessary, reasonable, and expedient, that the Judges, Sergeants, and Kings Councell, learned in the Lawes of the Realme, and best able to descide all legall controversies, and to make good Lawes to redresse all mischiefes, should have votes in Parlia∣ment
than Bishops; yet we know they have no votes at all by way of descition, because no Barons nor Peers of the Realm, but onely by way of direction and advice, when their Judge∣ments are demanded. Why then our Bishops (especially those who are no Barons, as few or none of them are) should not now be ranked in equipage with the Judges, and have no o∣ther but a directive, not voting, descitive or Legislative voyce in Parliament, I thinke no reason can be given; and indeede many thinke there is little reason why they should have any votes at all, since ancient, that I say not present, experience ma∣nifests, that they crosse or oppose all, or most good Bills, and motions, for the advancement of religion and reformation of Ecclesiasticall abuses; and for the most part vote with the Po∣pish Lords, or worser side against the better; and so by Pope Gratian. Caus. 11. qu. 2. Gregory his owne rule, approved by Bishop. Iewel Reply to Har∣ding, Artic. 4. divis. 53. p. 234. Bishop Iewel, ought to lose their priviledge of voting: Quia Privilegium meretur amittere, qui abutitur potestate. Now whereas some Object that if the Bishops were put out of the Upper House of Parliament,Object. the Clergie could not grant subsidies to the King. I answere,Answ. it is a most grosse mistake, for the Clergie ever grant their subsidies in the Convocation, not in the Lords house, and if the Major part of the Clerkes in Convocation grant subsi∣dies without the Bishops, and then send their Bill by which they grant them, to the Commons and Lords House to be con∣firmed, (as they usually doe) if the Commons and Temporall Lords, without the Bishops passe it, this, with the Kings Roy∣all assent, will binde all the Clergie and Bishops too. So as their presence and votes in Parliament is no wayes necessary for the granting of Subsidies. Wherefore they may be thence exclu∣ded without any prejudice to the King or Subject, if not with great benefit unto both. For the third clause of the Objection; that the removall of them will breede a great confusion in the Common and Statute  Law. I answere, first, that the same Objection might have beene  made for the continuance of the Pope, and Popery; yea a∣gainst the severall Statutes for Creating estate Tayles, levying of Fines, Vses, Devises, Ioyntures, and the like, which bred greater alterations in the Common and former Statute Lawes, than
the removing of Bishops can doe. Secondly, that one Act of Parliament, nabling certaine Commissioners to execute all those Legall Acts which Bishops usually did, will prevent all this pretended confusion; so that this part of the Objection is scarce worthy answere. For the fourth clause, that the King by his Coronation Oath, is sworne to preserve to the Bishops and their Churches all their Canonicall priviledges, and to protect and defend to his power the Bishops and Churches under his government. I answere, First, that this Oath was at first cunningly devi∣sed and imposed on our Kings by our Bishops themselves, out of a policy to engage our Princes to maintaine them in their usurped authority; possessions, and Jurisdictions, which had no foundation in the Scripture, and to captivate our Kings to their pleasures, as the Popes by such a kind of Oath enthralled the Emperours to their Vassallage. Secondly, that this Oath was first invented by Popish Prelates, and meant onely of them and their Popish Church and Priviledges, and so cannot properly extend to our Prelates if Protestants. Thirdly, this Oath doth no way engage the King to defend and maintaine our Bishops, if the Parliament see good cause to extirpate them. For as the King and Judges who are obliged by their Oathes to maintaine and execute all the Lawes of the Realme, are not bound by their Oath to continue former in∣convenient Lawes from alteration, or repeale, or to execute them when repealed, for then all ill Lawes should be unaltera∣ble and irrepealeable: So the King by this his Oath, is no wayes obleiged to defend, protect, and preserve the Bishops, if there be good cause in point of piety and policy to sup∣presse them, especially when any of them prove delinquents: For as Bishops and other Subjects by their misdemeanours may See Brooke Fiz herbert, and Raall. Title  re Cookes Istitutes, . 12.130. put themselves out of the Kings Protection, and forfeite both their goods, lives, and estates, notwithstanding this Co∣ronation Oath; So by the same reason when Bishops (and Bishoprickes, by their misdemeanours) prove intolerable grie∣vances both to Church and State (as now they have done) they have thereby deprived themselves of the Kings Prote∣ction and deence specified in this Oath and thereupon may be justly suppressed by the King and State, without the least
violation of this most solemne Oath, as Abbots, Monkes, and Sanctuaries were. Having thus removed all the principall Ob∣jections for the continuance of our Lordly Prelates; I shall in the last place answere one EvasionEvasion. whereby our present Lord Bishops thinke to shift off this Antipathy from themselves, as ha∣ving no relation at all to them; They Bishop Hall defence of the humble Remon∣strance. p. 163.164.165. say, that those Prelates whose Treasons, Rebellions, Seditions, Oppressions, and Antimonar∣chicall practises, I have here collected, were Popish Bishops, Limbes of that body whose head they all abjure; the fault of their wicked∣nesse was in the Popery, not in the Episcopacy, in the men, not the cal∣ling; and so utterly unconcerneth them, and haveth no reflection at all on them, who are generally taxed for being excessive royalists, and siding too much with the King and Court. To this I answere,Answ. 1. first, that most of all the premised rebelli∣ous, disloyall, seditious, extravagant actions of our Bishops have proceeded from them onely as Lordly, not Popish Pre∣lates, and issued from their Episcopacy, not their Popery, their Prelaticall functions, not personall corruptions, as the Histories themselves sufficiently demonstrate. Secondly, I answer, that some of the recited Bishops were  no Papists but Protestants, who were no limbes of that body of Rome, whose head our Bishops say they have abjured therefore it is evident, that their Episcopall function, not their Religion, was the ground both of their disloyalties and extravagancies. Thirdly, I suppose our Prelates will not renounce Arch-Bishop  Laud, Bishop Wren, Peirce, Mountague, and other of their fellow Bishops yet alive, or lately dead, as Popish Prelates, and members of the Church of Rome, as some account them: yet their impious, seditious, oppressive, prophane, not trayterly Actions, equall or exceede many of our Popish Arch-Bishops and Bishops, as he that will but compare them may easily dis∣cerne. It is not then the leaven of Popery, but of the Lordly Prelacy it selfe which infected our Bishops, and made them so treacherous and impious in all ages. It is true indeed, that Popery (some of whose See King Iams his Procla∣mation, for ba∣nishing Jesuites, June 10. 1606. & June 2. 1610. Iohn Whit his Defence of the Way. ch. 6. and 10. positions are treasonable; and sedi∣tious) and dependency upon the Pope, hath made some of our Bishops more disloyall and Rebellious than otherwise they would have beene, as is evident by the first proceeding of Stephen Langhton and his confederates against King Iohn;See par. 1. p. 33. to 41. but yet afterward when the Pope sided with King Iohn and Henry
the third, against Langton, and the other Bishops, who stirred up the Barons Warres, these Bishops continued as trayterous and rebellious to these Kings as ever they were before whiles they adhered to the Pope, and the Pope to them; therefore their Hierarchy (the cause of all these stirs) not their Popery was the ground worke of their Treachery and enormities. Now be∣cause our present Prelates boast so much of their loyalty to his Majestie, whose absolute Civill Royall prerogative, they have lately overmuch courted and endeavored to extend be∣yond due limits to the impeachment of the Lawes and Sub∣jects hereditary liberties, not out of any zeale to his Majesties service, but onely to advance their owne Episcopall power and Jurisdiction, and to usurpe a more than Royall or Papall authority over all his Majesties Subjects for the present, and over himselfe at last; I shall make bold to present them with some particular instances, whereby I shall demonstrate, that all or most of our present Lordly Bishops have beene more se∣ditious, contumacious, disloyall and injurious to his Majesties royall prerogative, more oppressive to his Loyall Subjects, and more destructive to the fundamentall Lawes of the Realme, and liberties of the Subject, than all other professions of men what∣soever. For first, they have presumed to keepe Consistories, Visita∣tions, Synods, and exercise all manner of Episcopall Jurisdi∣ction in their Diocesse without his Majesties speciall Letters Patents, or Commissions under the great Seale of England, au∣thorizing them to doe it, contrary to the Statutes of 26. Hen. 8. c. 1.37. Hen. 8. c. 17. 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1.5 Eliz. c. 1. and 8. Eliz. c. 1. Secondly, they have dared to make out all their Processes, Ci∣tations, Excommunications, Suspensions, Sentences, Pro∣bates of Wills, Letters of Administation, Writs of Iure Pa∣tronatus, accounts of Executors, and the like in their owne names and Stiles, and under their owne Seales alone, not the Kings, as if they were the onely Kings, the Supreame Ecclesia∣sticall heads and Governours of the Church of England, not his Majesty, contrary to the Statutes of 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 1 Jac. c. 25. Thirdly, they have presumed in The Arch-Bishop in his speech in Starre-Chamber. Dr. Hylin, and Dw, in their Answers to Mr. Burn. Printed Bookes to justi∣fie  these proceedings to be Lawfull; and not content herewith,
they have most audaciously caused all the Judges of England to resolve, and moved his Majestie to dclare and proclaime these their disloyall unjust usurpations on his Crowne to be just and legall; when as I dare make good the contrary, against all the Prelaes and Lawyers of England, and have done it in part, in my Breviate of the Prelates intolerable incroachments upon the Kings Prerogative royall and the Subjects Liberties. This resolu∣tion of he Judges against the Kings Prerogative the Prelates have caused to be See a new Discovery of the Prelates Ty∣ranny. p. 33. to. 38. nrolled both in the High Commission at Lambeth and Yorke and in all their Ecclesiasticall Courts throughout England in perpetuam rei memoriam, the Arch-bishop of Canterbury keeping the Originall certificate of the Judges among the records of his Court, as a good evidence against his Majesty and his successors. Fourthly, they have pillored, stigmatized, banished, close  imprisoned, and cut off the eares of those who have opposed these their encroachments upon his Majesties Prerogative Royall, according to their Oath and duty, to deterre all others from defending his Majesties Title. Fifthly, they have taken upon them to make, Print and pub∣lish  in their owne names, by their owne authorities, without his Majesties or the Parliaments speciall License, new Visita∣tion Oathes, Articles, Injunctions, Canons, Ordinances, Rites, and Ceremonies; enforced them on Ministers, Church Wardens, Sidemen and others, and excommunicated, suspended, silenced, fned, imprisoned and persecuted his Majesties faithfull, and loyalest Subjects for not submitting to them, contrary to the Sta∣tutes of 25. H. 8. c. 19.21.27. H. 8. c. 15.3 Ed. 6. c. 10.11. 1 Eliz. c. 2.13 Eliz. c. 12. Magna Charta, c. 29. and the Petition of Right. Sixthly, they have presumed to grant Licenses to marry  without banes, and to eate flesh on fasting dayes in their owne names; a Prerogative peculiar to the King alone; who onely can dispense with penall Lawes, and the booke of Common Prayer, which 2. & 3. Ed. 6. c. 21.5. & 6. Ed. 6. c. 12. and the Rubrick be∣fore Matrimony enjoyne no marriages to be solemnized, unlesse the Banes be first thrice asked in the Church. Seventhly, they have adventured to hold plea of divers cases in their Consistories of which the Conusance belongs onely  to the Kings temporall Courts; which the formes of Proibiti∣ons, and Ad Iura Regia in the Pars 2. ol. 36. to 66. Register, determine, to be a
dis-inheriting of the Kings Crowne and Royall dignity, a contempt, derogation, and grievous prejudice to his Royall authority, and in∣tolerable rebellion, affront, disloyalty and contuacy to his Soveraigne Iurisdiction. Eighthly, they have stopped the current of the Kings owne Prohibitions to their Ecclesiasticall spitefull Courts, in cases where they have beene usually granted in former ages, even in times of Popery, and of the most domineering Prelates; and oft questioned, threatned, convented the Kings Judge before the King and Lords of the Councell for granting them. An in∣solency and affront to Soveraigne Justice, which no former ages can Parallell. Ninthly, they have disobeyed his Majesties Prohibitions, proceeded in contempt and despite of them; yea they have committed divers to prison who have sued for, and delivered Prohibitions in a faire dutifull manner in the High Commission Court, and Articled against one Mr. Iohn Clobery in the High Commission, onely for suing out of a Prohibition to that Court, as if it were a Capitall ofence. For which contumcy and Re∣bellion their temporalities might bee justly seised into the Kings hands, and themselves attainted in a Preunire Adde to this, that the now Archbishop of Canterbury hath many times openly protested in Court; that he would breake both the necke and backe of Prohibitions.See the Ar∣ticles of his Im∣peachment. And Matthew Wren whilst Bishop of Norwich, in the 14. yeare of his Mjesties reigne, procured his Majestie to declare under his Highnesse great Seale of England, his royall pleasure; That if any person within the sayd City of Nor∣which should refuse to pay according to the rate of two shillings the pound in lieu of the Tithes of Houses, unto the Minister of any Parish within the sayd City, that the same should be heard in the Court of Chancery, or in the Consistory of the Bishop of Norwich. And that in such Case no Prohibition should be granted against the said Bishop of Norwich their Chancellors, or Commissaries in the sayd Courts of Consistory. Tenthly, they hve disobeyed and contemned his Majesties just and lawfull-commands, in a most premptory and insolent manner, of which I shall give onely one memorable instance. His Majesty about the yeare of our Lord 1629. taking notice of the Bishops Non-residence from their Bishoprickes, and how they lived for the most part idlely in London, hunting after
new prefements, to the ill example of the inerior Clrgi, the delapidation and ruine of their mansion houses, the decay of Hospitality, the impairing of their woods and temporalties, the increase of Popery and decrease of Religion; was pleased to send a letter to Doctor Abbot, then Arch-Bishop of Canterbury for the redresse of the sayd inconveniences, commanding him in his Royall name, to enjoyne every Bishop then residing about Lon∣don, upon his Canonicall Obedience, under paine of his Majesties dis∣pleasure forthwith to repaire to his Bishopricke, and no longer to abide about London. The Arch-Bishop hereupon, sends his Secretary with this his Majesties Letter, to the Bishops then in London and Westminster; charging them upon their Canonical Obedience, ac∣cording to this Letter, presently to depart to their several Bisho∣prickes. His Secretary repaired with this Letter and the Arch-bishops instructions to Dr Howson, the Bp of Durham lodging on Snowhill, neare Sepulchers Church, and required him in the Arch-bishops name by vertue of his Canonicall obedience, to repaire to his Bishoprick according to his Majesties command. He here∣upon in a great rage giving the Secretary some harsh words, told him plainly, that he neither would nor could obey this mandate, for he had many great suits in Law with Sr Henry Martyn, and others, of wch be would ee an end ere he departed London; besides he had not as yet furnished his house at Durham, for his entertainment, that it was a great way to Durham, the wayes somewhat foule, the weather cold, and imself aged; wherefore he neither would nor could goe out of Towne till the next Summer, if then, come what would: and bid him returne this answere to the Arch-bishop. Neither could the Secretary (who perswaded him to send a milder answere, and to sue to his Majestie for License to abide in Towne) obtaine any other resolution from this Cholericke Prelate. From him he repaired to Doctor Buckeridge, Bishop of Ely, at Ely house in Holburne, acquainting him with this his Majesties Letter, and comman∣ding him by his Majesties Order upon his Canonicall obedi∣ence, to repaire forthwith to his Bishopricke, according to his Majesties command. But this dutifull Prelategrew more Cholericke than the former, answering him to this effect: Let who would obey this Command, yet he would not: what, sayd he, have I lately bestowed almost 500. l. in repairing and furnishing my house, here in London, to make it fit for my habitation, and must I now be Commanded to depart from it, and sent into the cold way
rotten fens of Ely, to impaire my health and kill me up quite? I will not be so served nor abused. And therefore tell your Lord from me, that I take it ill e should send me such a Command, and that I will not goe from my house to Ely for his or any other mans pleasure. The Se∣cretary thereupon desired his Lordship to take notice, that it was his Majesties pleasure he should depart to his Bishopricke, as well as the Arch-bishops, who did no more than he was en∣joyned by the King, whose mandate hee hoped his Lordship would obey, however he neglected or disobeyed the Arch-bi∣shops Command, which yet was not to be slighted, being his Metropolitan. In conclusion, the Bishop told him plainely, he would obey neither the one nor other, and that he would not stirre out of London all the winter till the spring, if then. The Secretary wondring at these two Bishops strange disobedience, and con∣tumacy both in words and deeds, departes from them to Bi∣shop Harsnet, and Bishop Field, with his Letter and instructi∣ons, who gave him the like answers in effect, though in calmer Termes, not one of them stirring from London, either upon the Kings Letter, or Arch-bishops Command, for all their Oath of Allegiance to the King, and of Canonicall obedience to the Arch-Bishop. If then these late Prelates have beene so Rebelli∣ous, so contumacious, both against his Majesties and their Me∣tropolitanes commands, when they required them onely to reside on their Bishoprickes, as the Law of God, the Statutes of the Realme, the Canons of the Church in all ages, yea the very Canon Law it selfe, enjoyne them to doe, under paine of mortall sinne; What Rebels, and disobedient Varlets would they have proved, thinke you, in matters and commands lesse reasonable? Eleventhly, our Prelates have beene strangely Rebellious, contumacious, and disloyall above all other Subjects, in sligh∣ting, vilifying, affronting the Kings owne Letters Patents, and frustrating his Subjects of the benefit of them. Thus Doctor Young Deane of Winchester was put by the Mastership of Saint Crosses, though granted him by Patent, that Doctor Lewis, who left his Provostship in Oriel Colledge in Oxford with other pre∣ferment, and fled into France for buggery as was reported; might be thrust in. So Doctor Manwering, publickely censured in Parliament for a Seditious Sermon, and made unca∣pable of any preferment, by the sentence of the House, was
immediately after the Parliament ended, thrust into a living of three hundred pound per annum, by our Prelates; and hee who had the grant of the next advowson by Patent put by. Thus divers others have beene thrust by such places as the King himselfe hath granted them by Patent by our Omnipo∣tent Prelates, to advance those of their own saction, yea one of them hath not stucke to say, that had the King himselfe granted a Patent for the Execution of Writs of Capias Excommunicatum to some who had long sued for it, that he would make the King recall it, or in case he would not, he would withstand and not obey it. Nay, we know, that though the Lord Majors of London, by Patent, and prescription time out of minde, as the Kings Leiutenants and Vicegerents, have used to carry up their swords before them in Pauls Church-yard and Church, yet a proud ambitious Pre∣late, not long since questioned him for doing it before the Lords of the Privie Councell, as if the Kings sword of Iustice, had nothing to doe within that Precinct but onely the Bishops Cro∣sier. Neither hath the City of Yorke scaped Scotfree: for the Bishops and Preends of that City have contested with the Citizens of Yorke, even in his Majesties presence, about those Liberties which both his Majestie himselfe but five yeares be∣fore, and his royall Ancestors had anciently granted to them, by severall Charters in expresse words; endeavouring to nul∣lifie and repeale their Patent, and caused the Major of Yorke not to beare his sword within the close, as he and his predeces∣sors had usually done, (and that by speciall Charter) from Ri∣chard the seconds time, till of late. Since that the now Arch-bishop of Canterbury hath had contests with the University of Cambridge touching their Charters and Priviledges which must all stop to adore his greatnesse, contesting even before the King and Lords with that Universitie and Oxford too, whether he as Arch-bishop, or his Majestie as King, should be their Vi∣sitor. Now what greater affront almost can there be to royall Majestie, than thus publikely to nullifie, oppose and spurne under feete the Kings owne Charters and Patents, as things of no value or moment. Twelfthly, they have most contemptuously affroned his  Majesties owne late royall Declarations to all his Loyall Subjects, both before the 39. Articles of Religion, & concerning the disso∣lution of the last Parliament, in the very highest degree, and that,
First, in their Court Sermons before his Majesties face. Secondly, In bookes lately written, or publickely authori∣zed by them and their Chaplaines for the Presse. Thirdly, By their Visitation Oathes and Articles. Fourthly, by their late Injunctions, Censures, Orders and instructions, by, and in all which they have notoriously op∣pugned, innovated, altered both the established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England sundry wayes, caused an apparent backliding to Arminianisme, Popery, Superstition, Schisme, oppressed and grieved his Majesties good Subjects, and deprived many of them both of their livings, liberties, and freedome of their Consciences, contrary to the expresse Pro∣vision, Letter and purport of these his Majesties Royall Decla∣ions, as hath beene lately manifested in sundry new Printed bookes, and voted by the Present Parliament. Thiteenthly, They have caused some grand Juries, and the Judge himselfe as well as the prosecutor, to be Pursevanred in∣to the High Commission, onely for finding a verdict upon an Indictment for the King against Innovating Clergie men, as they were bound to doe both in Law and Conscience. Wit∣nesse the Case of Master Aske, late Recorder of Colchester, Mr. Burroughs, and the grand Jury of that Towne, who were thus vexed for finding an Indictment against Paron Newcoman, for refusing to deliver the Sacrament to those who came not up to his new raile. And no doubt the Bishops secret Commands and Instructions, were the Originall cause that moved Sir Articles of Accusation a∣gainst the Jud∣ges, p. 7.8.9. Robert Berkely Knight, one of the Judges of the Kings Bench at the Generall Sessions at Harford in Ianuary 7. 1638. to fine Mr. Henry Browne, one of the grand Jury men at that Sessions, and lay him in Irons one night, onely for finding an Indict∣ment for rayling in the Communion Table at Hartford Altar∣wise, which indictment he caused the said Brown openly to teare & trample under his feete, and one tha stayed other indictments of this nature, in high affront boh o Law and Justice, onely to please the Prelaes, whose commands, threates, and persecu∣tions, have beene the Originall causes of most of the Judges irregular proceedings. Fourteenthly, They have not onely cited, but censured some of his Majesties Officers in the High-Commission, for executing his Lawes according to their Oath and duty, as the
Major of Arundell for punishing a drumken Minister: and likewise cied Mr. Staple a Justice of peace in Sussex into the High-Comission for giving in charge at the quarter Sessions his  against Innovations, and deaucht Clergie men. Fiftnhly hey have most unjustly caused some Posters to be opped afr dicts ound for the plaintiffes and damma∣ges  given by he Jury upon ul hearing, for Actions justly broght agais  of hir Officers, for dafamations, and o∣ther , so that the Plaintiffes could never get judgement wnesse he case of Master Bayton, against Doctor Martyn Comssary of Tomes and others. Sixteehly, they haue caused some Solliciters, Atturnies  and Planiffes to be imprisoned, untill they gave over such just actions as they had commenced and prosecuted against their Offices, for Extortions, Opressions, and unjust Excommuni∣ations, witnesse the case of Ferdinando Adams, whose Attur∣ny Master Letchford was committed to the Kings Bench, by Judge Iones and some other Judges, only for bringing an Acti∣on of the Case, against Dade the the Bishop of Norwich, Com∣missary at Ipswich for Excommunicating him maliciously and unjustly, because he reused to blot out this Text of Scripture written over the Commissaries Court in Saint Maries Church in Ipswich,Mark. 11.17. Mat. 21.13. Luk 19.56. Isa. 56.7. It is written, My house shall be called an house of Prayer of all Nations, but ye have made it a den of theeves: detaining him in prison till he gave over the prosecution and discontinued the suite: sundry others having since beene served in this kinde, by the Prelates sollicitation. Seventeenthly, They have beene the Originall occasions of  the late unhappy warre and differences betweene Scotland and England, which they stiled Bellum Episcopale, the Bishops warre, to which they liberally contributed themselves, and enforced others to do the like, when these differences were comprimised, and this warre happily concluded in peace, they were the chiefe Authors of the breach of the pacificaion formerly made, and of a second warre, to the great danger, trouble, and unsup∣portable charge o his Majesties three kingdomes. Eighteenthly, they have beene the prime causes of all, or  most of the grievances, pressures, distractions, Schismes in our Church and Common-weale, and chiefe instruments of the
unhappy breaches of our former Parliaments, to the infinite prejudice both of King and Subject. Ninteenthly, when as they had caused the last Parliament but this to be dissolved, to manifest their omnipotency, disloy∣alty and tyranny, they caused a new Convocation to be imme∣diately assembled without a Parliament, wherein they compi∣led and prescribed New Canons, with an &c. Oath, tending highly to the derogation of his Majesties prerogative royall in Ecclesiasticall matters, the subversion of the undamentall Lawes of the Realme and Liberties of the Subject, the affront of Parliaments, the suppression of all faithfull ministers, and ayming onely at the perpetuating of their owne Episcopall Lordly power, and Popish Innovations. And as if this were not sufficient, they tooke upon them to grant sundry subsidies without a Parliament, for the maintenance of a new war against the Scots, and enjoyned all Ministers to pay these Subsidies peremptorily at the dayes assigned by them, under paine of present deprivation for the first default, Omni Appellatione se∣mota, without any benefit of appeale, one of the highest straines of tyranny and injustice, that ever I have met with. For which Canons Oath, and Subsidies, they now stand impeached by the whole house of Commons, as delinquents in a high nature, and are like ere long to receive condigne punishment. Twentiethly, it is very suspicious, that they or some of them,  had a hand in the late dangerous Treason and Conspiracie, since the See the Report of the Conspira∣y to the house of Commons June the 17. 1641. p. 2.3. and Mr. Henry Pier∣cies Letter, p. 3. The Declaration of Colonell Go∣ing. p. 2 first clause of the Oath of Serecy administred to the Conspirators was, To maintaine the Bishops in their functions, and votes in Parliament, and the Clergie would at their owne charge (as Serjant Major Wallis confesseth in his examination) maintaine a thousand horse to promote this Trayterous designe, and have now (as some report) an hundred thousand pound ready for such a service. In the twentieth one place, they have oppressed and ruined divers of his Majesties Loyall Subjects, Ministers and others,  both in their bodies, estates, credits, families; caused many thousands of them to forsake the Realme, and to transport their families into forraine parts, to the great decay of trade, and impoverishing of the Realme. In which they have done his Majestie great dis-service, whose Honour and safety consists in the multitude and wealth of his people,rov. 14.2 and his destruction in want of people.
In the twenty second ranke, they have most undutifully and  disloyally cast the odium of all their late Innovations in Religi∣on, their new Canons and tyrannicall exorbitant proceedings, on his Majestie, proclaiming it openly to the people, that all they did, was onely by his Majesties speciall direction and command, of purpose to alienate the hearts of the people from his Majestie, as much as in them lay. In the twenty third place, they and their Officers have  sorely fleeced and impoverished his Majesties Subjects in such sort by exacted Fees, and vexatios suites in their Visitations, High-Commissions, and other Ecclesiasticall Courts, and by putting them to unnecessary costs for raising and rayling in Commnion Tables, and new adorning their Churches, that they are unable to supply his Majesties and the Kingdomes necessi∣ties in that liberall proportion as they have formerly done; the late Subsidies scarce amounting to halfe that summe, as they did in former times. Finally, in their last High-Commission Paent they obtained  this strange Non-obstante (which robs the King of his Supre∣macy, and the Subjects of their Lawes and Liberties) namely, That their Lordships in all Ecclesiasticall causes specified in that Commission might proceede in a meere arbitrary manner, as they list themselves, Notwithstanding any Appellation, provocation, privi∣ledge, or exemption, in that behalfe to be had, made, pretended or al∣leadged, by ANY PERSON OR PERSONS (therefore by Lords and Peeres as well as others) resident or dwelling in any place or places, exempt or not exempt within the Realmes of England and Ireland and Principality of Wales (for no leser circuite would content them) and all Lawes, Statutes, Proclamations, or other grants Priviledges, or Ordinances, which be or may seeme contrary to the premises notwithstanding. What Hist. Anglia p. 694. See p. 68.784.905. Matthew Paris writes of the Popes Non-obstantees in his Bulls, which first begar them, Per illud verbum & adjectionem detestabilem Non Obstante, omnem xtinguit justitiam praehabitam: I may more truely affirme of this, that it extinguisheth all Iustice; yea his Majesties Suprema∣cy, our fundamentall Lawes, Statutes, and the Subjects Liber∣ties, since it robs the King of the Regall right of 25. H. 8. c. 19.21.24. H. 8. c. 12. receiving appeales as supreame head of the Church of England, for releese of his oppressed Subjects, and of the honour of his Royall Lawes, Proclamations, grants, exemptions, which must all stoope to
the Prelates pleasures; and strips the Subjects naked of the be∣nefit and protection of all Lawes, Statutes, Proclamations, and o∣ther grants, priviledges, Ordinances or exemptions whatsoever, which might shelter them from the Prelates tyranny and oppressions. So that you have here the very height of Treason, Conspiracy, and Contumacy, against his Majestie, the Lawes of the Realme and hereditary liberties of the people. In all these respects (to omit other particulars) our Prelates if they be not direct Traytors to his Majestie and the Realme, so farre as to incurre a Capitall Censure, as is more than proba∣ble, or at least a Praemunire, of which there is no question; yet I dare averre they are the most notorious Rebels, the ob∣stinatest contemners, enemies and oppugners of his Majesties Royall Prerogative, the Fundamentall Lawes of the Realme, and just Liberties of the Subject, this day breathing; inferiour to none of their predecessors in contumacy and disobedience to their Soveraigne and our Lawes (what ever they preted) and exceeding them in many particulars. Having thus I hope sufficiently answered all our Prelates Ar∣guments for the supportation, and continuance of their Lord∣ly Prelacy in our Church, and their Evasions to shift off this Antipathy as no way pertinent unto them; give me leave onely to observe these sixe remarkeable Circumstances in our Prelats premised Treason, Conspiracies and Rebellions, which high∣ly aggravate their offences, and make them farre more execrable Traytors, Rebels, and delinquents, than all other rankes of men; and then I shall conclude. First, they have presumed to justifie their Treasons and Re∣bellions, against their Soveraignes, as pious, religious, holy and commendable actions, and to Canonize these Episcopall Arch-Traytors and Rebells, not onely for chiefe pillars, patri∣ots and defenders of the Churches Liberties, but even for holy Saints and Martyrs, as appeares by the examples of See Capgave, Surius, Ribade∣neira, and others, de vitis Sancto∣rum, Baronius his Martyriologe, & our Common Popish Primers, Calenders, and Almanackes. Dunstan, Anselme, Becket, Edmund of Canterbury, Hugh of Lincolne, S. Ger∣main , Richard Scroope of Yorke, with others: no Laymen having yet beene so happy, as for their Treasons and Rebellions onel, or especially, to bee Sainted and adored, as many Bishops and Clergie men have beene. Hence Doctor Barnes in his Supplication to King Henry the 8. p. 190. writes thus, I would not speake how damnable it is to institute Masses, for a
willing Traytor, and murtherer, there was never no learning that could allow this. But there is no remedy, he that dyes against his King, and for the maintaining of your Treason, must needes be a Saint, if Masses, blessings, and miracles will helpe; for all these bee at your Commandment, to give where your list. So that we poore men, must be accused of insurrection and Treason, and we must beare all the blame, we must be driven out of the Realme, we must be bur∣ned for it, when as God knowes there is no people under heaven, that more abhorreth and with earnester eart resisteth, and more dili∣gently doth preach against disobedience than we doe: yea, I dare say boldly, let all your bookes be searched, tha were written this 500. yeares, and all they shall not declare the authority of a Prince, and the true obedience toward him, as one of our little bookes shall doe, that be condemned by you for heresie, and all this will not helpe us. But as for you, you may preach, you may write, you may doe, you may sweare against your Princes, and also assoile all other men of their obedience towards their Princes, you may compell Princes to be sworne to you, and yet are you children of obedience and good Christi∣an men. And if ye dye for this doctrine then is there no remedy, but you must be Saints, and rather than faile ye shall doe miracles: which he proves by the example of Thomas Becket & of Germane formerly cited, who was made a Saint for deposing King Vorti∣ger, and making his Neat-heard King in his steed. These shame∣full and abominable things doe ye prayse and allow, and in the meane time condemne us for heretickes and Traytors. Secondly, in interceding for, saving, rescuing, protecting, rewarding Trayterous and Rebellious Bishops, after their Treasons and Rebellions committed, and warding off the sword of Justice from their Mitred Pates (though worthy of ten thousand deaths) when as all others Peeres or Commons whom they have drawne into their Treasons, Rebellions, and Conspiracies have beene sure to suffer the rigor of Justice, without any mitigation or pardon; this most of the premised in∣stances witnesse, especially that of Adam de Tarlton, Part. 1. p 54.55.56.57.265.266. Thirdly, in mincing, extenuating, excusing, and patroni∣zing  the Treasons, Conspiracies and Rebellions of Prelates, and referring them to the Pope or their owne Ecclesiastical-Tribunalls, that so they might scape unpunished a priviledge and tricke of Episcopall Leger-de-maine, that no Layman
was capable of, but onely Bishops and Clerkes. Fourthly, in slandering, reviling, censuring, excommunica∣ting their Princes, together with heir Judges and Officers, for the execution of Justice on Bishops, who have beene Arch-Rebells, Traytors and Conspirators; as appeares by the exam∣ples of See Part. 1. p. 193. to 196. Richard Scroope and others: which story of Scroope Doctor Barnes thus descants on in his Supplication to King Hen∣ry the 8. p. 188.189. Doe you not remember, how that in the dayes of Henry the fourth, a captaine of your Church, called Richard Scroope Archbishop of York, did gather an Host of men, and waged battle against his King? but God the Defendor of his Ruler, gave the King the victory, which caused the Traytor to be beheaded. And then your fore-fathers with their devil∣lish crat, made the people beleeve by their false Chronicle, that at every stroke that was given at the Bishops necke, the King received another of God in his necke. And whereas the King was afterward stricken with a sickenesse, you made him and all his Subjects beleeve, that it was Gods punishment, be∣cause he had killed the Bishop: and not thus content, but you fained after his death, that he did miracles. Is not this too much, both to be Traytors to your King, and also to faine God to be displeased with your King for punishing of Treason? Finally, to make him a Saint, and also that God had done mi∣racles to the defending of his Treason? How is it possible to invent a more pestilent Doctrine than this is? Here is Gods Ruler despised, and hereby is open Treason maintained: Thinke you that God will shew miracles to fortifie these things? But no doubt the Proverbe is true, Such lippes, such Lettuce, such Saints, such miracles. Fifthly, in persisting most peremptorily in Treasons, Rebel∣lions, contests and Conspiracies against their Princes, without yeelding or intermission till they had obtained their demaunds and desires of them insteed of craving pardon of them, all which the premises evidence to the full in Anselme, Becket, Langton, Stafford and others. Sixthly, in enforcing their Soveraignes against whom they conspired, rebelled, and practised divers horrid Treasons and Contumacies, to submit, nay seeke to them for pardon, and to undergoe such sharpe censures, such orbid, infamous, harsh pu∣nishments, covenants and conditions, as are inconsistent with
Monarchy, honour, Soveraignty, as in the case of Henry the second, King Iohn and others. In these sixe respects, our Lordly Bishops have transcended all other Traytors, Rebels, Conspi∣rators, and Seditious persons whatsoever; as also in Censuring Loyalty See Aventine. Annal. Biorum. l. 6. & 7. for Heresie, true Subjects to their Princes for Heretickes; and Canonizing High Treason, Rebellion against Emperours, Kings, Princes, for Orthodox faith; notorious Traytors and Rebels, for good Christians and true beleevers; as appeares in the Case of Hilde∣brand and his Hellish crew of Bishops, who branded Henry the Emperour and those who sided with him, for Heretickes, and their Loyalty for Heresie, in the Case of Henry the second and King Iohn in their difference with Anselme, Becket, and Langh∣ton. In imitation of whom our present Prelates now slander those who oppugne ad withstand their encroachments upon the Kings prerogative Royall, with odious termes of Puritans, Novellers, Seditious persons, Schismatickes, Rebels, and brand Loyalty, and true allegiance to the King, with the termes of Fa∣ction, Schisme, Sedition, Novelty, and Rebellion. You have seene now a large Anatomy of our Lordly Pre∣lates desperate Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Contu∣macies, Warres, disloyall oppressive practises in all ages a∣gainst our Kings, Kingdomes, Lawes, Liberties: which duly pondered, we may easily conclude, there is little cause any longer to tolerate them in our Church or State, but great ground eternally to extirpate them out of both. It is storyed of the people ofGenerall Hi∣story of Spaine, l. 22. Heylins Geogr. p. 55. Biscany in Spaine, That they have such a natu∣rall enmity against Bishops, that they will admit no Bishops to come among them, and that when Fedinand the Catholicke came in Progresse into Biscany, accompanyed with the Bishop of Pampilone, the people rose up in Armes, drove backe the Bishop out of their Coast, and gathering up all the dust they thought he or his Mule had trod on, threw it into the Sea with curses and imprecations. I dare not say, that our people should rise up in Armes like these Biscaners, and drive out our Bishops, God forbid any such Tumultuous, or Seditious pra∣ctise: but this I dare confidently averre, that his Majestie and our High Court of Parliament, have farre greater reason to drive, and extirpate them out of our Realme and Church, even with curses and execrations, and to subvert their Sees in an orderly, just, and legall way, than these Biscaners had to
repulse this Bishop, who entered thus into their Country, one∣ly to accompany Ferdinand in his progresse, not to play the Lord Bishop among them. I shall close up all with the words of Musculus, a Lear∣ned forraigne Protestant Divine; who after he had large∣ly proved by Scriptures and Fathers, That Bishops and Presbyters by Divine right are both one, and of equall au∣thority, and that the difference betweene them was onely a humane institution to prevent Schismes, concludes thus. Musculus. Loc Communes, Basi∣la. 1560. p. 246. Whether o no this Counsell hath profited the Church of God, whereby such Bishops who should be greater than Pres∣byters were introduced, rather our of Custome (that I may use the words of Hierome) than out of the truth of the Lords institution, is better declared in after ages, than when this custome was first brought in; to which we owe all that insolency, opulency and tyranny of Princely and Lordly Bishops; imo omnem corruptionem Ecclesiarum Christi; yea all the corruption of the Churches of Christ; which if Hierome should now perceive, without doubt he would acknowledge this, not to be the Counsell of the Holy-Ghost, to take away Schismes, as was pretended; but of the Nota. Devill himselfe, to waste and destroy the ancient Offices of feeding the Lords locke; by which it comes to passe, that the Church hath not true Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Bihops, but Idle bellies, and magnificent Princes under the vizors of these names, who not onely neglect to feede the people of the Lord in proper person with wholesome and Apostolicall doctrine, but also by most wicked violence take speciall care, that no man else may doe it. This verily was done by the Nota. Counsell of Satan, that the Church in stead of Bishops should have powerfull Lords and Pinces, elected for the greatest part out of the Order of the Nobles and Princes of the world, (as they are in Germany) who under-propped with their owne and their kindreds power, may domineer over the flocke of Christ at their pleasre. And with the complaint of the Emperour Lewis the fourth, and the German Princes against the Italian and German Lordly Prelates, which I may justly accomodate to ours. Aventinus An∣nali Birum. l. 7. p. 546.547.577. Flamines isti Babyloniae soli regnare cupiunt; ferre pa∣rem nn possunt; non desistent, donec omnia pedibus suis concul∣caverint, atque in Templo Dei sdeant, extllanturque supra omne
id quod colitur. Sub Pontificis titulo, pastoris pelle, lupum saevis∣simum, nisi caeci sumus, sentimus. Cum nostri servi sint, ipsi do∣minari contra jus gentium, adversus leges, auspicia & Oracula di∣vina, Dominos, sibi servire volunt. Caesarem Italia, Roma, Chri∣stum terris exclusere: illi coelum quidem permittunt, inferos atque terras sibi asseruere. Bernard Epist. 158. Quid spirituali gladio, quid censurae Ecclesiasticae, quid Chri∣stianae legi & Disciplinae, quid denique divino timori relinquitur, si metu potentiae secularis nullus muire jam audeat contra insolenti∣am Praelatorum? FINIS.
Kind Reader, I shall desire thee to rectiie these Presse-Errours, which in my absence in the Country hapned in many Copies in some Pages of the first and Second Part, besides those forementioned, after the Table of Chap∣ters. In the first Part. PAge 8. l. 6. departing p. 10. l. 5. their, this, p. 11. l. 28. largely, lately p. 16. l. 1. del, as. p. 24. l. 2. we, e. p. 25. l. 3. marred l 29. Kings. p. 53. l. 40. dele th p. 62. l. 13. and, the p. 63. l. 30. still, stile. p 64. l. 16. be, he p 70. l. 3. his, this p. 79. l. 33. no, hot p. 81. l. 12. against the p. 221. l. 18.19.20.21 read thus: he was smitten mortally wth a dn∣gerous dsease, for which he repaired to the Bath for reliefe, and retrning from thence, dyed by the way at Morton Hinmast in Glocester shire, the very night before he had resolved to silence and suspend some godly Ministers, con∣vented before him re his departure to the Bath, and summoned to appeare be∣fore him, the morning after his decease, had he returned alive by that time; Which being more briefely expressed in the Booke, hath caused some to question the truth, of what I long since received from good in∣formation. In the second Part. PAge 239. l. 9. dele in the p. 243. l. 15. Traytor, Tower p. 276. l. 29. liberty. p. 283. l. 21. . p 286. l. 15. our the. p. 291. l. 33. which she. p. 292. l. 17. ne of l. 29. spend. p. 300. l. 14. Prelates. l. 23. armes, p. 304. l. 5. hearing, fearing p. 313. l. 30. one, out. p. 326. l. 37. Arrane, p. 327. l. 1 same. p. 331. l. 22.1544. p. 336. l. 38. doth, doe, p. 333. l. 15. divrs Acts. l. 21. Dundy, p. 338. l. 20. from, of l 28, ordereth, adoreth, l. 29 500. p. 341. l. 11. Church of Scotland, p. 342. l. 5 Ies, p. 356. l. 38. nul, p. 499. l. 23. habetur, p. 501. l 40. without them, p. 503. l. 19. West∣minster, Winchester, p. 515. l. 29. if not, p. 523. l. 4. debaucht, p. 526. l. 35. dele, and others, p. 478. l. 19. Harmony Sect. II. in Helt. post Gal∣lia, Gallia, Blgia, Anglia, &c. should have beene put in the Margin. Omissions. PAge 489. l. 38. In the Ancient Italian Bible set forth by Antonius Bruciolus, Venetiis, 1543. In the French Bible set forth by Iohn Crespin 1541; and that Printed at Lyons 1540. In the Latine Testament Printed at Lundon, 1540. and dedicated to King Hnry the 8. are omitted. Page 513. l. 17: In the Patent Rols of 18. H. 3. m. 17. and Cookes Institutes f. 97. a: I finde this notable Record: Mandatum est Om∣nibus Episcopis qui conventuri st apud Gloucestriam die Sabbath in cra∣stine Sanctae Katherinae, firmiter inhibnd, quod sicut Baronias suas qua de Rege tenent, diligunt, nullo modo prsumant Conciltum tnere a aliqui∣bus qua ad Coronam Regis pertinent, vel qua personam Regis vel statum su∣um, vel statum concilit su contingunt; scituri pro crto, quod si fecerint; Rex inde se capie ad Baronias suas. Teste Rege apud Hereford 23. Nvemb By which it appeares, that our Bishops by their late pretended Syno∣dicall proceedings, have forfeited, and givn the King and Parliament just occasion to seize upon their Bishoprickes, and Baronies, and so to thrust them out of the Parliament house, Where thy it onely as Baron ot as Bishops, Cookes Institutes f. 97. a.
Directions for the Booke-Binder. a: b: aa: BB, BB3 a halfe sheete, CC: DD: EE: E3 a single leafe, ff: gg: hh: II: KK: LL: Mm* Mm: 289. Cap. 6. Nn: * arti- ¶ ¶ Bri- ¶ ¶ ¶: Toge- a single leafe: Oo Cap. 7. Pp: Qq: Rr: Ss: Tt: Vv: Xx: Yy: RR * 307. Cap. 8. Ss*: Tt*: Vv: Xx*: Yy*: Zz*: Aaa: Bbb: Ccc: Ddd: Eee: Fff: Ggg: Hhh: Iii: Kkk: Lll: Mmm: Nnn: Ooo: Ppp: Qqq: Rrr: Sss: Ttt: Vvv: Xxx: Yyy.
