R1892A R36794 16016629 104778
THE Roman Papal Empire, Proved to be the IMAGE OF THE Roman Pagan Empire, From Revelation. Chap. xiii. Vers. xiv. Everso Romano Imperio, nisi Deus restituisset Pontificatum, futurum erat, ut Roma nullo tempore excitata ac restituta, inhabitabilis post hac, foe∣dissima Boum Porcorumque esset habitatio: at in Pontificatu, etsi non illa veteris Imperii magnitudo, species certè non dissimilis longè rena∣ta est, quâ Gentse omnes haud secus ab ortu et occasu Romanum Pon∣tificem venerantur, quam omnes Nationes olim Imperatoribus obtempera∣bant. Et paulo post. An non omnia quae Romae quondam profana erant, sacra effecta sunt, quemadmodum omnia Templa Deorum facta sunt Ec∣clesiae sanctorum? Nonne Pantheon Templum omnium Idolorum, effect∣um est Templum Beatae Virginis? (secundùm alias omnium Diva∣rum) nonne in Vaticano Templum Apollinis, ubi condita erant cor∣pora Apostolorum, conversum in Ecclesiam ipsorum Apostolorum? Ʋt superius demonstratum est. Augustin. Steuch. de Donatione Con∣stantini. LONDON, Printed and Sold by B. Harris, at the Golden Boar's-head in Grace-Church-Street. M DCC.
THE Roman Papal Empire, &c. Revel. Chap. xiij. Vers. xiv. And he deceiveth them that dwell on the Earth, by means of those Miracles which he had Power to do in the sight of the Beast; say∣ing to them that dwell on the Earth, that they should make an Image to the Beast which had the Wound by the Sword, and did Live. THE whole Book of the Revelation is, by all, acknowledged to be very Mystical. My Text, by many, is thought to be a Mystery in that Mystery. To set the words, therefore, in a just and clear Light, you must give me leave to premise some things; which, being generally own∣ed, I shall barely mention, not detaining you, at present, with the Proof of them. I. In the Second and Seventh Chapters of Daniel, we have illust∣rious Predictions of Four great Empires that should successively Oppose, and Oppress the Church of God; these were the Babi∣lonian, Persian, Graecian, Roman. II. Three of these Empires were Spent, had Risen, done their Work, were Fallen again, before the Incarnation of our Blessed Saviour; the Fourth, viz. the Roman, was then Up. III. The Revelation contains, A Prophecy of the Church's Fate, under its Enlargement after the Downfal of the Fourth, or Ro∣man Empire. IV. 'Tis usual for God in Prophecies, to represent great Em∣pires by great Beasts. Dan. 7. the Babilonian Empire is represent∣ed by a Lyon, the Persian by a Bear, the Graecian by a Leopard, the Roman by a savage Beast, horrid for Shape and Fierceness, that, in Nature, had nothing like it. V. In the Revelation, the Roman Empire is represented by a Beast with Seven Heads, and Ten Horns; of this Beast we Read frequently in that Book; Three times we have express mention of his Seven Heads, and Ten Horns, viz. Chap. 12.13.17.
VI. That we might certainly know what the Seven Heads, and Ten Horns signify, God himself declares it, Chap. 17. The De∣sign of that Chapter is, to give the Church a Key to unlock the meaning of this prophetical Emblem. Vers. 7. And the Angel said to me, wherefore didst thou Marvel? I will tell thee the Mystery of the Woman, and of the Beast that carrieth her, which hath Seven Heads, and Ten Horns, Vers. 10.11. the Seven Heads are said to signify Seven Mountains, and Seven Kings. 1. Seven Mountains. Vers. 10. Here is the Mind that hath Wis∣dom; the Seven Heads, are Seven Mountains, on which the Woman sitteth; i. e. Rome built on Seven Hills: Therefore call'd the Se∣ven-hill'd City, by Historians, both Greek and Latin. Vers. 18. The Woman which thou sawest, is that great City which Reigneth over the Kings of the Earth. In John's time, Rome was the Imperial City of the World. 2. Seven Kings, or forms of Government. Any sort of Govern∣ment, in Scripture, is call'd a King. Judges, 18.1. When Israel wanted a Governor, 'tis said, there was no King in Israel. Rev. 17.10. And there are Seven Kings; Five are Fallen, and One Is, and the other is not yet Come; and when he Cometh, he must onti∣nue a short space. Rome, with its Dominions, hath been under Se∣ven forms of Government; 1. Kings, 2. Consuls, 3. Decemvirs, 4. Military Tribunes, with Consulary Power; 5. Dictators, 6. Empe∣rors, 7. Popes. Five of these were Fallen in John's time; Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs, Military Tribunes, Dictators; One Is, viz. the Imperial Head; the other is not yet Come, viz. the Papal Head; and when he Cometh, he must continue a short time. For the Church's comfort, a Term of many Years is call'd short; and so it is with respect to Eternity. Isa. 54.8. I hid my Face from thee for a Moment; (which contains the whole time of the Suf∣ferings of the Jewish and Christian Church) but with everlasting Kind∣ness will I have Mercy on thee. Antichrist's Reign, though for many Hundred Years, is but for a short time, if compared to the everlasting Kingdom, or Church of Christ, which it doth Op∣pose; and by which it shall be destroyed, it follows, Vers. 11. And the Beast that was, and is not, viz. his Dominions were un∣der the Five Heads that are Fallen: He is not yet what he shall be under his last Antichristian Head. He is the Eight, and is of the Seven. In Number he is One, viz. the last of the Seven. He is call'd the Eight, because he is an Head of another Kind. They were all Civil Ones; Antichrist is an Ecclesiastical Head.
Thus the Seven Kings, signify Seven Forms of Government, successively Heading Rome and its Dominions. The Christian Em∣perors were not a distinct Form of Government from the Hea∣then. They did not belong to any of the Seven Heads of this Beast; because they had not on them the Names of Blasphemy, as all these Seven Heads have, Rev. 13.1. The Christian Em∣perors putting down Heathenism, setting up Christianity in the Empire, gave the Beast its deadly Wound in its Sixth Head, Rev. 13.3. The Plebeian Tribunes were subject to the Consuls, not Heads of the Government. The Two Triumvirats were exorbitant Consuls, or not chosen by the People, as all the other Forms were. The Mystery of the Seven Heads being cleared, let us see what the Ten Horns signify. Rev. 17.12. And the Ten Horns which thou sawest, are Ten Kings, which have received no Kingdom, as yet, (at that time they were Provinces of the Roman Empire) but re∣ceive Power as Kings One Hour with the Beast; i. e. under the same dispensation of Providence. Vers. 13.14. It is said, these Ten Kings shall give their Power to the Beast; and under his Banner, fight against Christ; by whom, at last, they shall be overcome. Ver. 16. Then they shall hate the Whore, make her Desolate and Naked, Eat her Flesh, Burn her with Fire; for Vers. 17. God hath put in∣to their Hearts to fulfil his Will; and to agree, and give their King∣dom to the Beast, until the Words of God shall be fulfilled. Thus you see what the Seven Heads, and Ten Horns signify. But, observe, Chap. 17. we Read of no Crowns, either upon the Heads or Horns. The design of that Chapter is, to unfold the meaning of the Seven Heads, and Ten Horns. In the other Two Places, where these Heads and Horns are mentioned, we Read of Crowns too, but with this difference; Chap. 12. the Crowns are upon the Seven Heads; Chap. 13. upon the Ten Horns; the rea∣son thereof, see under the next Head. VII. Rev. 12.3. We Read of a Beast with Seven Heads, Ten Horns, and Seven Crowns upon his Heads. A Crown is the sign of supream Civil Authority. In the Five first Verses of that Chapter, the Church is represented as a glorious Woman in Tra∣vail; and a great red Dragon with Seven Heads, Ten Horns, and Seven Crowns on his Heads, watching to devour her Child as soon as Born; notwithstanding she brings forth a Man-child, who was to rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron, who is caught up to God, and his Throne. This Prophecy obtained its blessed Ac∣complishment;
when, in the time, and by the means of Constan∣tine the Great, Christianity obtained the Throne of the Roman Empire. At such a time, One would think all the Church's trou∣bles over: The great Storm was yet behind: The Fourth Em∣pire must Oppose and Oppress the Church of God, under Two distinct Heads, a Pagan Imperial, and a Papal Antichristian One. Therefore, vers. 5. the Woman no sooner brings forth her Man∣child, which is caught up to God and his Throne, but, Vers. 6. The Woman Flies into the Wilderness, where she hath a Place pre∣pared of God, that they should feed her there 1260 Days. From Vers. 7. to 12. we Read of War in Heaven, betwixt Michael and the Dragon, whereby the Dragon is cast down, and his place found no more in Heaven. Whereas, from vers. 1. to 5. the travailling Wo∣man is said to bring forth her Man-child, which is caught up to God, and his Throne, in spight of the great Dragon that opposed her: If any ask how this was possible, it is explained from vers. 7. to 12. be∣cause Michael (i. e. Christ) was on the Woman's side; for, vers. 11. they (i. e. the Woman and her Seed) overcame by the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of their Testimony; and they loved not their Lives unto the Death. In this Parenthesis, the Scripture shews how the Church became Victorious over the Roman Heathen Em∣pire. Whereas vers. 6. the Woman is said, after the Ascent of the Man-child to the Throne of the Roman Empire, to fly into the Wilderness. From vers. 12. to the end of the Chapter, The Woman hath given her Two Wings of a great Eagle, where∣with she flies into the Wilderness: And the Serpent casts out of his Mouth Water as a Flood, to carry her away; i. e. a Flood of Heresies, viz. Arianism, Macedonianism, Nestorianism, Eutychianism, Pelagianism; besides, an horrible Corruption of Church Government, and Discipline: These were attended with an universal and gross Corruption of Manners. Hereby Christianity in the Church was laid waste; upon the Ruins whereof, the Antichristian Empire was Erected. VIII. Chapter 13. presents us with the Rise and Reign of the Antichristian Empire. Vers. 1. And I stood upon the Sand of the Sea, and saw a Beast rising out of the Sea, having Seven Heads and Ten Horns, and upon the Horns Ten Crowns, and upon the Heads the Name of Blasphemy. Here the Crowns are not upon the Heads, but Horns; i. e. the supream Civil Power in those Kings, whose Kingdoms were raised out of the Ruins of the Western Empire, who received their Power one Hour (under the same Dispensation of Providence)
with the Beast, and submit to the Pope, not as a Civil, but Ec∣clesiastical Head. Vers. 2. And the Beast which I saw was like unto a Leopard, and his Feet were as the Feet of a Bear, and his Mouth as the Mouth for a Lion, and the Dragon gave him his Seat, and Pow∣er, and great Authority, Dan. 7. A Leopard represents the Grecian Empire. The Grecian Empire, after Alexander's Death, continu∣ed not one single civil Polity, but was divided into Four King∣doms; the Jewish Church lying betwixt the Two chiefest of those Kingdoms, viz. Syria and Egypt (from their Scituation with respect to Judea, called the Kings of the North and the South, Dan. 11.) was more scorched in the Flames of their mutual Wars, than if both had been united into one, and ruled over it. The Anti∣christian Empire hath the Body of this Leopard, because, as the Greci∣an Empire of old, it consists not of One single civil Polity, but is divided into many distinct Kingdoms, which submit to the Pope as an Ecclesi∣astical Head. Dan. 7. The Bear represents the Persian Empire, the Lion the Babilonian. Here behold the Body of the Grecian Leopard, the Feet of the Persian Bear, the Mouth of the Babilonian Lion, those things that were most hurtful and injurious to the Jewish Church, in the Three preceeding Empires, for the greater torment of the Christian Church, meeting together in the Antichristian Empire of the Pope. It is said, the Dragon gave him his Seat, i. e. Rome, (where the Devil pre∣sided in his last Lieutenant, the Pagan Emperor) his Power and great Authority; i. e. thro divine Permission, instructing the Pope to deceive those Kingdoms, infatuating them to submit to him as their Ecclesiastical Head. The Pope hath managed them in as true and great an Oppo∣sition to Christ, as before the Pagan Imperial Head did, when commanding them as Provinces. Vers. 3. And I saw One of his Heads, as it were wounded to the Death, and its deadly Wound was healed, and the World wondered after the Beast. The Sixth, viz. the Imperial Head, received a deadly Wound; when Constantine put down Heathenism, and Christianity obtained the Throne of the Roman Empire: This deadly Wound given the Beast in his Sixth Head, was healed by set∣ting up the Papal, the Seventh, whom the World wondered after, i. e. for many Ages hath followed with stupid Veneration. To proceed no farther in the Explication of this Chapter, by these Three Verses we may learn the Holy Ghost's Definition of Antichrist, viz. The Seventh or last Head of the Roman, or Fourth Monarchy, not Civil, but Ecclesiastical, managing it not as One single civil Polity, but divided into several Kingdoms, all of them submitting to him
as an Ecclesiastical Head; and acted by him in a wicked Opposition to Christ and his Church. His Blaspheming God, Persecuting his Church, are declared, Vers. 6.7. Here behold the Roman Empire turned Christian, and degenerated into Antichristian. Under the Name of Christian, as great an Ene∣my to God and Christ as when Heathen. If any ask, How this could be done; by what Arts and Methods did the Devil bring it about? Answer, 'twas done by Priest-craft. Vers. 11. And I beheld another Beast coming out of the Earth, and he had Two Horns like a Lamb, and he spake as a Dragon. Outwardly he seemed a Christian, inwardly was a Devil, &c. In my Text, it is said, And he deceived them that dwell on the Earth, by means of those Miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the Beast; saying, to them that dwell on the Earth, that they should make an Image to the Beast which had the Wound by the Sword, and did Live. The Pagan Empire received a deadly Wound by taking down its Imperial Head, was revived by setting up its Papal Head. So it Lived again under its Papal Head, as it were, the Image of it self under its Pagan One. Thus, with what plainness and shortness I could, I have led you into the Sense and Design of the Holy Ghost in my Text. DOCTRINE. The Roman Papal Empire, is the Image of the old Roman Pagan Empire. They both belong to the same, viz. the Fourth, or Roman Monarchy; which, under Two distinct Heads, was to Oppose and Oppress the Church of God, viz. a Pagan Imperial, and a Papal Antichristian One. This same Roman Monarchy, under its Papal Head, is the very Image of it self when under its Pagan One. Peter Lombard, speaking of the several sacred Orders amongst the Roman Clergy, says,Horum autem distinctio a Gen∣tilibus introducta videtur: qui su∣os flamines, alios simpliciter flami∣nes, alios archi∣flamines, alios protoflamines ap∣pellabant. l. 4. distinct. 24. Their distinction seems to be taken from the Gentils, who called their Priests, some simply Flamens, some Arch-fla∣mens, some Proto-flamens. Baronius extols the Zeal of Constantine the Great, who transfer'd the Priviledges of Heathen Priests to Christian Bishops; which he largely describes in his Annals, ad An. 312. n. 79. But tho' too much of a Gentil Spirit (even against the express Com∣mand of Christ, Matth. 20.25, 26.) be manifest in the Papal Hierar∣chy; yet the more common (and, I think, true Opinion) is, that the Sacerdotal Hierarchy proceeded from a Conformity of the Govern∣ment of the Church, to that of the State. This is shortly and fully de∣clared by the Learned Tallents.Chron. schem. Col. 15. An. 400. The Roman Empire was divided, by
Constantine into 13 Diocesses, and they into 118 Provinces, in each of which were many Cities; and the Government of the Church was much conformed to it; Bishops in each City. Metropolitans in each Province, and Primates, or Patriarchs in each Diocess.Archi-episcopi sunt unius Provin∣ciae episcoporium Principes et Prae∣sules. Provinciae siquidem longo ante adventum Christi tempore maxima ex par∣te divisae erant: qae divisio post modum ab Apo∣stolis et eorum successoribus re∣novata est. Itaq. ubidudum Prima∣tes erant saeculi: nostros Patriar∣chas vel primates leges Ecclesiasticae poni jusserunt, in civitatibus vero Metropolitanis, qae minores judi∣ces habebant, illi hodie prasunt qui Metropolitano∣rum ant Archi-e∣piscoporum no∣mine designantur. Lib. 1. Tit. 5. Lancelot in his Institutions of the Canon Law. L. 1. Tit. 5. acknow∣ledges the conformity of the Government of the Church to that of the State; but, if you will believe him, the Apostles themselves were not unconcerned in it. The Provinces, a long time before the com∣ing of Christ were in part divided, which division afterwards, by the Apostles and their Successors, is renewed. Therefore, where, long since, there were secular Primates, the Ecclesiastical Laws com∣manded that our Patriarchs or Primates should be placed too; but in Metropolitan Cities, which had lesser Judges, they preside, who, at this day, are designed by the Names of Metropolitans or Arch∣bishops; they are simply Bishops, who preside over a greater People, populous Cities.Paulo post. simpliciter epis∣copi. qui majori∣bus populis et frequentioribus civitatibus pre∣sunt. The concern of the Apostles in this Affair is as∣serted without Proof or Truth.Bin. in 1. Can. Apostolo∣rum. Binius acknowledges, that the Names of Bishop and Presbyter were promiscuously used in the Pri∣mitive Church, and not distinguished for a good while. Yet the con∣fession of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchies proceeding from a conformity of the government of the Church, to that of the State, may be accept∣ed as true, it being declared and proved by many. This conformity of the Church to the Empire, cast the Ecclesiastical Government into a Monarchical Form; and was, at least the grain of Mustard-seed, which, in process of time, grew up into the fatal Tree of the Anti∣christian Empire. For if, according to the Institution of Christ, the just liberty of Churches, and due right of Synods, had been preserved, it would have been as a brazen Wal, against all the Incroachments of Antichrist. But as the Sacerdotal Hierarchy proceeded from a conformity of the government of the Church to that of the Empire; so, by the arts and charms of that Priesthood, this western part, at least, of the Ro∣man World, was infatuated and bewitched to wonder after the Beast; with a stupid Adoration to prostrate themselves at his Feet, who is Head of such an Ecclesiastico-political Empire; the like whereof, in all respects, was never heard of in the World. This is the Roman Papal Empire; and to prove that it is the Image of the old Roman Pagan Empire, I shall shew their likeness in Three things. 1. In their opposing the Doctrine of Christianity. 2. In their setting up Idolatry, and corrupt Worship. 3. In persecuting the Church of God.
1. Behold the likeness of Rome Papal to Rome Pagan, in oppo∣sing the Doctrine of Christianity. To clear this point, we must con∣sider what that Doctrine is. All true Christians are Baptized into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. This Baptism indis∣pensibly obliges them, explicitely to own and worship God as a Trinity of Persons in the unity of the divine Nature; the second of which Persons, is incarnate, and cloathed with the Office of Mediator. As the Doctrine of a Trinity of Persons in the God-head, is the sublimest Mystery of the Gospel, so it is the Foundation of our worshiping God as such, which contains the substance and glory of Christianity. By this way of wor∣shiping God, the Christian Religion is distinguished from all false Religions, without the Church. Jews, Mahometans, Heathens, at best, pretend to worship Him but as a God who hath all infinite Perfection in himself, is their Creator, Governor, and will be their Judge. They under∣stand nothing of his relative Glory, and an infinite Mediator. This way of worshiping God, as a Trinity in Ʋnity, doth not only confute grosser Heresies, but, rightly understood, would go far in composing other doctrinal Controversies, amongst Christians, in which the Errors are of lesser Malignity. The clearing up of this point, would be too great a Digression. One thing there is which I must crave leave to add. This way of worshiping God as a Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, where∣of the Second Person is Incarnate and Mediator, according to the tenure of the Covenant of Grace, is the best way of worshiping God that can be, both for exalting the Glory of that God who is worshiped, and se∣curing the Happiness of that Person who doth so worship Him. 1. This is the best way of worshiping God, for exalting the Glory of that God who is worshiped: For hereby God receives the relative Glory of his Persons, and the absolute Glory of his infinite Perfections in the highest Degree. 1. Hereby God receives the relative Glory of a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Nature, viz. of a first Person in the Fa∣ther, in whose Person satisfaction is made to the infinite Justice of the Divine Nature for Sin, of a Second Person in the Son, by whom, (incarnate, and working out a sufficient Righteousness in our Nature) satisfaction is made to the Divine Justice for Sin; of a Third Person, in the Holy Ghost, who applies the salvation purchased by Christ's Righteousness, to the Elect and Believers. No finite Nature can sustain a plurality of Persons in the same indi∣vidual Essence. There cannot be Three humane Persons without Three Men; or Three Angelical Persons without Three Angels; there are Three Divine Persons, and but One God. And in this way of
worshiping Him, he receives that relative Glory of a Trinity of Per∣sons in the same individual Essence, which is incompatible to any Crea∣ture, and none but a God is capable of Receiving. 2. Hereby God receives the absolute Glory of his infinite Perfect∣ions in the highest Degree. The infinite Perfections of the Divine Nature meet together, and infinitely display their Glory, in the Sal∣vation of him that doth thus worship God. Infinite Wisdom infinite∣ly displays its Glory in contriving this way of saving Sinners by Jesus Christ, which tends so much to the exalting God's Glory in their Sal∣vation. Infinite Goodness, Love, Mercy, Grace, infinitely display their Glory, in the Gift of Christ an infinite Mediator. Infinite Just∣ice is infinitely Glorified in the Justification of a Believer, by the infi∣nitely meritorious Righteousness of Christ. Infinite Holiness is infi∣nitely Glorified in thus over-ruling Sin, which, of all things in the World, is most contrary to God's Glory, to the highest exaltation of his Glory in the Salvation of Believers, by Jesus Christ. He that thus worships, and thereby seeks Salvation from God, gives him, as the relative Glory of his Persons, so this absolute Glory of his infinite Perfections, beaming forth therein. 2. This is the best way of worshiping God that can be, for securing the Happiness of the Worshiper: For the Glory of all the Divine Persons in the God-head, and of all the infinite Perfections of the Di∣vine Nature, are engaged, by an everlasting Covenant, for the Salva∣tion of such an One. Therefore God Swears by Himself, Heb. 6.13.14. When God made promise to Abraham; because he could Swear by no greater, he swore by Himself; saying, surely, blessing I will bless thee. i. e. as sure as I am God, (if we may speak it with an holy Reverence) let me cease to be God, lose all the Glory of the Divine Persons in my God-head, and of the infinite Perfections of my Divine Nature, if, in Blessing, I do not bless Abraham; and all such as walk in the Foot-steps of Abraham's Faith. I have been the larger in my Explication of the Christian Doctrine, both to give you a little glimpse of the Glory of true Christianity; and also, that the grossness of any opposition to this Doctrine, whether open, or secret, may be more manifest. Now behold the likeness of Rome Papal to Rome Pagan, in opposing the Doctrine of Christianity. Rome Pagan did it openly, with barba∣rous Rage.Rev. 17.5. Rome Papal is Mystical Babilon that glories in the Name of Zion. The Church of Rome freely owns, and professeth the Doct∣rine of the Trinity. They are baptized into the name of God, as a Trinity in Unity, which adds perfidiousness to their Sin. Their learn∣ed
Men write excellent Books for the Confirmation, and Defence of the Doctrine of the Trinity. But, at the same time, they have brought a new Religion into the World, the Capital Doctrines whereof, are inconsistent with, and, by necessary consequence, deny the God-head of all the Three Per∣sons of the Trinity. 1. As for the God-head of the Father, to shew you what Capital Doctrines of the Church of Rome, are inconsistent with it. That Church holds, that Christ hath satisfied for the Eternal Punishment of Sin; but there is a Temporal Punishment which Christians themselves must bear, and thereby satisfy God's Justice, either by Penances before Death, or in Pur∣gatory after Death, unless relieved by Indulgencies, which contain the Me∣rits and Satisfactions of other Saints. Do not these Capital Doctrines of Popery Rob God of his infinite Justice, and render him imperfect∣ly Just, that will be put off without a full Satisfaction from Christ, or accept any thing as Satisfaction to his Justice for Sin, which a meer Creature can do? Again, That Church holds, That God remits to a Believer the Guilt of Sin, but not of Punishment. Doth not this Doctrine Rob God of the Glory of his infinite Mercy, and render him imper∣fectly Merciful to forgive Sin partially, forgive One part of the Debt, and require the other? Now those Doctrines which make God im∣perfectly Just, and imperfectly Merciful, render him uncapable of be∣ing any God at all. By these Doctrines, therefore, the Church of Rome really denies the true God, and sets up an Idol of their own Brains in his Room.Coment. de Sta∣tu Religion. et reipub. in Gal. sub Carol. 9. An. 1561. p. 108. This Argument was urged by the Learned Be∣za, in the Colloquy of Poissy, before the French Court, and the Roma∣nists, (who wanted not for number of Cardinals, Prelats, Divines) in their Reply to his Speech, attempted an Answer to some other parts of it; but had not courage enough to venture upon this. 2. As for the Son. Those Capital Doctrines of the Church of Rome, concerning humane Satisfactions, in Penances, Purgatory, or by Indulgences, with the Intercession of Saints and Angels, as finite Mediators, are utterly in∣consistent with the God-head of Christ. If Christ be God, there must needs be an infinite Dignity in his Person, an infinite Merit in his Righteousness: As such a Righteousness needs no help, it will admit no Partner in the glorious Work of our Justification before God. Here 'tis fit we should take notice of their Religious Orders (as they call them) of Men and Women. The Sacerdotal Hierarchy wears the Crown;Biblioth. Selec. lib. 3. chap. 20. Possevin calls them the GOVERNING CLERGY, their Monks, &c. the SUPEREROGATING CLERGY. In them they place the Glory of their Sanctity. The great design of these Orders is, to do Works of Supererogation for maintaining the Fund
of the Church's Spiritual Treasure.This Fund of Merts consists of the Works of Su∣pererogation of Christ and the Sints. From thence the Pope takes Parcels of Merits, which he Sells in Indulgences, to keep, or fetch Souls out of Purgatory, to deluded Wretches, who are thereby cheat∣ed of their Money, and their Souls to. The Church of Rome holds, That Obeying the Law more perfectly than it Requires, and Observ∣ing the Councels of the Gospel, are Works of Supererogation. The Law, they say, is satisfied with the first Degree of Charity, whatso∣ever is above that, in any Man's Obedience of it, is Supererogatory. The Religious Orders of the Church of Rome, by their Obedience of the Law, more perfectly then is necessary; but especially by observ∣ing their Three-fold Vow, of Poverty, Chastity, Obedience, (which, with them, are not Precepts, but Councels) do Works of Superero∣gation, to maintain this Fund of the Church's Spiritual Treasure; whereof, the Pope is Lord, and hath the soveraign Disposal. This Doctrine of Indulgences, horribly Blasphemes the Glory of Christ's infinitely Meritorious Righteousness; which is only Sufficient, and All-sufficient for the Justification of a Believer before God. Set aside, therefore, the Consideration of their Flagitiousness, (whereof the VVorld hath Rung for many Ages) let them be as Good as they pretend to be, the Perfection of that Sanctity wherein they Glory, is, at best, A Deceive∣ableness of Ʋnrighteousness, and, indeed, a great Abomination. By the painted Sanctity of these Religious Orders, the World was at first bewitohed into, and is still infatuated in a superstitious Wonder after the Beast. This Chimaerical Fund of Merits, brings down those Golden Showers into the Roman Synagogue, which Gild the Pope's Crown, and Pamper the Priests Bellies. 3. As for the Holy Ghost. The Doctrines of the Pope's, or Church's Infallibility and Supremacy, are inconsistent with his God-head. This Do∣ctrine is the main Pillar of the Papal Empire.In praefatione ad li. de summo Pontifie. Bellarmine calls the Primacy of the Pope, the Sum of Christianity; without which, the Church can no more subsist, than a Building without a Foundation, a Flock without a Pastor, an Army without a General, the Stars with∣out the Sun, the Body without the Head. In Short, they hold such a visible infallible supream Head necessary to the Churches Unity in Fundamentals. (In Doctrines not Fundamental, there are Diffe∣rences enough among themselves, which this infallible Head cannot Remove.) How is this Doctrine consistent with the God-head of the Holy Ghost? If the Holy Ghost be God, certainly, by the Illu∣mination of his Grace, he can enable all sincere Christians to discern, and agree in all such Doctrines of the Gospel, the knowledge where∣of, is necessary to Salvation.
Thus you see how the Capital Doctrines of the Church of Rome are inconsistent with, and, by necessary consequence, deny the Deity of all the Three Persons of the God-head. Heathens opposed the Doctrine of Christianity ignorantly and o∣penly. The Church of Rome pretending to Infallibility in the case, undermines and destroys it under the Name of a special Friend. Ar∣rians, Socinians, openly deny the God-head of Christ; so did Macedo∣nians the God-head and Personality of the Holy Ghost. For this they are condemned as Hereticks, by the Church of Rome, which, at the same time, sets up and imposeth Doctrines, to be believed on pain of Damnation, that really do the same VVork. II. The Papal Empire is like the Pagan in setting up Idolatry and cor∣rupt Worship. How grosly guilty heathen Rome was in this matter, none deny. VVhat is their worshiping of Saints, Angels, Images, Re∣liques, the Host, but Idolatry? All the Distinctions used herein by Papists, to excuse themselves, were before used by heathen Philoso∣phers, to the same purpose, and with as good Success. There are Two Aggravations of Papal Idolatry not to be met with in Heathen Idolatry, the One Blasphemes Christ, the other Affronts the common Sense of Mankind. 1. If Pagans worshiped their Idols, (which were either Souls of Persons, esteemed eminently Virtuous, that were departed, or Spirits that had never been Incarnate) and used them as Finite Mediators be∣tween themselves and the supream God, they knew no other, better Mediator. But Papists know, and acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ to be an infinite Mediator; and not content with him alone, to his in∣finite Dishonour, they will be setting up, and worshiping Finite Ones. 2. Popish Idolatry in their worshiping the Host, is an Affront to the common Sense of Mankind. For it must be Adored as the real, proper, natural Body of Christ, when, to our Sight, Smelling, Feeling, Taste, it appears to be nothing but Bread. This, in Impudence, out-does the Sorcery of Jannes and Jambres, who cast their Rods upon the Ground, and (seemingly at least) they became Serpents; if, to the Eyes of the Spectators, they had appeared Rods, and those Magi∣cians, with a Roman Assurance, had told them, That, upon pain of Damnation, they must believe them not to be Rods, but Serpents; instead of Believing, they would have Stoned them. Here we may also take Notice of their Ceremonial Worship, whereby the simplicity of that VVorship, which Christ appointed in the Christ∣ian Church, is turned into a gawdy Pageantry, and heathenish Pomp. From their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, it necessarily follows,
That the same individual Body must be in many places at Once, which is inconsistent with an humane Body, and implicitly denies the truth of Christ's Humanity. The great multitude of their vain Ceremonies, also, implicitly denies Christ's being come, and having suffered in the Flesh; for it subjects the Christian Church to such a way of VVor∣ship, as was only proper before his Incarnation and Passion. Thus Christ is quite destroyed by the Doctrine and VVorship of the Church of Rome, being inconsistent with the Truth of both his Na∣tures, Divine and Humane. III. Rome Papal is like Rome Pagan, in Tyranny and Persecution. Those Provinces which (at least, in this western part of the VVorld) sup∣ported the Grandeur of Rome Pagan, and were used by it in persecu∣ting the Christian Church, being turned into Kingdoms, submitting to the Pope as their spiritual Head, support his Grandeur, and have been used by him in persecuting true Christianity. For the first Three Centuries, the Church felt the fury of heathen Persecutions; for the next Three it was afflicted by the violent Opposition of the Arrians, wherein Subtilty and Rage met together. For the succeed∣ing Three, it was scorched in the Flames of Saracenical Wrath. A∣bout the Eleventh Century, the Pope took up the persecuting Trade, and hath held it ever since: On all Occasions, he hath shewed his Hear∣tiness and Dexterity in this barbarous Work. Herein the Image hath out-done the Original. Rome Papal hath been the cause of shedding more Christian Blood, than ever Rome Pagan Shed. Moreover, there has been more perfidiousness in Papal Butcheries, as in the Parisian and Irish Massacres, than we read of in Pagan Persecutions. And for Ingratitude, in all the Pagan Violence against the Christian Church, what is com∣parable to that of the Marian Persecution in England, and the present Usage of the French Protestants? For the Proof of my Doctrine, viz. That Rome Papal is the Image of Rome Pagan, I think there needs no more than what has been done in shewing their Likeness. 1. In opposing the Doctrine of Christiani∣ty. 2. In their setting up Idolatry and corrupt Worship. 3. In their Tyranny and Persecution. This Papal Empire is the Devils Master-piece, for therein the Name of Christianity is turned against the thing. And there are Three things observable in the prophetical Description of this Work. 1. The Devils Subtilty in appearing quite contrary to what he is. 2. A Painted shew of Religion, whereby he undermines the truth of it. 3. Persecuting Rage, clad in the Armor of Zeal, to suppress Opposers.
1. The Devils Subtilty in appearing to be quite contrary to what he is. That little Beast, which, in my Text, cajoles and perswades the World to make an Image to the Beast, which had the wound by a Sword, and did Live, Vers. 11. He is said to have Horns like a Lamb, but, to speak, like a Dragon. He wears the shew of a Christian; claims his power from Christ, as his Vicar, as if, like Christ his great design were to destroy the works of the Devil, when, all the while, the Devil possesseth his Heart, inspires his Counsels, dictates his words, directs his Actions. Again, Vers. 2. The Papal Empire hath the Bo∣dy of a Leopard; One reason thereof, you heard before, another may be this. Naturalists say, the Leopard is friendly to all Beasts, but the Dragon. By that Shape, one would think this Beast a mortal Enemy to the Dragon, whose Brat and Off-spring he is; for the Dragon gives him his Seat, his Power, and great Authority. 2. The painted shew of Religion, whereby he undermines and destroys the truth of it. This is seen in Two things. 1. Their Morality. 2. Their Miracles. 1. Their Morality. To wave the Jesuits Morals, which Papists them∣selves condemn. Not to mention what the Learned Clarkson hath written to prove, That the Practical Divinity of the Papists in general, is destructive to Christianity, and Men's Souls. 2 Thes. 2.9.10. An∣tichrist's coming, is said to be after the working of Satan, with all power, &c. and deceiveableness of Ʋnrighteousness. This is seen in their Doctrine of Justification by works. Upon the contrary Doct∣rine of Justification before God, by the Righteousness of Christ im∣puted to a Believer, the first Reformers most successfully, founded their Reformation. These works, whereby Papists seek Justification, when examined, will appear to be no real Righteousness, but a deceive∣ableness of Ʋnrighteousness. For, according to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. 1. The works of the Unregenerate, performed by the assistance of common Grace, prepare, and dispose to Justification. 2. The Grace of Justification (whereby they mean, what we call Re∣generation or Sanctification) is communicated (as the Councel of Trent speaks) according to every Man's Disposition, and Co-operation. As if the common Grace of the Unregenerate, and special Grace of the Regenerate, differ'd only in degree, not in kind. 3. The works of the Regenerate continue, increase, perfect their Justification. By this Grace, and these good works, they hold, we are justified before God, for Christ's sake. 1. By this Doctrine, their works will be found not to be truly Righteous; i. e. proceeding from a principle of inherent Righteous∣ness,
by the Holy Ghost, wrought in the Soul; like that which before the Fall, was the Image of God on the Soul of Man, and Lost by the Fall. These Works are but like Grapes and Figs, growing on Thorns and Thistles, without an Antecedent specifical change of those Thorns and Thistles, into Vines and Fig-trees.The Learned Perkins hath wri a Tract to prove, That a Papist, by his Religion, can not go beyond a Reprobate. 2. These Graces (as they call them) and good Works, are set up for a justifying Righteousness before God, in opposition to Christ's Righteousness, which is only Sufficient, and All-sufficient for that End and Purpose. They say, indeed, our own Works justify us for Christ's sake. This makes Christ's Merits a Stale to Man's inherent personal Righteous∣ness. With the same Doctrine the false Apostles, of old, corrupted the Galatian Churches. Gal. 5.2.3, 4. 3. Which is worse, On this Doctrine of Justification by Works, they graft their Doctrine of humane Satisfactions. They say, Christ was made under the Law, and redeems us from the curse of the Law. They say, Christ was not made under the Gospel. With them the Gospel (taken strictly, as contra-distinct to the Law of Nature) is a new Law, requiring Faith and Repentance We our selves must satisfy for our Sins a∣gainst it. Thus comes in their Doctrine of humane Satisfactions, by Pennances, the pains of Purgatory, Works of Supererogation; for which their religious Orders are so highly esteemed. In these humane Satisfactions, and Works of Supererogation, there is a great shew of Sanctity, hatred of Sin, contempt of the World, zeal to God. Consi∣der the things themselves, they are a deceiveableness of Unrighteous∣ness; consider their end and use, they are grand Abominations. 2. Their Miracles. 2. Thes. 2.9. Antichrist's coming is said to be after the working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders. To wave the Dispute at present, (which would immoderately swell this too large Digression) how far the Devil, by God's Permission, may go in doing Wonders. It's evident, from Ecclesiastical History, that several things in the Church of Rome, (which are secrets and sinews of the Papal Empire) as the Veneration of Reliques and Images, the Doctrines of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Prayers for the Dead, were much beholding for their Entertainment to Miracles pretended to be wrought in their Favour. 'Tis by these Miracles, the little Beast, in my Text, is said to deceive them that dwell on the Earth; and perswade them to make an Image to the Beast that received the Wound by the Sword, and did Live. 3. The Devil, by this shew of Religion, in a deceitful Morality, and pretended Miracles, having drawn the World into a superstitious wonder after the Beast; he inflames those Princes, who submit their
Scepters to his Crosier, with a blind zeal to draw their Swords a∣gainst, and destroy such as would not worship the Beast, nor receive his Mark in their Right-hands, and their Fore-heads. As our Blessed Sa∣viour fore-told, they thought they did Christ good Service in de∣stroying such as were most faithful to his Interest and Glory. Pardon this Digression, which, though not necessary to prove my Doctrine, is not wholly foreign to my Text. It may be not unprofi∣table to shew, by what Arts and Methods the Devil erected that Pa∣gano-christian Empire, which, as it hath been the subtlest, longest, so∣rst; so it shall be the last Enemy which shall ever prevail over, and oppress the Church of God in this World. Now I shall proceed to the Application of the Doctrine. ƲSE I. If the Papal Empire be the Image of the Pagan, What reason is there to question the Pope's being Antichrist; how much, to believe and call him so? As amongst the Romans of old, every General was call'd Empe∣ror, at last that Name was restrained to the Head of the Government; so every Arch Heretick, may be call'd Antichrist; (we Read of ma∣ny such in the first Epistle of St. John) but the Scripture speaks of One Eminent, Notorious Opposer, who should be Head of a wicked Empire, and as such oppose and oppress the Church of God. This Antichristian (represented by those Beasts, Revel. 13. & 17.) is the Papal Empire. Before the Reformation, many of the chiefest Wri∣ters of the Church of Rome, onderstood these Prophecies of the wick∣ed of the World; since, 'tis acknowledged, they are forced to change their Exposition. Concerning this Antichrist, or the wicked Empire so injurious to the Church of God, mentioned in those Chapters, there are Two O∣pinions most in Vogue amongst the Romanists. Some apply 'em to an Antichrist already past, others expound 'em of One to come: 'Tis pleasant Reading how fairly they confute each other. 1. Some make this Antichristian Empire to have been Rome Heathen. Their Scheme of the Revelation is this. From Chap. 4. to 12. is de∣clared God's Judgments on the Jews for their crucifying Christ, oppo∣sing the Gospel. From Chap. 12. to 20. the Christian Church's conflict with, and conquest over the Roman Heathen Empire. Chap. 20. the glori∣ous Millenium, or prosperous Estate of the Christian Church in this World begins, at the time of Constantine the Great, &c. Alcasar pretends to be the Author of this Scheme. In his Epistle Dedicatory to Pope
Paul the Fifth. He glories in it (and were his Exposition true, not unjustly) as the greatest Service that could be done to the Church of Rome. He says, all other places of Scripture describing the glory of that Church, borrow their Light from the Revelation, as the the Stars receive theirs from the Sun. This, indeed, makes it seem strangeer, that the Learned Grotius, and Dr. Hammond should embrace this Scheme; for, according to it, the Church of Rome is the glory of Christianity; and if so, all the Protestant Churches must be guilty of mortal Schisme, if not damnable Heresy. To prove that Rome Heathen was not Antichrist. 'Tis the com∣mon Opinion, taken from 2 Thes. 2.7. (which Bellarmine proves, and quotes many Fathers for it) that the Roman Empire must fall before Antichrist could rise. 2. Others will have it a future Antichrist, that must rise and reign Three Years and an half before the end of the World. The mistake of this Perswasion is evident to any who considers, That the Beast mentioned Rev. 13. and 17, is quite destroyed, Rev. 19.20. After which, Rev. 20. the Church is said to enjoy Halcion Days on Earth for a Thousand Years before the Day of Judgment. We place Antichrist in the middle. The Holy Ghost's Descripti∣on of Antichrist and his Empire, taken from the Prophecy thereof, Rev. 13. agrees to the Papal Empire, and none else. Protestants esteem this Doctrine of the Pope's being Antichrist, a point of such certainty and importance, that several Protestant Church∣es have thought fit to put it into their Confessions of Faith. Not to trouble you with many Testimonies, I'll confine my self to the French Churches; the sore Affliction whereof, is the occasion of this Dis∣course. Here let me give you the Judgment of Two of their Natio∣nal Synods, and One of their Divines. Quick's Syno∣dium in Gallia reformataIn their 17th Synod held at Gap, C. 2. N. 5. 'tis delared, that the Pope is Antichrist, with the reasons thereof. C. 6. N. 5. it is de∣creed, That the Article concerning the Pope's being the Great Antichrist, shall be inserted into their Confession of Faith. That all the faithful Pastors, and private Christians, be exhorted constantly to persist in the Profession of it, and boldy to confess it. That whosoever are prosecuted or molested on this Account, shall be supported and defended by the whole Body of the Churches, in the best manner that can be, &c. In their 19th Synod, assembled at London, (which was their last) the French King, by his Commissioner, the Lord Magdelaine, expresly forbad them in their Sermons or Books, to call the Pope Antichrist, or stile the Catholicks Idolators, &c. To this the Deputies of the
Council answer, by the Mouth of their Moderator, Monsieur Dallie. As for those Words Antichrist in our Liturgy, and Idolatry and Deceits of Satan which be found in our Cenfession, they be words declaring the grounds and reasons of our Seperation from the Romish Church, and Doctrines which our Fathers maintained in the worst of Times, and which we are fully resol∣ved, as they, through the aids of divine Grace, never to abandon, but keep faithfully, and inviolably to the last gasp. After Two National Synods, let it not seem strange to add the Judgment of a single Divine, both for the Merit of the Man, and me∣morableness of the Expressions.In praefat. ad Princip. Auriac. ant Calvin, opusc. It is the great Calvin, whom Beza truly calls, under God, the Father of the French Churches. Mr. Calvin, in his Answer to Pighius about Free Will, having men∣tioned a passage of Pighius, who exploded the Stupidity of the German Reformers, that, in his Opinion, undertook a more difficult work than the Apostles themselves did, p. 191. concerning which, Mr. Cal∣vin says, p. 193. If any Man prudently consider the state of that time wherein Luther rose, he shall see that he had almost all other Difficulties in common with the Apostles; but in One thing his condition was more unjust and hard than theirs, That then there was no Kingdom in the World; no Principality to whom they must denounce War: But he could by no means prevail without the ruine and destruction of that Empire, which is not only the most Potent of all, but holds all others, as it were in subjection to it self. What he adds concerning the Power of the Pope, is too large to transcribe. This is sufficient to declare the Judgment of those great Persons (with whom the Body of Protestants generally agree) concern∣ing the Pope's being Antichrist.Lib. de ne∣cessar. secess. ab Eccles. Roman. disput. 7. sive An∣tichristi. demon∣strat. Turretine says, it is the common and constant opinion of Protestants, and mentions the several Confessions of Faith, whereof this Doctrine is made an Article. ƲSE II. If the Papal Empire be the Image of the Pagan, What reason have we to bless God for the Reformation? For restoring the Gospel to us, and continuing it, notwithstanding our many and great forfeitures of it, and the many subtle Designs and Attempts of our Popish Ad∣versaries to deprive us of it? Our most acceptable Return to God for any Mercy, is making a right use of it. Let me, therefore, press you to the discharge of this great Duty. 1. Generally. 2. Parti∣cularly. 1. In General. As you value this inestimable Mercy of the Gos∣pel, beware of having any thing to do with Popery, or what is Popish,
in any part of Religion. Our miserable Ancestors, for many Ages, were Drunk with the Wine of the Whores Fornication:Rev. 17.2. They are now in Eternity, and God knows where their Souls are: Since divine Mercy hath caused our latter Progenitors to spue it up, let us abhor the thoughts of returning like the Dog to his Vomit. When God had plant∣ed the Children of Israel in the Land of Canaan, and they defiled themselves with the Idolatry of the Neighbour Nations, God deli∣vered them up into the Hands of those Nations, to Chastise them for such sinful Compliance. This is largely described in the Book of Judges. After the Kingdom was Setled among them, instead of Ser∣ving and Trusting their God, they Courted and Fawned upon Egypt and Babilon, seeking Rest under their Shadow. Egypt Betray'd em, Babylon lead 'em Captive. When, by that Captivity, they were cor∣rected, humbled, reformed, and saught their God; the Babylonish Em∣pire is broke to pieces for Israel's Deliverance; the Kingdom of E∣gypt is made Tributary for their Wealth. This is frequently men∣tioned in Scripture, both these are declared in the same Chapter. I∣saiah, 45. in the foregoing Verses, after mention of the great Success of Cyrus in his Expedition against Babylon Vers. 4. For Jacob my Ser∣vant's sake, and Israel mine Elect; I have even called thee by thy Name, I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not known me. Vers. 13. I have raised him up in Righteousness, I will direct all his ways; he shall build my City, he shall let go my Captives, not for Price nor Reward, saith the Lord of Hosts. And for Egypt, Read Vers. 14. Thus saith the Lord, the La∣bour of Egypt, and Merchandise of Ethiopia, and of the Sabeans, Men of Sta∣ture shall come over unto thee, they shall be thine, they shall come after thee, in Chains they shall come over, &c. The Kingdom of Egypt being con∣quered by the Persians, Ezra, 7. Artaxerxes, King of Persia, gave the Jews out of the Tribute, on that side the River (Euphrates) to which Egypt belonged, Expences for building the Temple, City, and setting up the Worship of God. To apply this to our present case. What did Protestants ever get by seeking the Favour of Papists? Did not Queen Mary begin her Persecution with those very Protestants that had been most serviceable in helping her to her Crown? To whom was the French King more beholding, for the quiet Possession of his Throne, than to his Protestant Subjects, and how gloriously are they requited? Let Protestants be faithful to the Lord Jesus Christ, and he'll take care of them, and do Antichrist's Work for him. 2. But, more Particularly, in those Three things, wherein the Pa∣pal Empire is the Image of the Pagan, let us be as unlike Papists as they are like Pagans.
I. As for the Doctrine of Christianity. Papists freely Profess, and are Baptized into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but, at the same time, set up a Religion, the Capital Doctrines whereof, are inconsistent with, and, by necessary consequence, deny the God∣head of all the Three Persons of the Trinity. Let us sacredly Be∣lieve, and sincerely Worship God as a Trinity of Persons in the Uni∣ty of the Divine Nature, whereof the second Person is Incarnate and Mediator. i. e. Let us yield all Worship, Service, Obedience to God, as an infinite Father, thrô an infinite Mediator, by an infinite Sanctifier, expecting all Salvation and Blessedness from the Father, thrô the Son, by the Spirit. In this way of Worshipping God, his Glory, and our Happiness are most divinely Connected. 1. Hereby we shall give Glory to God in the highest Degree: We shall give him the Relative Glory of his Divine Persons, and the Absolute Glory of his Infinite Perfections, in such a manner, as their Glory is not Displayed in any other Work (but the Salvation of Fal∣len Man) manifested to this lower World. Adam in his state of Innocency and Perfection under the Covenant of Works, could not, the Angels of Heaven cannot (their State, tho' Perfect, renders them not capable to) Worship God in a way so much for exalting his Glo∣ry both Relative and Absolute, as that prescribed and injoyned to the Christian Church under the Covenant of Grace. 2. Hereby we shall come to enjoy the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God, the Communion of the Holy Ghost. This will make us Fruitful in all Manner of Good Works on Earth. This will conduct us safely and comfortably to Heaven. II. As the Papal Empire is the Image of the Pagan in Idolatry and Superstition. Let us Conscientiously Adhere to the Purity, and be content with the Simplicity of the Gospel. If Christ be an infinite Mediator, what need have we of Saints, and Angels, who can be but finite Ones? Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you of your Reward in a voluntary Humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he hath not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly Mind, 19. And not hold∣ing the Head from which all the Body, by Joints and Bands, having Nourish∣ment ministred, and knit together, increaseth with the Increase of God. 1. This is a vain Intrusion into that which a Man hath not seen. God hath Revealed, Enjoyned no such Thing in his Word: There∣fore, for want of Scripture, pretended Visions were contrived and published for the Ushering in this, as some other Doctrines of the Church of Rome.
2. Here's a shew of Humility; but 'tis Voluntary, of Man's own making, and real Pride; vainly puff'd up by his fleshly mind. 'Tis de∣sperate and fatal Pride for a sinful Man to think that any Mediator but an Infinite One, can render his Person; or imperfect Services ac∣ceptible to an infinitely Just God. 3. Such don't hold the Head Christ: The setting up finite Me∣diators, implys a Denyal of Christ's Alsufficiency and consequently, of his Infiniteness, and God-head. But such as truly hold the Head, and sincerely Worship God thrô Christ, find themselves Compleat in Him, and have that Spiritual Nourishment communicated to them, which makes them Increase with the Increases of God. If the Holy-Ghost be God, what need of holy Water, Relicks, and such Supersti∣tious Rites of Purification? When such Rites of Purification were Injoyned by God hmself, in the Jewish Church, where they were Ty∣pical, they could only Sanctify to the Purifying of the Flesh, Heb. 9.13. i. e. Remove only an external Ecclesiastical, or Political Un∣cleanness, made so by the Ceremonial, and Judicial Laws. Those Laws are now ceased. Christians have no such Uncleanness to be removed. If God be a Spirit, what need of Images to Represent him? The antient Heathen Romans were not so Gross, but, for a considerable time, worship'd their gods without 'em. Should Images of God, or Saints, before whom they Prostrate themselves, move towards them to help 'em, they would fly from them, as acted by infernal Spirits, whom just before, they Adored as Deities. And so for Religious Ceremonies, not of God's Appointment, in divine Worship, what have we to do with 'em? Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ hath made you Free. This Liberty (whatever else may be contained in it) signifies, A Liberty from the Bondage of the Ceremonial Law. Here's an express Command to stand Fast in it, back'd with an infinite Motive, wherewith Christ hath made you free. This should make us highly Esteem it, and care∣fully Retain it, because we are Beholding to the infinite Love, and precious Blood of Christ for it. Obj.] If any say, The Church of Rome doth not Impose the Jew∣ish Ceremonial Law. Sol.] 'Tis no Liberty to be Freed from the Golden Chains of God's Institutions, and left to the Brazen Fetters of mens Inventi∣ons.
III. As the Papal Empire is the Image of the Pagan, in Tyranny and Persecution. Let us study, and walk in the Exercise of Brotherly Love. Hereby we shall eminently resemble Christ, as Antichrist by his persecuting Rage doth the Devil. 'Tis manifest the Devil in∣flames the Rage of Persecutors, and hath the chief Hand in all the Persecutions of the Church. Rev. 12.7. Concerning Heathen Persecutions 'tis said, There was War in Heaven: Michael (Christ) and his Angels, fought against the Dragon. And the Dragon (v. 9. call'd the old Serpent, the Devil, Satan) fought, and his Angels. The Devil inspir'd the Roman Heathen Magistrates, and People, with Rage and Fury against the Christian Church. Rev. 13.11. The little Beast that hath Horns like a Lamb, (i. e. in outward Appear∣ance is a Christian) which represents the Sacerdotal Hierarchy, by whose Art and Power, the Papal Empire was Erected) speaks like a Dragon. The Devil is his Oracle. By his Direction he caused the Image of the Beast to be made. By his Instigation he caused as many as would not worship that Image to be Kill'd. And 'tis Observable, Rev. 20.2. When the Dragon, that old Serpent, the Devil, Satan is Bound, for a Thousand Years, the Church hath Halcyon Days. v. 7. Satan is no sooner loosed, but v. 8. he goes out to deceive the Nati∣ons that are in the Four Quarters of the Earth, and gathers together the Armies of Gog and Magog against the Church. As the Devil hath the chief Hand in Persecuting the Church; so Persons can scarce in any thing shew themselves more like him, then by opposing and vexing sincere and serious Christians. On the other hand, by walk∣ing in the Exercise of Brotherly Love, Christians eminently resemble Christ, Eph. 2. Walk in Love, as Christ loved us, and gave himself a Sacrifice, and an Offering of a sweet smelling Savour to God. Psal. 133. v. 1. Behold how good and pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in Ʋnity, v. 2. it is like the precious Oyntment upon the Head, that ran down upon the Beard, even Aaron's Beard, that went down to the Skirts of his Garment. Aaron the High-priest was a Type of Christ. When Christians walk in Love and Unity, it shews they are Anointed with the same Grace, that Sanctified the Human Nature of Christ himself. v. 3. As the Dew of Hermon, and the Dew that descended upon the Mountains of Zion; for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even Life for evermore. That Dew made the places where it fell, very Fruit∣ful; this Grace makes Christians Fruitful in good Works: Ready to be Subject to each others, to Serve each others, to provoke each others to Love and good Works. There the Lord commanded the bles∣sing, even Life for evermore. Holy Brotherly Love is a certain sign
of Regeneration. 1 Joh. 3.14. We know that we have passed from Deah to Life, because we Love the Brethren. This Regeneration is the Beginning and Pledge of eternal Life in the Soul. It enables Chri∣stians to bring forth Fruit to God, to lay up Treasure in Heaven, a good Foundation against the time to come. ƲSE III. If the Papal Empire be the Image of the Pagan, how should we Simpathize with our Protestant Brethren, that Labour under Papal Persecution? 'Tis a melancholly Reflection, to consider how greatly the Prote∣stant Interest is reduc'd in Poland. How 'tis wasted in Hungary. How 'tis shock'd in the Palatinate. How 'tis trampled under Foot in France. Human Help fails: God lives. 'Tis only the God of all Grace, and who can create Deliverance, that is Able to Reform that part of it which is yet in peace, and revive the Interest where 'tis sinking, or fallen. Here give me leave to offer a few things to you, and chiefly with respect to the French Churches that are so Dissipa∣ted and Distressed. 1. Behold here the Severity of God against his own People for their Sins. Isa. 10.5.6. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine indignation. I will send him against an hypocri∣tical nation, and against the People of my Wrath, will I give him a charge to take the spoil and the prey, and to tread them down like the mire in the streets. Considering the vast disproportion between the great and potent Empire of Assyria, and the little weak Kingdom of Judah, without a strong Faith, it had been hard to believe that God him∣self could have delivered that little Kingdom, out of that great King's Hand. Yet Assyria was but God's Rod and Staff, as the Prophet says, v. 15. That mighty Monarch of himself, without the Lord of Hosts, could have no more annoyed and afflicted the Church, than the Ax could Hew, the Saw shake its self, the Rod lift up its self, without an Hand to manage them. The Prophet's Word, v. 5. 6. may well be applied to our case. Whosoever would rightly understand mat∣ters, must took thrô the Ingratitude and Power of the Instrument: He must say, God hath sent, or given him a Charge against the Peo∣ple of his Wrath. Far be it from me, to pour Vinegar on such as God hath Wounded. But all own a great corruption of Manners to have been in those Churches. Whilst to the Glory of God, and their Honour, we acknowledge the exemplary Lives of some, yet
how much is serious Godliness to be desired amongst others, not a few, that have left their native Country and Estates for their Pro∣fession? Some bewail an unhappy Fret of Doctrine that disquieted them. God, to be sure, must be owned and justified in all that is come upon them. 2. Let us look upon this Persecution as a signal Warning, and loud Call upon us to Repentance. Ezek. 23. Idolatrous Israel is compared to an Harlot call'd Aholah, Judah to another call'd Aholi∣bah. When Aholibah saw God's Judgments upon Aholah for her Sins, and instead of Reformation, committed the like, Aholah's bit∣ter Cup is put into the Hands of Aholibah also. How often hath God Delivered us from the deadly Designs of our Popish Enemies? Those great Mercies, how little are they Remembred? Thô God hath lately pluck'd us out of the Jaws of Destruction, where's our Gratitude, or Reformation? What Atheism, Prophaness, Immora∣lities are Rampant, and Insolent? Set aside the Consideration of that Deism, and Socinianism, which so boldly lift up their Heads a∣mongst us; that Arminianism which prevails so much in England, goes beyond the Amyraldianism, which was thought to be the Infeli∣city of the French Churches. Not to enter into the Merits of either Cause at present, I believe the most judicious and impartial Judges will readily Acknowledge, that both of 'em Swerve from the Judg∣ment and Doctrin of the first Reformers. The Dissent of the First from the Minds of those that drew up the XXXIX Articles of the Church of England, may be gathered from that memorable Expression of the Bishop of Sarum, in the Preface to his Exposition of those Articles: It has likewise been often Suggested, that those Articles seemed to be so plain a Transcript of St. Austin's Doctrin in these much disputed Points, concerning the Decrees of God, and the Effica∣cy of Grace, that they were not Expounded by our Divines for that very Reason; since the far greater Number of them is believ'd to be now of a different Opinion. The Difference of the Amyraldians from those who Composed the Confession of Faith for the French Protestant Churches, may be learn∣ed from those great Letters Printed at the end of the Second Synod of Alanzon,Quick's Synodi∣um. where the Messieurs, Amyrald and Testard, appeared to give an Account of their Dostrine. I'll mention but a little out of that Letter written by the Pastors and Professors of Geneva to that Council.
Moreover, we are very much Astonished, and our dear Brethren of Switzerland are also extreamly Offended, that the Names of the great Doctors of our Churches have been used for the Defence of these Novelties; And would Charity suffer it, we should be∣lieve they were Persons not in the least to be Credited, because the Novelists do impute, and tax them with a very great Incon∣sistency in their Doctrin, the contrary whereunto, notwithstand∣ing their pretended Allegations out of them for their darling Opi∣nions is universally known: And their different Sentiments from these new Dogmes, will clearly and sufficiently Justify them be∣fore the whole World. 3. Let us beg of God to fill our Hearts with an holy Simpathy and Compassion towards our afflicted Brethren in France, as the Apo∣stle says, Heb. 13.3. Let us remember those that are in Bonds, as if bound with them. As if ourselves were Chained down in the same Gallies, Immur'd in the same vile Goals, and loathsome Dungeons; had our Children Ravish'd from us, and Sty'd up in Monasteries and Nunneries, to be poyson'd with Popish Corruptions: Such a Fel∣low-feeling will make us Cry to God for them, with the same Hearti∣ness and Fervour, as if it were our own Case. Don't think this work of Prayer is to be performed only upon such Solemn Occasions as this, but reckon it your indispensible Duty every day in your Fami∣lies and Closets. In your Prayers for them, be not so Earnest for their Deliverance, but rather Cry mightily for a large Effusion of the Spirit, in order to their Reformation, and Sanctification. This Grace will make them even to Glory in their Tribulations. The ex∣ercise of it in Faith, Patience, Constancy, Joy, will, thrô God's Bles∣sing, be a means for the Conviction and Conversion of such as are round about 'em: And then all the rest will follow sooner and bet∣ter than you expect. ƲSE IV. Since the Papal Empire is the Image of the Pagan, beg of God that he would send the Papal after the Pagan. As sure as one is gone, 't'other shall follow in due time. In the eye of Reason, the Christian Church had less Human Help to deliver it from the Op∣pression of the Pagan Empire heretofore, than it has to deliver it it from Papal Oppression at this Day. In the Third Century, by the Invasion of the barbarous Nations, and intestine Wars, the Roman Empire was Soaked in Blood. These Wars, as 'tis usual, were at∣tended
by Famine, and that by Pestilence. By these Three, the Empire was almost Depopulated, insomuch, that when Dioclesian returned Vi∣ctorious over the Persians, with many Captives, after his Triumph, instead of putting them to Death, they gave them Houses and Lands, that they might help to repeople the Empire. Then God raised up Constantine the Great, who turned Christian himself, and by whose Means, Christianity obtained the upper-hand of Heathenism in the Empire. This great Work became more Easie to that glorious Prince, by the former Judgments, having cut off those Hands, which else in all likelyhood would have Opposed him in it. The Wars that have been, and different Interests that are amongst the Princes of the Papal Empire, contribute nothing to its Strength. But as the Deliverance of the Church from Rome Pagan was God's Work, its deliverance from Papal Oppression shall be his too. This is celebra∣ted by the Church, Rev. 15.3.4. Great and Marvellous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints; who would not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? For thou only art holy; for all Nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy Judgments are made manifest. 'Tis spoken of God's Judgments, executed by the effusion of the Vials on the Antichristian Empire, Chap. 16. and as the Destruction of the Antichristian Empire is God's Work, so he will do it in answer to the Churches Prayer, Rev. 15.5, 6, 7. Up∣on opening of the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in Heaven, (which was done by the Reformation) the Seven Angels came out of the Temple, and receive Golden Vials full of God's Wrath, which they pour out upon the Beast, Chap. 16. You that have neither Learning, Authority, nor Power wherewith to serve the Church in this great Work, by humble, serious, fervent, constant Prayer, may prevail with God to raise up such as have, to engage and prosper them in it. For stirring you up to this great Duty, let me leave two Motives with you. 1. Consider, that all the while God is pouring out the Vials of his Wrath upon Antichrist, till the Work be quite finished, the Church of God will be under a mysterious, and tremendous Dispen∣sation of Providence. Rev. 15.8. And the Temple was fill'd with Smoke, from the Glory of God, and his Power; and no Man was able to en∣ter into the Temple, till the Seven Plagues of the Seven Angels were fulfill'd. The first time we find Smoke used as a Prophetical Emblem is, Gen. 15.12. An horror of great Darkness fell upon Abram; this was caused, Vers. 17. by a smoking Furnace passing between the parts of his Sacrifice. There also, we have an Oracle added to declare the Signification of
the prophetical Emblem. Vers. 13.14. Abram's Seed should serve a strange Nation, be afflicted by them Four Hundred Years, then God would Judge that Nation, and bring them out with great Substance. The Smoke of the Furnace, therefore, passing betwixt the parts of Abram's Sa∣crifice, signified God's Presence amongst Abram's Posterity, by Ver∣tue whereof, they should multiply under, at last be delivered from the Egyptian Bondage; but his Presence, in a mysterious tremendous way, who would severely correct them for their Sins. So here, all the while God is pouring out the Vials of his Wrath on Antichrist, the Temple is fill'd with Smoke from the Glory of God, and his Power. This signifies God's Presence in the Church, by Vertue whereof, the work of Reformation shall be preserved, and in due time perfected. But God shall be present in a mysterrious, tremendous way, whereby the Protestant Churches shall be severely Corrected for their Sins. Thus it hath been ever since the beginning of the Reformation. What Wars upon account of Religion; what Persecutions, what Massacres in all Countries where the Gospel hath come? What Scandals of Professors, the generality of such as call themselves Pro∣testants, living in a flat Contradiction to that holy Religion they profess? What Clashings of Doctrines and Passions amongst such as are Sincere? These things are the Smoke that fills the Temple. As it hath been from the Beginning of the Reformation; so 'tis like to be till the Work is Finished. 'Tis said, No man was able to enter into the Temple till the Seven Plagues of the Seven Angels are fulfill'd. 'Tis not to be understood none Absolutely, but Comparatively, as Joh. 3.32. 'Tis said, No Man received Christ's Testimony; not Absolutely, for some were Converted by him; but Comparatively, to those great Multitudes, Converted by the Apostles and their Followers, after Christ's Resurrection and Ascension. So here 'tis said, No Man was able to enter into the Temple; not Absolutely, but Comparatively, to the vast Multitudes that shall come in after this Smoak is Vanish∣ed, and the seven Plagues of the seven Angels are fulfilled. As 'tis de∣clared, v. 4. of this Chapter. All Nations shall come and Worship be∣fore thee, because thy Judgments are made manifest. As therefore you desire a Period of these unhappy Circumstances, which so much Mar the Church's Beauty, and hinder the Conversion of Sinners, be earn∣est in Prayer to God, that he would hasten the Accomplishment of his Judgments on Antichrist. For this Smoke will so fill the Temple all that while, that no man will be able to enter into the Temple, till the seven Plagues of the seven Angels are fulfilled.
2. Consider how great the Inlargement, and Prosperity of the Church shall be, when Antichrist is carried off the Stage, Dan. 2.35. Then was the Iron, the Clay, the Brass, the Silver, the Gold broken to pieces together, and became like the Chaff of the Summer threshing Floors, and the Wind carried them away, that no place was found for them: And the Stone that smote the Image became a great Mountain, and filled the Earth. The Four Mettals of that prodigious Image, mention'd in the foregoing part of the Chapter, by the Holy Ghost himself, v. 36, &c. are expounded to signify Four Idolatrous and Tyranical Empires, that should successively oppose and oppress the Church of God, viz. the Babilonian, Persian, Grecian, Roman; the Iron Legs sig∣nify the Roman Empire under its Pagan Imperial Head: The Feet, part of Iron, part of Potters Clay, signify the Ecclesiastico-Political Empire of the Pope. When all these are carried off the Stage (whereof the Papal is last) and not before the little Stone (v. 44. call'd the Kingdom of God) shall become a great Mountain, and fill the Earth. So again, Dan. 7.26, 27. When the Judgment shall sit upon the little Htrn, (which signifies Antichrist) and take away his Dominion, to consume and destroy it to the end. Then the Kingdom, and the Dominion, and the Greatness of the Kingdom, under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the People of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall Serve and Obey him. To add but one more; Consider that plain and illustrious Testi∣mony, Revel. 19.20. The Beast is taken and with him the false Pro∣phet, that wrought Micacles before him, &c. These both are cast alive in∣to the Lake of Fire burning with Brimstone. There's an end of Anti-Christ. See what follows, ch. xx. 1, 2, 3. The Devil is chain'd down into the bottomless Pit, for a Thousand Years; v. 4. And I saw Thrones, and they sate upon them, and Judgment was given unto them: And I saw the Souls of them that were Beheaded for the Witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his Image; neither had received his Mark upon their Foreheads, or in their Hands; and they Lived and Reigned with Christ a Thousand Years. From the lofty Expressions of this Verse, some would Infer, That Christ himself shall descend from Heaven, be visibly present in his humane Nature, that dead Saints shall be raised out of their Graves, and Live with Christ upon the Earth for a Thousand Years. This O∣pinion was held by many of the greatest Lights in the Christian Church, for the first Four Centuries. It is embraced by many Protestants, eminent for Learning and Piety, of all Perswasions. The impure Thoughts of some ancient Hereticks, conctrning the Conversation of Christ and his Saints, at that time, and
the Excesses of some modern H spurs, have been its greater Ble∣mish. But those things ought not to be charg'd upon a Doctrine; which, by necessary consequence, do not follow from it, and are both disown'd, and abhor'd by its chief Supporters. It would be tedious, and unseasonable here to debate this great Point. I'll only say, that, according to the Rules of Interpretation, the Words will fairly admit a Sense exceedingly for the Benefit and Comfort of the Church, yet leaving the humane Nature of Christ at the Right-hand of God above, and the Bodies of Saints departed sleeping in Jesus here below. For, 1. Whereas the Martyrs that Suffer'd under Antichrist are said to Live and Reign, &c. We must consider, that the Church is the myst∣ical Body of Christ continued thrô all Ages. Rev. 11. ver. 3.12. The Two Witnesses are said to Prophecy in Sack-cloth 1260 Days, then to have War made upon them, to be conquer'd, and kill'd by the Beast that ascended out of the Bottomless-Pit, to lye unburied Three Days and an half; after that to rise again, and ascend up to Heaven. By consent of both Sides, (such as are for, and against a proper Resurrection of the Saints at that time) the 1260 Days are prophetical Days, each Day signifies an Year. No individual Persons ever Lived 1260 Years. But the same individual Witnesses that Prophecied in Sack-cloth in the beginning of those 1260 Years, may be said in the Successors of their Faith and Cause, to continue so Pro∣phecying through them all, and afterwards to be War'd upon, Con∣quer'd, Kill'd by the Beast, ly unburied Three Days and an half, then rise again, ascend into Heaven. And here in Chap. 20. to Live and Reign with Christ a Thousand Years. 2. There 'tis said, I saw the Souls, not the Bodies. Had there been a proper Resurrection, their Bodies would have been most Conspicuous. John is said to have seen the Souls, they were the immediate Seat of that Knowledge, Faith, Love, Zeal to Christ, which were displayed in those Martyrs that suf∣fered under Antichrist, and shall be conspicuous in the Saints, which, for these Thousand Years, shall Reign with Christ. 3. In the pro∣phetick Stile, the Church is said to rule with God, when his true Re∣ligion, and the Ordinances of his Worship are kept pure and intire. Hosea, 11.12. Ephraim compasseth me about with Lies, and the House of Israel with Deceit: but Judah yet ruleth with God, and is faithful with the Saints. Whatever more may be contain'd, in the high Expressions of this Text, will be most acceptible to the Church of God when it comes. With the greatest Modesty and Assurance we may gather thus much, that, after Antichrist Destruction, and the Devils being chain'd down into the Bottomless Pit, the true and pure Church of
God shall be the most prosperous,  Intere  ever was in the World. How ld the Consideration hereof,  our Prayer to God for the hastening that time? And make us pt on the holy Resolution of the Prophet, Isa. 62:1: For Zion's sake I will  hol my Peace, and for Jerusalem's sake, I will not Rest, until the Righusness thereof go forth as Brightness, and the Slio therof as a L that burneth: FINIS.
