S3581 12655540 65344
A SHORT, COMPENDIOUS, AND TRUE DESCRIPTION Of the ROUND-HEADS, and the LONG-HEADS, Shag-polls, briefly declared, with the true discovery both of the time and place of both their Originall begin∣nings, deduced and drawn out of the purest and re∣finedst Antiquities or Records of Time. OR, AN ANSWER To a most ridiculous, absurd, and beyond comparison, most foolish Baffle, sent into the world by a stinking Locust, And Intituled, THE DEVIL TURN'D ROUND-HEAD. EZEK. 44. 20. Neither shall they shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long; they shall onely poll their heads. Printed in the yeer, 1642.
A TRVE DESCRIPTION OF THE ROVND-HEADS. ANd first there is layd down in these eight ge∣nerall heads: First, the Originall of them both, Gen. 2.7. Revel. 9. Secondly, where they were made, as in the same re∣cords you shall finde. Thirdly, of what made, the same records also de∣clares. Fourthly, by whom made, there you shall find it also. Fiftly, how they are qualified, there you shall find it also. Sixtly, of the number of either of them, that you shall find Mat: 7. ver. 13. Revel. 9. of their use and particular end, Psalm 73. Eightly, and lastly of their last, and finall end that is Math: 25. All these are severally handled more plainly and largelie in their order by W. P.
A faithfull souldier of the sixt legion belonging unto the cheif generall of the most victorious regi∣ment of the Round-heads. Written upon the plaine of the earth, in the midst of an innumerable rabble ga∣thered together by the devill of shag-poll locusts, for the destruction of the Round-heads. And first to begin with the Round-heads Originall: His beginning was the sixt and last day of the worlds creation, in time proceeding and going before that of the locust shag-polls, being of more an∣tiquity, and therefore more to be had in honour, of those that reverence antiquitie of time more then your shag-poll Locusts are. Secondly, for the place where your Round-head was made: why; he was made in a place incomparable, more excellent then that wherein your shag-poll Lo∣cust was made, as you shall heare hereafter, he was made in a delicate place, even in paradise a place of spot-lesse purity, and delightfull content; A place fit for a Round-headed puritan and semy-separate to be made in: your semy-seperate, puritan, and Round-head, are computable 3. objects comprehended in one sub∣ject, being all made of one and the selfe-same matter, as also of one and the selfe-same nature, differing one∣ly in the precedency of the titles, the title semy-sepa∣rates, and Round-head, issuing out of the Puritan, as the streame issues out of the fountaine, being all one as the fountaine and his streame is. Thirdly, by whom wa your Puritan or Round-head made? your Puritan or Round-head was made by him who made the round world, and all that therin is, by Iehovah Elohim in most perfect beauty, shape, and form,
most admirable, composed in most comely proportion and order, his Round-head not Ass-Head like, but round indeed, which being looked upon by God him∣selfe, he saw that it was good, yea, most exceeding good and liked it wondrous well, so that he blessed his round head by him made, bids him increase and bring forth fruit, yea, even that fruit that should destroy the shag-polle locusts, and all the works of the devill from off the earth. Fourthly, of what made? he was made of that mat∣ter which that name which God gave him signifies, of red earth this Adam which the shag-polls in deri∣sion calls a Round-head, was made of red earth or of red dust, which to prevent some foolish objection, sig∣nifies one and the same thing. Fifthly, how is this Round-head qualified? admi∣rably, with grace and vertue of unvalued worth, as, first with innocency of life, composed and mixt with rare ingredients, of mercy, truth, and love, as also with rare wisdome and understanding, so that he did know the composition, and secret natures of all the creatures in the world, and so was able to give them names according to their nature, and so he did; thus in∣ternally and externally was this Round-head qualified with Admirable Wisdom, Beauty, Comelines and strength. Sixtly, for his number and increase: why; for his increase of number it was but small, excellent for qua∣lity, but few for quantity, in regard as the time now is and ever was, but here & there one; excellent and exqui∣site things being alwayes scant, and rarest to be found, and that is the thing, together with their secret vertue,
that makes them be of such account with those that knowes their worth, which knowledge of them, as they are, it is only in God and amongst themselves, for foo∣lish shagpole locusts have no knowledge of their excel∣lencie, nor are no more able to discerne their splendor, then a blind man that never saw the Sun, is able to judge or discerne the glory of the illustrious beauty of the Sun. Seaventhly, of the Round-heads use, what is he use∣full for? the Round-heads use is manifold, of many sorts and kinds, but all for good; and first to set forth the splendid glory of the justice of God, his grace ma∣nifested to them in the face and favour of Iesus Christ, but never unto the shag-pole locusts. Secondly, to set or shew forth the vertues of Iesus Christ, the se∣cond person in the trinity, that hath therefore called these Round-heads out of darkenesse into light; that they should shew forth his vertues, and so they do as on the contrary the shag pole shews forth the vices of the devill. Their third use is to be store houses of wis∣dom; their fourth use to be temples of the living God. Fiftly, to be teachers and instructers of men for the praise and glory of God, his secrets being made known unto them only. Sixtly, to denounce his judgments against the world, Revel: 18. about the begining, for these Round-heuds are called his Angels, Revel: 2. Angell being a name of office, not of nature alwayes. Seaventhly, they are usefull to keep off his judgments sometimes from the shag pole, as that Round-head Lot while he was among the shag-pole locusts Sodo∣mites, the fire and brimstone could not come down to burne them; as also here in England, how does these
Round-heads keep off the pestilence, sword, and famine from the shag poles here, and are the causes that many temporall blessings doth come upon them, which not∣withstanding these shag pole locusts know, that it is for their sakes that they receive these benefits, yet they cannot endure them. Eightly, & lastly, what is the finall end of the Round-heads? their finall end next the glory of God is the sal∣vation of his own soule, his finall is the redemption from all miseries in this mortall life here and for ever hereafter, which no shag pole locust must injoy, his fi∣nall end is to be a King, to raign with Christ for ever, to be an heire with Christ, an inheritour and possesser of all things wth him to all eternity; as also to praise and glorifie God for ever in an everlasting state of bles∣sednesse in the highest heaven, out of which all slander∣ous lying, scorning, barking, shag pole locusts must be shut, Revel: 22. ver. 15. without shall be dogs, shag pole locusts, he means inchanters, whoremongers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loveth lies or makes lies, be they Preists, or Pesants, or whatsoever. And thus have we finished your Round-head. The second generall head to be handled is your shag pole locusts originall when it was. Your shag pole locusts originall was the opening of the bottomlesse pit, Rev: 9: the smoaky pit, out of that smoake; came those shag pole locusts that weare hair like women, which was long after the making of the Round-heads; therefore are they of no such anti∣quity as your Round-heads are: and therefore accor∣ding to your own rules are not so honorable as your Round-heads are.
Secondly, the place where they were made: why, they were made in the bottomlesse pit, as is above men∣tioned, they came out of the bottomlesse pit, at the place from whence they came, there were they made. Thirdly, by whom were they made? why, by the devill the father of all slanderers and lyers, such as these locusts are, whether locusts teachers, or locusts hearers, who made them all in uncomly, and in unman∣ly order, for they had haire like women, faces like men, and teeth like a Lyon, Revel. 9: vers. 7,8. all like deformed monsters, aswell in-side as out-side, exceeding bad and vile, full of confusion and deformed disorder as well the Preists as people. Fourthly, of what made? why, as first his case or out∣side he is made of dust as your Round-head is, although he knowes it not as your Round-head doth, but for his pitch or in-side it is semines incuba, or spermes diablus, he is made of the seed or spane of the devil, he is of his fa∣ther the devil; as concerning his constitution of his mind, murtherers and lyers are they, and so is he. Fiftly, how are they qualified? why, clean contrary to your Round-heads, not with innocency of life, but with nocency, with grosse and palpable ignorance and blindnesse in spirituall and heavenly things, full of con∣ceitednesse of having that which they are utterly emp∣tie of, but being full indeed of the spirit: now I know to heare the name of spirit, will vexe them, for they de∣fie such as are full of the spirit; but to quiet them a little, I give them to understand, that that spirit which they meane, is not the spirit I meane, the spirit that I meane here that they are filled with; is the spirit of lying, and slandering, and false accusing of the Round-heads,
the spirit of whoredom and unsatiable lust, the spirit of envy, malice and murther, of drunkennesse, epi∣curisme, and all maner of loose prophaneness, the spirit of hatred against the appearance of any goodnesse, though never so little, for they love nothing almost but profit, impiety, like the devil himself, which rains ef∣fectually in them, and he it is that hath thus qualified them, and which hath also blinded them in their judg∣ments, that they cannot discern the nature and diffe∣rence of things, but judge good to be evil, and evil to be good, Iohn 16. 1, 2. They shall excommunicate you, and he that kills you shall think he does God good ser∣vice: whether this be so or no, I refer you to your selves, all you shag-poll Locusts. Sixtly, for their number and increase, it is wonder∣full, in number they exceed the Round-heads, to speak comparatively, more then the Muscetoes and Flyes ex∣ceeds in number the Eagles, they darken the light of the Sun with their multitude, as did the Flyes of Egypt. They are not rare to be found, as are the Eagles and the Round-heads, there are whole swarms of them in every place; and as hurtfull and troublesome to your Round-heads in old England, as your Muscetoes are to your Round-heads in New-England, and every way as evil to be dealt withall, for the more you strive to beat them off, the more they muster and swarm about you, so that there is no way of quietnesse for a Round-head, but to avoid them. Seventhly, for their use, that also is divers, but ten∣ding all to hurt, yet contrary to their mindes it effects good, not to themselves, but to the Round-heads, whom their whole intent and desire is to hurt. Now their
first use is, to afflict the Round-heads, which if your shag-poll did know, what good they did unto your Round-heads, by afflicting of them, by their wrongs and injuries they do unto them, then would they never do it to them; for first, they teach them experience of the worlds vanity; secondly, they make them weary of the world, and weane them from the love of the world, the love thereof would be their destruction; thirdly, they make them by these their out-ragious wrongs and injuries they do unto them, more splendid, bright, and lovely in the sight of God and good men; fourthly, by the shag-polls hatred of them, they come to have cer∣tain knowledge, that God loves them, which otherwise they could not have; for if the shag-poll Locusts loved them, it were a certain sign they were hated of God, for your shag-poll loves none but such as God hates; fifthly, they increase the Round-heads glory in heaven, for the more they scorn them here, the more shall they be honoured there; sixtly, the shag-polls, by reason of their out-ragious wrongs and injuries that they do un∣to the Round-heads, they make this world a hell unto these Round-heads, wherein these shag-polls like de∣vils do torment them, so that they shall have no hell hereafter, as your shag-polls shall; other sorts of uses that they serve for is, first, to make vessels of disho∣nour; secondly, to declare the justice of his wrath up∣on, and to teach the Round-heads, that though he do spare for a time his and their enemies, that yet he will not alwayes spare them; and lastly, to be such fire∣brands of hell, as shall never be taken forth. Eightly and lastly, of their finall end, their finall end next to the glory of the justice of Gods wrath, is
to be damned, for their end is damnation, they minde nothing but earthly things, their God is their belly, they glory in shamefull things, their conversation is not in heaven, therfore by God his definitive sentence, their finall end is damnation. And thus much for your Round-heads and your Shag-polls. Onely this by the way of Advertisement to the ho∣nest-hearted Christian Reader, that though some do either through ignorance, or some infirmity occasio∣ning, weare their hair longer then may in some mens judgements seem fitting, for men professing themselves to be Christians to wear; know you that we intend not a definitive sentence against any particular person for wearing of their hair, but yet do wish them for the better informing of their judgements, to consider the Apostles rule concerning hair, in 1 Cor. 11.14. where he may have full satisfaction; and further also, we give you to understand, that we are so far off from a parti∣cular sentence, that we beleeve that there are many a∣mong the Long-heads, that may belong unto the Round-heads, and that may in time declare themselves; and this also, that there are many Locusts among the Round-heads, that now seem to be Round-heads, yet are not so, and will declare themselves to be but Locusts; yet not withstanding that, all that weare long hair are not Locusts; as also, all that weare not long hair, are not Round-heads, yet is long hair the visible sign or mark to distinguish a Locust, Rev. 9. 8. and they had hair like women. FINIS.
Not long agone a Champion came from Hell, To bid defiance to the host of Heaven: But with the Puritans he hath no minde to deal, Because with them to no end he hath striven. A Periwig in stead of Helmet on his head he wears, To prove, if he by that can hide his Midas ears. His armour loose Prophanenesse is, and Hatred strong, Disdain, contempt of God and goodnesse all; Murtherous desire, by him retained long: By which at last he hope to make to full The Puritan, which now he Round-head call: A term, by which he thinks to overthrow, And beat all goodnesse from the earth below. By this design, he doubts not, but to stop The breath and life of goodnesse in this land; And spoil that strength that Puritans have got, And by this title Round-head, to set all good at stand: But silly Long-head, that hair is not thine own, 'Tis but some harlots, though by thee its worn.
