S5401 13385798 99347
STELLA MERIDIANA CAROLI Secundi Regis, &c. VERSES Written 31 years since, upon the Birth and Noon-day Star of CHARLES, born Prince of Great Brittaine; the 29. of May 1630. Our now Miraculously Restored, and Glo∣riously Crowned, CHARLES the Second of Great Britain, France and Ireland KING, &c. By severall Persons of Honour. LONDON, Printed for T. Basset in S. Dunstans Church yard in Fleetstreet. 1661.
Vpon the 29. of May 1630. being our Gracious King CHARLES the Second his happy Birth-Day, being a Feria, and no Commemoration of any Saint for that Day. THe Holy Ghost, which guides the Church her Way, Admits no Saint an Office on this Day. But by Divine fore-sight reserv'd this room To be supply'd by one that was to come; Which is fulfil'd, for now the thankful Earth Shall keep it holy for this Prince his Birth. By the Lord Windsor. HE that observ'd this Dayes Nativity, Had sure the Spirit in't of Prophecy, Divining above thirty years before, It should be kept for Holy evermore. And now by Parliament confirm'd appears A Holy Office for this Day all years. What in this Calender before was blanck Shall bear a Rubrick from hencefore to thank
Almighty God, honour our KING, and pray, In His blest Reign to Centuply this Day: A Day whose Blessings none too high can sing; That brought us first our Prince, and next our King; And with him came to three orn Kingdomes Peace, Whose Name and presence did our Woes Release: For which Te Deum, and all praise be given; Let Hymns and Authems eccho up to Heaven. Iames Parry. KING CHARLES the First (of ever blessed Memory) went to S. Pauls Church the 30. day of May 1630. to offer there, and to give praise and thanks to God for the Birth of his Son, our now most Gracious King Charles the Second, (born the 20. of the same May) attended with all his Peers, and a most Royal Train, where a bright Star appeared at High Noon in the presence and sight of all. Sir William Iones sitting in the same seat with Serjeant Hoskins, and both of them beholding the Star with admiration; Sir William Iones, said Judge Hoskins, (who was a very learned and ingenuous Poet) Brother, here is a fair Subject for you to write some thing upon. Who then composed these Verses following, which were presented to the Kings Majesty the same day at Dinner.
DVm Rex Paulinas accessit gratus ad Aras, Emicuit medio, lucida stella Die. Die mihi Divinus tractans AEnigmata preco, Hac nobis hodie, Quid sibi stella velit? Magnus in Occiduo, Princeps modo nascitur Orbe Crasque subAn Eclipse of the Sun next day. Eclipsin Regna Orientis erint. Jo. Hoskins Servi. ad Legem. Englished. WHilst to the Altar of Saint Paul the KING Approached with a gratefull Offering, A Star at Noon appear'd; tell me Divine, That preachest Riddles, why it then did shine? I'th' Western World aMagnus Princeps, here he was stiled Great at his Birth. Great Prince newly born; And th' East to morrow in Eclipse shall mourn.
Some further Observations on the same Subject, written the same time by James Parry, Esq TIs not fit any should conceal What God from high doth here reveal, When by strange language of the Skies He Thunders Ears, and Stars our Eies; For by most high Prognosticks God Forewarns his Mercies and his Rod. A Star appearing at High Noon, And in Highest glory face the Sun. For Doctor Don saies, The Stars be (By light he lends) his Com'naltie. And in the presence of his Rayes 'Pear not but in Ecliptick dayes. This Noon-bright Star doth therefore show Somethng above what man can know. King, Church, Peers, Citizens discern'd This Star at once, and all concern'd. Pray God no fiery spirits high Disturb our peacefull Monarchy. God's Tabernacle's in the Sun, As clear's his Truth, when some Stars run Erring in Opposition, ill Aspects That oft produce as ominous Effects; But God's true Church shall be in sight By him maintain'd whilst Sol hath light, 'Gainst which Hell Gates shall ne'r prevail: Who promis'd it can never fail.
Pray Heaven th' Eclipse that doth attend, No future troubles may portend. Clouds cause dark dayes. Eclipses fears, When past the Sun more bright appears. But gracious CHARLES (best King on earth) Here gives God praise for his Sons birth, Who sends his Star at Noon to shine, And pose the riddleing Divine. The Sun's height then makes me presage, This Prince at his Meridian Age Shall shine in Glory most renown'd, And in his perfect Age be Crown'd Great Brittain's King, and all restore That Church, Peers, Gentry lost before. B'ingHactenus Anglorum nulli was the Motto on the Med∣dals, made in memory of Prince CHARLES his Birth-day the 29. of May 1630. upon them, &c. And since Cadwallader, the last King of the Britains, none born Prince of Great Britain, but only this our now most great and gracious King CHARLES the Second, whom God blesse and preserve with long and most hap∣py Reign. Amen. first born Prince of Britain since The blest Cadwallader went hence. And this the Nation to advance, Be second Charlemain of France.
Somewhat more on the Text and Eclipse observed. TH' Eclipse follow'd the Birth too near, wherefore Some wish'd it had been thirty years before, That the Saturnian malevolence Might have been wasted, and quite vanisht hence. The Text was Sampsons Riddle intricate, And puzled with his Audience too great State, In Scruples of his Text the man was maz'd, And with the presence daunted as he gaz'd. The King commanding no new Text should be, Nor other preach that day but only He Appointed was before, and be content At that time with the Pulpits Accident. The business fraught with much dark my stery Of a dead Lion,Sampsons Riddle. a strange History, In which a Commonwealth of Bees did build, Their waxed Garison with Honey fill'd, Suck'd from the flow'ry Meads, and seem'd to thrive, Having that Princely Carkas for their Hive, And arm'd with stings Levellers seem'd to be Their Houses equal, all of like degree. But had not there their Parliament enjoy'd, Had not Mishaur the Lion King destroy'd, But were at last discover'd in full season, And lost their lives, and all they got for Treason. I.P.
THere was a Lawdress had imbezzled a Jewel (that had been Queen Annes,) and had got it altered, and sold it to our Queen. The late King Charles of blessed memory (who had an excellent judgement in all things) knew the precious Stone. The Woman was dismissed; and in further fear of danger, she got this Petition put into our then Prince Charles his hand, being an Infant before he could speak. REad Royal Father, mighty King, What my little hand doth bring. I, whose happy birth imparts Joy to all true Subjects hearts, Though an Infant, dod not break Natures Laws, if now I speak By this Interpreter, for one Whose face doth blush and heart doth groan For her acknowledged offence, Who only found my Innocence To gain her Mercy; she is bold, O may it some proportion hold; If to the Father she doth run By mediation of the Son. To whom a Star God also gave In token I was born to save. If therefore, O my Royal Sir, My first request may purchase her Restoring to your Grace, to me (Though yong) it will an honour be When in my Cradle it was said, I Master of Requests was made. Ia. Sherley.
I Heard it credibly reported by a Person of Quality, that King Charles the first, of blessed memory; (the Mirrour of Princes for Piety and Patience) being in his bed in Christ church in Oxford, and a Candle burning in the Chamber, as the Order was; the King being awake, (who did meditate much, and sleep little) saw that the Candle was gone out of a sudden; whereupon the King calls to a Great Peer of eminent office, that lodged in the Chamber, and told him the Candle was gone out, and it was so, and all dark; the Lord wondred at it, and said, he would call to have it lighted again; but His Majesty bad him let it alone and take his rest: a good while after the King wakens him again, and shewed him the Candle lighted again of it self. The Lord suspected some Witchcraft; but the King said, I see I shall suffer detriment, but Charles my Son shall shine again. And His Majesty commanded the Noble-man not to speak of it whilst the King lived. A remarkable strange light seen about the time of the Kings Martyrdom. ABout the time King Charles was hence enspher'd, A wonderfull strange Light that Mouth appear'd, Six miles from Hereford, where is a Park, Through which the Owner riding in the dark,
And his man with him: from the Earth did rise A Light that with amazement did surprise The two Beholders, and in quantity Like the Moon Orb'd in full serenety, And from the ground ascended to the sky, Which there receiv'd it up immediately. They were not frighted with the glorious shine, But home they rid, and told what they had seen. The name of Morehampton the place doth bear, I'th' Golden Valley, and my Neighbor near. A person wise and grave, of honesty, Not to report or speak but verity. To kill a King is Deicide, Cristicide, Regicide, Paricide, and Ho∣micide. J. Speed, in his Chron. Bloud is a Crying sin; but that of Kings Cries lowdest, and to certain ruine brings. Ia. Howell, in his Inquisition after bloud. And till his Murderers come to Justice hand, The stain and scandal lies on all this Land; Though those that sign'd and seal'd his blest bloud spilt, Yet on the Nation they laid all the guilt. He was the Common Father of us all: And Duty bids us loud for justice call. Let some Lords, Priests, Cits, Lawyers, men oth' Blade, Of all sorts some be now a Victim made. I. P. FINIS.
