w2400 99833510 37987
His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Munday the Twelfth day of November, 1694. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1694.
His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT. My Lords and Gentlemen, I Am Glad to Meet you here, when I can say, Our Affairs are in a better Posture both by Sea and Land, than when We parted last. The Enemy has not been in a Condition to Oppose Our Fleet in these Seas, and Our sending so great a Force into the Mediter∣ranean, has Disappointed their Designs, and leaves us a Prospect of further Success. With Respect to the War by Land, I think I may say, That this Year a Stop has been put to the Progress of the French Arms. Gentlemen of the House of Commons, I have had so much Experience of your good Af∣fection to Me, and of your Zeal for the Publick,
that I cannot Doubt of your Assistance at this time I do therefore earnestly Recommend to you, to Pro∣vide such Supplies as may Enable Me to Prosecute the War with Vigour; which is the only means to Procure Peace to Christendom, with the Safety and Honour of England. I must likewise put you in mind that the Act of Tunnage and poundage Expires at Christmas; and I hope you will think fit to Continue that Revenue to the Crown, which is the more Necessary at this time, in regard the several Branches of the Revenue are under great Anticipations, for Extraordinary Ex∣pences of the War, and Subject to many Demands upon other Accounts. I cannot but Mention to you again, the Debt for the Transport Ships imployed in the Reducing of Ireland, which is a Case of Compassion, and deserves Relief. My Lords and Gentlemen, I should be Glad you would take into your Consi∣deration the Preparing some good Bill for the Encourage∣ment of Our Seamen: You cannot but be Sensible, how much a Law of this Nature would tend to the Ad∣vancement of Trade, and of the Naval Strength of the Kingdom, which is Our Great Interest, and ought to be Our Principal Care. FINIS.
