W2551 16285527 105252
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION. WILLIAM R. WHereas in Order to the Holding a Correspondence with Their Majesties Enemies, and the Carrying on other Wicked and Treasonable Designs, divers Passes, and also divers Warrants for Seising of Persons have been Forged, and thereto the Hand and Seal of Daniel Earl of Nottingham, Their Majesties Principal Se∣cretary of State have been Counterfeited, by Means whereof not only the Peace of the Kingdom may be Disturb'd, but great Danger may Ensue to Their Majesties Royal Persons, unless some Speedy and Publick Notice be given of the said Fogeries: Their Majesties therefore, with the Advice of Their Privy Council, have thought fit by this their Royal Proclamation to Notifie the Premisses to all Their Loving Subjects. And to the End they may not hereafter be Deceived or Imposed upon by such Forged War∣rants or Passes, the Impression of the said Counterfeited Seal is De∣scribed, and Imprinted in the Margin of this Their Majesties Proclamation. And for the future and more certain Avoiding the Mischiefs which may be Occasioned by the said Forgeries, and lest well-meaning Persons may be Deceived by any Resemblance betweén the said Counterfeit Seal and the True and Real Seal formerly made use of (Their Majesties said Principal Secretary of State having, by Their Erpress Command, Caused a New Seal of a different Impression to be Prepared, which is to be Vsed for the Future) Their Majesties do by this Their Proclamation, with the Advice of Their Privy Council, Revoke and Discharge all Passes, and all Warrants whatsoever for Apprehending or Seising any Person or Persons heretofore Sealed with any Seal which shall Resemble the Im∣pression made in the Margin of this Proclamation, hereby Willing and Requiring all Iustices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs and Officers belonging to the Ports, and all other Officers and Persons whatsoever, to take Notice hereof, and Commanding them, and every of them upon their Duty and Allegiance, That they do not at any time hereafter Yield Obedience to any Warrants or Passes whatsoever, which shall be Sealed with the said Counterfeit Seal, or any Seal which shall Resemble the said Impression in the Margin hereof. And also that they and every of them do use their utmost Endeavours to Apprehend and Seise such Persons as shall use or produce any of the said Counterfeit Warrants or Passes, and cause them to be Committed to the next Goal, there to remain until they shall be delivered by due Course of Law: And that as soon as such Person shall be Apprehended, they do give Notice thereof immediately to Their Majesties, or Their Privy Council, or to Their Principal Secretary of State. And Their Majesties are Graciously Pleased hereby to Promise and Declare, That whosoever shall Discover any Person who has beén Guilty of making or Forging the said Counterfeit Warrants or Passes, or of Dispersing or Vsing the same, so as such Person may be Convicted by due Course of Law, shall have and receive as a Reward for such good Service, immediately upon the Conviction of any such Offen∣der the Sum of Five hundred Pounds. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Ninth Day of March 1692/3. In the Fifth year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceas'd. Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1692/3.
