W2766 12202433 56130
A KEY into the LANGUAGE OF AMERICA: OR, An help to the Language of the Natives in that part of AMERICA, called NEW-ENGLAND. Together, with briefe Observations of the Cu∣stomes, Manners and Worships, &c. of the aforesaid Natives, in Peace and Warre, in Life and Death. On all which are added Spirituall Observations, Generall and Particular by the Authour, of chiefe and speciall use (upon all occasions,) to all the English Inhabiting those parts; yet pleasant and profitable to the view of all men: BY ROGER WILLIAMS of Providence in New-England. LONDON, Printed by Gregory Dexter, 1643.
To my Deare and Welbeloved Friends and Counrey-men, in old and new ENGLAND. I Present you with a Key; I have not heard of the like, yet fra∣med, since it pleased God to bring that mighty Continent of America to light: Others of my Coun∣trey-men have often, and excellently, and lately written of the Countrey (and none that I know beyond the goodnesse and worth of it.) This Key, respects the Native Language of it, and happily may unlocke some Ra∣rities concerning the Natives themselves, not yet discovered. I drew the Materialls in a rude lumpe at Sea, as a private helpe to my owne memo∣ry, that I might not by my present ab∣sence
lightly lose what I had so dearely bought in some few yeares hardship, and charges among the Barbarians; yet being reminded by some, what pitie it were to bury those Materialls in my Grave at land or Sea; and withall, remembring how oft I have been importun'd by worthy friends, of all sorts, to afford them some helps this way. I resolved (by the assistance of the most High) to cast those Materialls into this Key, pleasant and profitable for All, but spe∣ally for my friends residing in those parts: A little Key may open a Box, where lies a bunch of Keyes. With this I have entred into the secrets of those Countries, where ever English dwel about two hundred miles, betweene the French and Dutch Plantations; for want of this, I know what grosse mis-takes my selfe and others have run into. There is a mixture of this Language North and South, from the place of my abode, about six hundred miles; yet with∣in the two hundred miles (aforementi∣oned)
their Dialects doe exceedingly dif∣fer; yet not so, but (within that compasse) a man may, by this helpe, converse with thousands of Natives all over the Countrey: and by such converse it may please the Fa∣ther of Mercies to spread civilitie, (and in his owne most holy season) Christianitie; for one Candle will light ten thousand, and it may please God to blesse a little Leaven to season the mightie Lump of those Peoples and Territories. It is expected, that having had so much converse with these Natives, I should write some litle of them. Concerning them (a little to gratifie expectation) I shall touch upon foure Heads: First, by what Names they are distin∣guished. Secondly, Their Originall and Descent. Thirdly, their Religion, Manners, Cu∣stomes, &c. Fourthly, That great Point of their Con∣ersion. To the first, their Names are of two sorts:
First, those of the English giving: as Na∣tives, Salvages, Indians, Wild-men, (so th Dutch call them Wilden) Abergeny men, Pa∣gans, Barbarians, Heathen. Secondly, their Names, which they giv themselves. I cannot observe, that they ever h (before the comming of the English, Frenc or Dutch amongst them) any Names t difference themselves from strangers, fo they knew none; but two sorts of nam they had, and have amongst themselves. First, generall, belonging to all Native as Ninnuock, Ninnimissinnûwock, Enisk tompawog, which signifies Men, Folke,  People. Secondly, particular names, peculi to severall Nations, of them amongst the selves, as, Nanhigganēuck, Massachusêu Cawasumsêuck, Cowwesēuck, Quintikó Qunnipiēuck, Pequóog, &c. They have often asked mee, why w call them Indians Natives, &c. And  derstanding the reason, they will ca themselues Indians, in opposition to E glish, &c.
For the second Head proposed, their Originall and Descent. From Adam and Noah that they spring, it is granted on all hands. But for their later Descent, and whence they came into those pars, it seemes as hard to finde, as to finde the Wellhead of some fresh Streame, which running many miles out of the Countrey to the salt Ocean, hath met with many mixing Streames by the way. They say themselves, that they have sprung and growne up in that very place, like the very trees of the wildernesse. They say that their Great God Cawtan∣towwit created those parts, as I observed in the Chapter of their Religion. They have no Clothes, Bookes, nor Letters, and conceive their Fathers never had; and therefore they are easily perswaded that the God that made English men is a grea∣ter God, because Hee hath so richly en∣dowed the English above themselves: But when they heare that about sixteen hun∣dred yeeres agoe, England and the Inha∣bitants thereof were like unto themselves,
and since have received from God, Clothes, Bookes, &c. they are greatly affected with a secret hope concerning themselves. Wise and Iudicious men, with whom I have discoursed, maintaine their Original to be Northward from Tartaria: and at my now taking ship, at the Dutch Plantation, it pleased the Dutch Governour, (in some discourse with mee about the Natives), to draw their Line from Iceland, because the name Sckmakan (the name for an Indian Prince, about the Dutch) is the name for▪ Prince in Iceland. Other opinions I could number up: under favour I shall present (not mine opinion, but) my Observations to the judgement of the Wise. First, others (and my selfe) have con∣ceived some of their words to hold affini∣tie with the Hebrew. Secondly, they constantly annoint their heads as the Iewes did. Thirdy, they give Dowries for their wives, as the Iewes did. Fourthly (and which I have not so ob∣served
amongst other Nations as amongst the Iewes, and these:) they constantly se∣perate their Women (during the time of their monthly sicknesse) in a little house alone by themselves foure or five dayes, and hold it an Irreligious thing for either Father or Husband or any Male to come neere them. They have often asked me if it bee so with women of other Nations, and whether they are so separated: and for their pra∣ctice they plead Nature and Tradition. Yet againe I have found a greater Affinity of their Language with the Greek Tongue. 2. As the Greekes and other Nations, and our selves call the seven Starres (or Charles Waine the Beare,) so doe they Mosk or Paukunnawaw the Beare. 3. They have many strange Relations of one Wetucks, a man that wrought great Miracles amongst them, and walking upon the waters,, &c. with some kind of broken Resemblance to the Sonne of God. Lastly, it is famous that the Sowwest (Sowaniu) is the great Subject of their dis∣course.
From thence their Traditions. There they say (at the South-west) is the Court of their great God Cautántouwit: At the South-west are their Forefathers soules: to the South-west they goe themselves when they dye; From the South-west came their Corne, and Beanes out of their Great God Cautántowwits field: And indeed the fur∣ther Northward and Westward from us their Corne will not grow, but to the South∣ward better and better. I dare not con∣jecture in these Vncertainties, I believe they are lost, and yet hope (in the Lords holy season) some of the wildest of them shall be found to share in the blood of the Son of God. To the third Head, con∣cerning their Religion, Customes, Man∣ners &c. I shall here say nothing, because in those, 32. Chapters of the whole Book, I have briefly touched those of all sorts, from their Birth to their Burialls, and have endeavoured (as the Nature of the worke would give way) to bring some short Observations and Applications home to Europe from America.
Therefore fourthly, to that great Point of their Conversion so much to bee longed for, and by all New-English so much pre∣tended, and I hope in Truth. For my selfe I have uprightly laboured to suite my endeavours to my pretences: and of later times (out of desire to attaine their Language) I have run through vari∣eties of Intercourses with them Day and Night, Summer and Winter, by Land and Sea, particular passages tending to this, I have related divers, in the Chapter of their Religion. Many solemne discourses I have had with all sorts of Nations of them, from one end of the Countrey to another (so farre as opportunity, and the little Language I have could reach.) I know there is no small preparation in the hearts of Multitudes of them. I know their many solemne Confessions to my self, and one to another of their lost wandring Conditions. I know strong Convictions upon the Con∣sciences of many of them, and their desires uttred that way.
I know not with how little Knowledge and Grace of Christ the Lord may save, and therefore neither will despaire, nor re∣port much. But since it hath pleased some of my Worthy Country-men to mention (of late in print) VVequash, the Peqt Captaine, I shall be bold so farre to second their Rela∣tions, as to relate mine owne Hopes of Him (though I dare not be so confident as others. Two dayes before his Death, as I past up to Qunnibicut River, it pleased my worthy friend Mr. Fenwick whom I visi∣ted at his house in Say-Brook Fort at the mouth of that River) to tell me that my old friend VVequash lay very sick: I desi∣red to see him, and Himselfe was pleased to be my Guide two mile where VVequash lay. Amongst other discourse concerning his sicknesse and Death (in which hee freely bequeathed his son to Mr. Fenwick) I clo∣sed with him concerning his Soule: Hee told me that some two or three yeare be∣fore
he had lodged at my House, where I acquainted him with the Condition of all mankind, & his Own in particular, how God created Man and All things: how Man fell from God, and of his present Enmity against God, and the wrath of God against Him untill Repentance: said he your words words were never out of my heart to this pre∣sent; and said hee me much pray to Iesus Christ: I told him so did many English, French, and Dutch, who had never turned to God, nor loved Him: He replyed in broken English: Me so big naughty Heart, e heart all one stone! Savory expressions using to breath from compunct and broken Hearts, and a sence of inward hardnesse and unbro∣kennesse. I had many discourses with him in his Life, but this was the summe of our last parting untill our generall meeting. Now because this is the great Inquiry of all men what Indians have been con∣verted? what have the English done in those parts? what hopes of the Indians receiving the Knowledge of Christ! And because to this Question, some put
an edge from the boast of the Jesuits in Canada and Maryland, and especially from the wonderfull conversions made by the Spaniards and Portugalls in the West-In dies, besides what I have here written, a also, beside what I have observed in th Chapter of their Religion! I shall fur∣ther present you with a briefe Additio∣nall discourse concerning this Grea Point, being comfortably perswaded tha that Father of Spirits, who was graciousl pleased to perswade Iaphet (the Gentiles to dwell in the Tents of Shem (the Iewes will in his holy season (I hope approach ing perswade, these Gentiles of Ameri to partake of the mercies of Europe, a then shall bee fulfilled what is writte by the Prophet Malachi, from the risin of the Sunne in (Europe) to the going dow of the same (in America) my Name sha great among the Gentiles.) So I desire  hope and pray, Your unworthy Country-man ROGE WILLIAMS
Directions for the use of the LANGUAGE. 1. A Dictionary or Grammer way I had consideration of, but purposely avoided, as not so accommodate to the Benefit of all, as I hope this Forme is. 2. A Dialogue also I had thoughts of, but avoi∣ded for brevities sake, and yet (with no small paines) I have so framed every Chapter and the matter of it, as I may call it a Implicite Dialogue. 3. It is framed chiefly after the Narroganset Dialect, because most spoken in the Countrey, and yet (with attending to the variation of peoples and Dialects) it will be of great use in all parts of the Countrey. 4. Whatever your occasion bee either of Travell, Discourse, Trading &c. turne to the Table which will direct you to the Proper Chapter. 5. Because the Life of all Language is in the Pro∣nuntiation, I have been at the paines and charges to Cause the Accents, Tones, or sounds to be affixed, (which some understand, according to the Greeke Language, Acutes, Graves, Circumflexes) for ex∣ample,
in the second leafe in the word Ewò He: the sound or Tone must not be put on E, but wò where the grave Accent is. In the same leafe, in the word Ascowequássin, the sound must not be on any of the Syllables, but o quáss, where the Acute or sharp sound is. In the same leafe in the word Anspaumpmaûn. tam, the sound must not be on any other syllable but Maûn, where the Circumflex or long sounding Accent is. 6. The English for every Indian word or phrase stands in a straight line directly against the Indi∣an: yet sometimes there are two words for the same thing (for their Language is exceeding copious and they have five or six words sometimes for one thing) and then the English stands against them both: for example in the second leafe, Cowaunckamish & Cuckquénamish. I pray your Favour.
AN Helpe to the native Language of that part of America called NEW-ENGLAND. CHAP. I. Of Salutation. Observation. THe Natives are of two sorts, (as the English are.) Some more Rude and Clownish, who are not so apt to Salute, but upon Salutation resalute lovingly. Others, and the generall, are sober and grave, and yet chearfull in a meane, and as ready to begin a Salutation as to Resalute, which yet the English generally begin, out of desire to Civilize them.
What cheare Nétop? is the generall salutatio of all English toward them, Nétop is friend. Netompaüog Friends. They are exceedingly delighted with Salutations in their own Language. Neèn, Keèn, Ewò, I, you, he. Keén ka neen You and I. Asco wequássin   Asco wequassunnúm∣mis Good morrow. Askuttaaquompsin? Hou doe you? Asnpaumpmaûntam I am very well. Taubot paump maúntaman I am glad you are well. Cowaúnckamish My service to you Observation. This word upon speciall Salutations the use, and upon some offence conceived by th Sachim or Prince against any: I have seen th party reverently doe obeysance, by stroking the Prince upon both his sholders, and usin this word, Cowaúnckamish & Cuckquénamish I pray your favour. Cowaúnkamuck He salutes you. A spaumpmáuntam sachim How doth the Prince
Aspaumpmáuntam Committamus? How doth your Wife? Aspaumpmaúntam∣wock cummucki∣aûg? How doth your children? Konkeeteâug They are well. Táu bot ne paump maunthéttit I am glad they are well. Túnna Cowâum   Tuckôteshana Whence come you. Yò nowaûm I came that way. Náwwatuck nôte∣shem I came from farre. Mattaâsu nóteshem I came from hard by. Wêtu An House. Wetuômuck nōte shem I came from the house. Acâwmuck notéshem I came over the water. Otàn A Towne. tânick notéshem I came from the Towne. Observation. In the Narigánset Countrey (which is the chief people in the Land:) a man shall come to many Townes, some bigger, some lesser, it may be a dozen in 20. miles Travell.
Observation. Acawmenóakit Old England, which is a much as from the Land on 'other side: hardl are they brought to believe that that Wate is three thousand English mile over, or there abouts. Tunnock kuttòme Whither goe you? Wékick nittóme To the house. Nékick To my house. Kékick To your house. Tuckowekin Where dwell you? Tuckuttin Where keep you? Matnowetuómeno I have no house. Observation. As commonly a single person hath n house, so after the death of a Husband o Wife, they often break up house, and liv here and there a while with Friends, to all a their excessive Sorrowes. Tou wuttîin? Where lives he? Awânick ûchick Who are these? Awaùn ewò? Who is that? Túnna úmwock?   Tunna Wutshaûock Whence come they? Yo nowêkin I dwell here. Yo ntîin I live here.
Eîu or Nnîu? Is it so? Nùx Yea. Mat nippompitám∣men I have heard nothing. Wésuonck A name. Tocketussawêitch What is your name? Taantússawese? Doe you aske my name? Ntússawese I am called, &c. Matnowesuonckane I have no name. Observation. Obscure and meane persons amongst them have no Names: Nullius numeri, &c. as the Lord Jesus foretells his followers, that their Names should be cast out, Luk. 6. 22. as not worthy to be named, &c. Againe▪ because they abhorre to name the dead (Death being the King of Terrours to all naturall men: and though the Natives hold the Soule to live ever; yet not holding a Resurrection, they die, and mourn without Hope.) In that respect I say, if any of their Sáchims or neigh∣bours die who were of their names, they lay down those Names as dead. Now ánnehick now∣ésuonck I have forgot my Name. Which is common amongst some of them, this being one Incivilitie amongst the more
rusticall sort, not to call each other by their Names, but Keen, You, Ewò He, &c. Tahéna What is his name? Tahossowêtam What is the name of it Tahéttamen What call you this? Teaqua What is this? Yò néepoush Stay or stand here. Mattapsh Sit down. Noonshem   Non ânum I cannot. Tawhitch kuppee yaúmen What come you for? Téaqua kunnaūnta men What doe you fetch? Chenock cuppeeyâu mis? When came you? Maish-kitummâyi Iust even now. Kitummâyi nippeé∣am I came just now. Yò Committamus? Is this your Wife? Yo cuppáppoos Is this your Child? Yô cummuckqua∣chucks Is this your Son? Yò cuttaûnis Is this your Daughter? Wunnêtu It is a fine Child. Tawhich neepou∣weéye an Why stand you? Pucqúatchick? Without dos.
Tawhitch mat pe ti∣teayean? Why come you not in? Observ. In this respect they are remarkably free and courteous, to invite all Strangers in; and if any come to them upon any occasion, they request them to come in, if they come not in of themselves. Awássish Warme you. Máttapsh yóteg Sit by the fire. Tocketúnnawem What say you? Keén nétop? Is it you friend. Peeyàush nétop Come hither friend. Pétitees Come in. Kunnúnni Have you seene me? Kunnúnnous I have seen you. Taubot mequaun namêan I thank you for your kind remembrance. Taûbotneanawáyean I thank you. Taûbotne aunana∣mêan I thank you for your love. Observ. I have acknowledged amongst them an heart sensible of kindnesses, and have reaped kindnesse again from many, seaven yeares af∣ter, when I my selfe had forgotten, &c. hence
the Lord Jesus exhorts his followers to do good for evill: for otherwise, sinners will do good for good, kindnesse for kindnesse, &c. Cowàmmaunsh I love you. Cowammaûnuck He loves you. Cowámmaus You are loving. Cowâutam? Vnderstand you? Nowaûtam I understand. Cowâwtam tawhit∣che nippeeyaûmen Doe you know why I come. Cowannantam Have you forgotten? Awanagusàntowosh Speake English. Eenntowash Speake Indian. Cuthanshishaùmo How many were you in Company? Kúnnishishem? Are you alone? Nnishishem I am alone. Naneeshâumo There be 2. of us. Nanshwihâwmen We are 4. Npiuckshâwmen We are 10. Neesneechecktashaû∣men We are 20. &c. Nquitpausuckowash∣âwmen We are an 100. Comishoonhómmis Did you come by boate? Kuttiakewushaùmis Came you by land? Mesh nomishoon hómmin I came by boat.
Meshntiauké wushem I came by land. Nippenowàntawem I am of another language Penowantowawhet∣tûock They are of a divers language. Mat nowawtau hetté mina We understand not each other. Nummaúchenèm? I am sicke. Cummaúchenem? Are you sicke? Tashúckqunne cum mauchenaùmis How long have you been sicke? Nummauchêmin or Ntannetéimmin I will be going. Saûop Cummauchê∣min You shall goe to morrow. Maúchish or ànakish Be going. Kuttannáwshesh Depart. Mauchéi or anittui He is gone. Kautanaûshant He being gone. Mauchéhettit or Kautanawshawhettit When they are gone. Kukkowêtous I will lodge with you. Yò Cówish Do, lodge here. Hawúnshech Farewell. Chénock wonck cup peeyeâumen? When will you be here againe? Nétop tattà My friend I can not tell. From these courteous Salutations Observe in generall: There is a savour of civility and
courtesie even amongst these wild Americans, both amongst themselves and towards stran∣gers. More particular: The Courteous Pagan shall condemne Uncourteous Englishmen, Who live like Foxes, Beares and Wolves, Or Lyon in his Den. Let none sing blessings to their soules, For that they Courteous are: The wild Barbarians with no more Then Nature, goe so farre: If Natures Sons both wild and tame. Humane and Courteous be: How ill becomes it Sonnes of God To want Humanity? CHAP. II. Of Eating and Entertainment. AScúmetesimmis? Have you not yet eaten Matta niccat∣tuppúmmin I a not hungry. Niccawkatone I am thirstie. Mannippéno? Have you no water? Nip. or nipéwese Give me some water. Nmitch, commete∣immin Stay, you must eat first.
Téaquacumméich What will you eat? Nókehick. Parch'd meal which is a readie very wholesome food, which they eate with a little water, hot or cold; I have travelled with neere 200. of them at once, neere 100. miles through the woods, every man carrying a little Basket of this at his back, and sometimes in a hollow Leather Girdle a∣bout his middle, sufficient for a man three or foure daies: With this readie provision, and their Bow and Arrowes, are they ready for War, and tra∣vell at an houres warning. With a spoonfull of this meale and a spoonfull of water from the Brooke, have I made many a good dinner and supper. Aupúmmineanash. The parch'd corne. Aupúminea-naw∣aùmp. The parc'd meale boild with water at their hou∣ses, which is the whole∣somest diet they have. Msickquatash. Boild corne whole. Manusqussêdash. Beanes. Nasàump. A kind of meale pottage, unpartch'd. From this the English call their Samp, which is the Indian corne, beaten and boild, and eaten hot or cold with milke or butter, which are
mercies beyond the Natives plaine water, and which is a dish exceeding wholesome for the English bodies. Puttuckqunnēge. A Cake. Puttuckqunnêgunash puttuckqui. Cakes or loves round. Teâgun kuttie maûnch? What shall I dresse fr you? Assámme. Give me to eate. Ncàttup. I am hungrie, Wúnna ncáttup. I am very hungry. Nippaskanaûn tum. I am almost starved. Pautous notatàm. Give me drinke. Sókenish. Powre forth. Cosaûme sokenúm mis. You have powred out too much. Wuttàttash. Drinke. Nquitchetàmmin. Let me taste. Quitchetash. Taste. Sanqui nip? Is the water coo Saun kopaûgot. Coole water. Chowhêsu. It is warme, Aquie wutt ttash. Doe not drinke. Aquie waúmatous. Doe not drinke all. Necwni mèich teàqua. First eat something: Tawhitch mat me chóan. Why eat you not?
Wussaume kusópita. It is too hot. Teâguun numméitch What shall I eate? Mateàg keesitauano? Is there nothing ready boyld? Ma teag mécho ewò. He eats nothing. Cotchikésu assamme. Cut me a piece. Cotchekúnnemi wee yoùs. Cut me some meat. Metesittuck. Let us goe eate. Pautiinnea méchi∣mucks. Bring hither some victu∣alls. Numwautous. Fill the dish. Mihtukmécha kick. Tree-eaters. A people so called (living be∣tween three and foure hundred miles West in∣to the land) from their eating only Mihtūch∣quash, that is, Trees: They are Men∣eaters, they set no corne, but live on the bark of Ches∣nt and Walnut, and other fine trees: They dry and eat this bark with the fat of Beasts, and somtimes of men: This people are the terrour of the neighbour Natives; and yet these Re∣bells, the Sonne of God may in time subdue. Mauchepweéean. After I have eaten. Maúchepwucks. After meales. Maúchepwut. When he hath eaten. Paúshaqua maúchep∣wut. After dinner.
Wàyyeyant maúche∣pwut. After supper. Nquittmaûntash. Smell. Weetimóquat. It smells sweet. Machemóqut. It stinks. Weékan. It is sweet. Machppoquat. It is sowre. Auwusse weékan. It is sweeter. Askùn. It is raw. Noónat. Not enough. Wusàume wkissu. Too much either boyled or rosted. Waûmet Taûbi. It is enough. Wuttattumutta. Let us drinke. Neesneechàhettit taúbi. Eenough for twentie men. Mattacuckquàw. A Cooke. Mattacúcquass. Cooke or dresse. Matcuttassamiin? Will you not give me to eate? Keen méitch. I pray eate. They generally all take Tobacco; and it is commonly the only plant which men labour in; the women managing all the rest: they say they take Tobacco for two causes; first, against the rheume, which cavseth the tooth∣ake, which they are impatient of: secondly, to revive and refresh them, they drinking no∣thing but water.
Squuttame. Give me your pipe. Petasinna, or, Wut∣tàmmasin. Give mee some Ta∣bacco. Ncattaûntum, or, Ncàttiteam. I long for that. Màuchinaash nowé∣piteass. My teeth are naught. Nummashackqune aûmen. Wee are in a dearth. Mashackquineâug. We have no food. Aúcuck. A Kettle. Mishquockuk. A red Copper Kettle. Nétopkuttàssammish. Friend, I have brought you this. Quàmphash quamp∣homiinea. Take up for me out of the pot. Eippoquat. It is sweet. Teàqua aspúckquat? What doth it taste of? Nowétipo. I like this. Wenómeneash. Grapes or Rayfins. Waweécocks. Figs, or some strange sweet meat. Nemaúanash. Provision for the way. Nemauaninnuit. A snapsacke. Tackhummin. To grind corne. Tackhumiinnea. Beat me parch'd meale. Pishquéhick. Vnparch'd meale. Nummaùchip nup mauchepúmmin. We have eaten all.
Cowàump? Have you enough? Nowâump. have enough. Mohowaúgsuck, or, Mauquuog, from móho to eate. The Canibals, or, Men eaters, up into the we two, three or foure hu∣dred miles from us. Cummóhucquock. They will eate you. Whomsoever commeth in when they ar eating, they offer them to eat of that whic they have, though but little enough prepar for themselves. If any provision of fish  flesh come in, they make their neighbou partakers with them. If any stranger come in, they presentl give him to eate of what they have; many  time, and at all times of the night (as I hav fallen in travell upon their houses) when no thing hath been ready, have themselves an their wives, risen to prepare me some r∣freshing. The observation generall from their eating. &c. It is a strange truth that a man shall general∣ly finde more free entertainment and refresh ing amongst these Barbarans, then among thousands that call themselves Christians.
More particular: Course bread and water's most their fare, O Englands diet fine; Thy cup runs ore with plenteous store Of wholesome beare and wine. Sometimes God gives them Fish or Flesh, Yet they're content without; And what comes in, they part to friends and strangers round about. Gods providence is rich to his, Let none distrustfull be; In wildernesse, in great distresse, These Ravens have fed me. CHAP. III. Concerning Sleepe and Lodging. NSowwushkâwmen I am weary. Nkàtaquaum. I am sleepie. ukkovetoùs. Shall I lodge here? o nickowémen? Shall I sleepe here? ukkowéti. Will you sleepe here? Wunnégn, cówish. Welcome, sleepe here. ummouaquômen. I will lodge abroad.
Puckquátchick nick∣ouemen. I will sleepe without th the doores, Which have knowne them contentedly doe, by a fi under a tree, when sometimes some Engli have (for want of familiaritie and languag with them) been fearefull to entertaine the In Summer-time I have knowne them ly abroad often themselves, to make roome f strangers, English, or others. Mouaquómitea. Let us lye abroad. Cowwêtuck. Let us sleepe. Kukkouene? Sleepe you? Cowwêke. Sleepe, sleepe. Cowwêwi. He is a sleepe. Cowwêwock. They sleepe. Askukkówene? Sleepe you yet? Takitippocat. It is a cold night. Wekitppocat. It is a warme night. Wauwháutowaw án∣awat, & Wawhau∣towâvog. Ther is an alarme, o there is a great shou ing: Howling an shouting is their Alarme; they having n Drums nor Trumpets: but whether an en∣mie approach, or fire breake out, this Alarm passeth from house to house; yea, commo∣ly, if any English or Dutch come amongst the they give notice of strangers by this signe; y I have knowne them buy and use a Dut
Trumpet, and knowne a Native make a good Drum in imitation of the English. Matannauke, or Mat∣tannàukanash A finer sort of mats to sleep on. Mask tuash Straw to ly on. Wuddúckqunash ponamauta Let us lay on wood. This they doe plentifully when they lie down to sleep winter and summer, abundance they have and abundance they lay on: their Fire is instead of our bedcloaths. And so, themselves and any that have occasion to lodge with them, must be content to turne often to the Fire, if the night be cold, and they who first wake must repaire the Fire. Mauataúnamoke Mend the fire. Mauataunamútta Let us mend the fire. Tokêtuck Let us wake. As kuttokēmis Are you not awake yet Tókish, Tókeke Wake wake Tókinish Wake him. Kitumyái tokéan As soone as I wake. Ntunnaquômn I have had a good dream Nummattaquômen I have had a bad dream. When they have a bad Dreame, which they conceive to be a threatning from God, they fall to prayer at all times of the night, especi∣ally early before day: So Davids zalous heart
to the true and living God: At midnight wil rise &c. I prevented the dawning of the day, &c. Psal. 119. &c. Wunnak ukkussa quaum You sleep much. Peeyanntam He prayes. Peeyauntamwock The pray. Tunna kukkowemis here spt you? Awan wck kuk∣kouēmis At whose house did you sleep? I once travailed to an Iland of the wildest i our parts, where in the night an Indian (as he said) had a vision or dream of the Sun (whom they worship for a God) darting a Beam into his Breast which he conceived to be the Messenger or his Death: this poore Native call'd his Friends and neighbours▪ and prepa∣red some little refreshing for them, but him∣selfe was kept waking and Fasting in grea Hmiliations and Invocations for 10. daye and nights: I was alone (having travailed from my Barke the wind being contrary) and little could I speake to them to their understand∣ings especially because of the change of ther Dialect or manner of Speech from our neigh∣bours: yet so much (through the help of God I did speake of the True and living only Wis God▪ of the Crcation: of Man, and his fal
from God, &c. that at parting many burst forth, Oh when will you come againe, to bring us some more newes of this God? From their Sleeping: The Observation generall. Sweet rest is not confind to soft Beds, for, not only God gives his beloved sleep on hard lodgings: but also Nature and Custome gives sound sleep to these Americans on the Earth, on a Boord or Mat. Yet how is Europe bound to God for better lodging, &c. More particular. God gives them sleep on Ground, on Straw, on Sedge Mats or Bord: When English softest Beds of Downe, sometimes no sleep affoord. I have knowne them leave their House and Mat to lodge a Friend or stranger, When Iewes and Christians oft have sent Christ Jesus to the Manger. 'Fore day they invocate their Gods, though Many, False and New: O how should that God worshipt be, who is but One and True?
CHAP. IIII. Of their Names. NQuit One Neèsse 2. Nish 3. Yoh 4. Napànna 5. Quta 6. énada 7. Shwósuck 8. Paskúgit 9. Piuck 10. Piuck nabna quit 11. Piucknab nèese 12, Piucknab nish 13, Piucknab yòh 14, Piucknab napànna 15, Piucknab naqútta 16; Piucknab énada 17, Piuck nabna shwó∣suck 18, Piucknab napas∣kugit 19. Neesneēchick 20,
Neesneēchick nab na∣quit, &c. 21, Shwinckeck 30, &c. Swincheck nab na∣quit, &c. 31, &c. Yowinicheck 40. Yówinicheck nabna qit, &c. 41, &c. Napannetashincheck 50, Napannetashinchek nabna quit 51, &c. Quttatashincheck 60, Quttatashincheck nab na quit 61, &c. Enadatashincheck 70, Enadatashincheck nabna quit 71, &c. Swoasuck ta shin check 80, Shwoasuck ta shin∣check nebna quit 81, &c. Paskugit tashin∣check, &c. 90, Paskugit tashin check nabna quit, &c. 91, &c. Nquit pâwsuck 100. Nees pâwsuck 200. Shweepâwsuck 300.
Yówe pâwsuck 400, Napannetashe pâw∣suck 500, Quttatashe pâwsuck 600, nadatashepawsuck 700, Shoasucktashe paw∣suck 800, Paskugit tashepâw∣suck 900, Nquittemittànnug 1000, Neese mittnnug 2000, Nishwe mittnnug 3000, Yowe mittànnug 4000, Napannetashemit tannug 5000, Quttatashe mit tàn∣nug 6000, Enadatashemit tàn∣nug 7000, Shoasuck ta she mit∣tánnug 8000, Paskugittashemit tánnug 9000, Piuckque mittánnug 10000, Neesneecheck tashe mittànnug 20000, Shwinchecktashe mittánnug 30000,
Yowincheck tashe∣mittánnug 40000, Napannetashincheck tashemittánnug 50000. Quttatashincheck ta∣shemittànnug 60000. Enadatashincheck tashe mittánnuck 70000. Shoasuck tashincheck tashe mittannug 80000. Pàskugit tashincheck tashe mittannug 90000. Nquit pausuckoemit tànnug, &c. 100000. Having no Letters nor Arts, 'cis admirable how quick they are in casting up great num∣bers, with the helpe of grames of Corne, in∣stead of Europes pens or counters. Numbers of the masculine gender. Pâwsuck 1. Neéswock 2. Skeetomp a Man. huog 3. Yówock 4. Napannetasúog 5. as, Skeetom Paúog, Men. Quttasúog 6. nada tasúog 7. hoasuck tasúog 8.
Paskugit tasúog 9. Prucksúog 10. Prucksúog nabna∣quit 11. Of the Feminine Gender. Pâwsuck 1 N énash 2 Swinash 3 Yowúnnash 4 Napannetashinash 5 as, Wauchò Hll. Wauchóas Hlls. Quttatshinash 6 Enadtashinash 7 Shoasucktashinash 8 Paskugittashinash 9 Piúckquatash 10 Piúckquatash nabna∣quit. 11 From their Numbers, Observation Generall. Let it be considered, whether Tradition of ancient Forefathers, or Nature hath taught them Europes Arithmaticke. Mor particular: Their Braines are quick, their hands, Their feet, their tongues, their eyes:
God may fit objects in has time, To those quicke faculties. Objects of higher nature make them tell, The holy number of his Sons Gospel: Make them and us to tell what told may be; But stand amazed at Eternitie. CHAP. V. Of their relations of consanguinitie and affinitie, or, Blood and Marriage. NNin-nninnuog, & keétomp-aûog Man-men Squàws-suck. Woman-women. Kichize, & An old man, Kichîzuck Old men. Hômes. & An old man, Hômesuck Old men. Kutchinnu A middle-aged-man. Kutchinnuwock. Middle-aged-men. Wuskeène A youth, Wskeeneésuck. Youths. Wénise & An old woman. Wenîsuck Old women. attaûntum Very old und decrepit.
Wâsick. An Husband. Weéwo, & Mittúmmus, & Wullógana A Wife. Nowéewo, My Wife. Nummittamus, &c.   Osh. A Father. Nòsh My father. Còsh Your father. Cuttòs? Have you a fathee? Okásu, & Witchwhaw A mother. Nókace nitchwhaw My mother. Wussese An Vnckle. Nissesè My Vnckle. Papoòs, A childe. Nippápoos, & Nummúckiese My childe. Nummúckquáchucks My sonne. Nittaûnis My daughter. Non anese A sucking child. Mucquachuckquê∣mese A little boy. Squsese A little girle. Weémat. A brother. They hold the band of brother-hood so deare, that when one had commited a mur ther and fled, they executed his brother; an
'tis common for a brother to pay the debt of a brother deceased. Neémat My brother. Wéticks, & Weésummis A sister. Wematittuock They are brothers. Cutchashematitin? How many brothers have you? Natòncks My cousin. Kattòncks Your cousin. Watòncks A cousin. Nullóquaso My ward or pupill. Wattonksittuock They are cousins. Kihtuckquaw A virgin marriageable. Their Virgins are distinguished by a bash∣ll falling downe of their haire over their eyes. Towiúwock Fatherlesse children. There are no beggars amongst them▪ nor fa∣therlesse children unprovided for. Tackqiuwock Twins. Their affections, especially to their children, are very strong; so that I have knowne a Fa∣ther take so grievously the losse of his chde, that hee hah cut and stob d himselfe with giefe and rage. This extreme affection, together with want of learning, makes ther children sawcie, bold, and undutifull.
I once came into a house an requested so water to drinke; the father bid his sonne ( some 8. yeeres of age) to fetch some water: t boy refused, and would not stir; I told the f∣ther, that I would correct my child, if he shou so disobey me, &c. Upon this the father to up a sticke, the boy another, and flew at his ∣ther: upon my perswasion, the poor fat made him smart a little threw down his sti and run for water, and the father confessed t benefit of correction, and the evill of their t indulgent affections. From their Relations Observation generall. In the nes of depraved mankinde, are yet be founde Natures distinctions, and Natures ections. More particular: The Pagans wild confesse the bonds Of married chastitie: How vild are Nicolâians that hold Of Wives communitie? How kindly flames of nature burne n wild humanitie? Naturall affections who wants, is sure Fr from Christianity.
Best nature's vaine, he's blest that s made A new and rich partaker Of divine Nature of his God, And blest eternall Maker. CHAP. VI. Of the Family and businesse of the House. VVEtu An House. Wetuômuck At home. Nékick My house. ékick Your house. k ick At his house. Nickquénum. I am going home: Which is a solemne word amongst them; and no man wil offer any hinderance to him, who after some absence is going to visit his Family, and useth this word Nicqunum (con∣fessing the sweetnesse even of these short tem∣orall homes.) uttuckakàun A round house. uttcukakâunese A little round house. etuomémese A little house; which eir women and maids live apart in, four,
five, or six dayes, in the time of their moneth∣ly sicknesse, which custome in all parts of the Countrey they strictly observe, and no Ma may come into that house. Neés quttow A longer house wi two fires. Shwishcuttow With three fires. Abockquósinash The mats of the house. Wuttapuissuck The long poles, which commonly men get and fix, and then the wo∣men cover the house with mats, and lin them with embroydered mats which the wo∣men make, and call them Mannotaúbana, o Hangings, which amongst them make as fair a show as Hangings with us. Nòte, or Yote Chickot & Sqútta Fire. Notáwese & chickau∣tawese A little fire. Púck Smoke. Puckissu Smokie Nippáckis Smoke troubleth me. Wuchickapêuck Burching barke, an Chesout barke which they dresse finely, an make a Summer-covering for their houses. Cuppoquittemin. I will divide house wi you, or dwell with yo
Two Families will live comfortably and vingly in a little round house of some four∣en or sixteen foot over, and so more and ore families in proportion. uckqusquatch I am cold. uckqusquatchimin   otouwassiceuck Let us make a fire. udtuckqun A piece of wood. udtuckquanash Lay on wood. namâuta   wacómwushesh Cut some wood. aumashinnaunam ûta Let us make a good fir. aacómwushem I will cut wood. éneshesh Fetch some small sticks, onck, & ónkatack More. onckataganash àus Fetch some more tashin & newuchá∣hinea, There is no more. equanántash A light fire. quanantig A Candle, or Light. quanantiganash Candles. kinan A light fire. âuo? Who is at home? t Awawanúnno There is no body. appo Kòsh Is your father at home?
Túckiu Sáchim Where is the Sachine? Maapeu He is not at home Pyáu He is come. Wéche-peyàu keé mat Your brother is come with him. Potawash Make a fire. Potauntash Blowe the fire. Peeyâuog They are come Wame paúshe All-some. Tawhitch mat peyá yean Why came, or, come yo not. Mesh noónshem pee∣yaun? I could not come. Mocenanippeéam I will come by and by. Aspeyàu, asquam He is not come yet. Yò autant mèsh nip∣peéam I was here the Sunnes high. And then th point with the hand to the Sunne by who highth they keepe account of the day and b the Moone and Stars by night, as wee doe b clocks and dialls, &c. Wuskont pyauog They will come. Tequa naúntick ewò What comes hee for? Yo ppitch▪ ewò Let him sit there. Unhappò kòsh Is your father at home Unnaugh He is there. Nppeyup nwwot I have long been here.
awhitch pyáuyean. Why doe you come? éaguun kunnaúnta∣mun? What come you for? un ewò? Who is that? owéchiume He is my servant. cum, naus Call fetch. titeaùta Let us goe in. oonapummin auta∣shéhettit There is not roome for so many. ubapimmin Roome enough. oonat Not enough. quam Not yet. m, námitch By and by. ce, unukquaquêse Instantly. ish, kitummy Iust, even now. ckiu, tyu Where. kkekuttokâwmen Would you speake with him? x Yea. ttammâun tam He is busie. top notammâun Friend, I am busie. am   tammâuntam Are you busie? tammish I hinder you. ammúmme tamme You trouble me.
Obs. They are as full of businesse, and as impatient of hinderance (in their kind) as any Merchant in Europe. Nqussûtam I am removing. Notámmehick ewò He hinders me. Maumachuash Goods. Auquiegs Housholdstuffe. Tuckiuash here be they? Wenawwètu Rich. Machêtu Poore. Wenawetuōnckon Wealth. Kúphash Shut the doore. Kuphommin To shut the doore. Yeaush Shut doore after you. Obs. Commonly they never shut thei doores, day nor night; and 'tis rare that an hurt is done. Wunègin Well, or good. Machit Naught, or evill. Cowam? Do you understand? Machug No, or not. Wunnaug A Tray. Wunnauganash Trayes. Kunàm A Spoone. Kunnamâuog Spoones. Obs. In steed of shelves, they have severa baskets, wherein they put all their houshold∣stuffe:
they have some great bags or sacks made of Hempe, which will hold five or sixe bushells. Táckunck, or, Wéskhunck. Their pounding Mor∣ter. Obs. Their women constantly beat all their corne with hand: they plant it, dresse it, ga∣ther it, barne it, beat it, and take as much paines as any people in the world which la∣bour is questionlesse one cause of their extra∣ordinary ease of childbirth. Wunnauganémese A little Tray. Téaqua cunnatinne What doe you looke for? Natinnehas Search. Kekineas See here. Machàge cunna mi∣teôuwin? Doe you find nothing. Wónckatack Another. Tunnati Where. Ntauhaunanatinne∣hommin. I cannot looke or search. Ntauhaunanamiteoû∣win I cannot find. Wiaseck Eiassunck Mocôtick Punnêtunck Chaúqock. A Knife.
Obs. Whence they call English-men Cháu∣quaquock, that is, Knive-men, stone formerly being to them in stead of Knives, Awle-blades, Hatchets and Howes. Namacówhe Lend me your Knife. Cówaseck   Wonck Commêsim? Wil you give it me again? Mátta nowáuwone I knew nothing. Matta nowáhea   Mat meshnowáhea I was innocent. Paútous Pautâuog Bring hither. Maúchatous Carry this. Niâutsh, & Wawhush. Take it on your backe. Obs. It is almost incredible what burthens the poore women carry of Corne, of Fish, of Beanes, of Mats, and a childe besides Awâùn There is some body. Kekineas Goe and see. Squauntâumuck At the doore. Awun ken? Who are you? Ken ntop Is it you. Pauquanaminnea Open me the doore. Obs. Most commonly their houses are o∣pen, their doore is a hanging Mat, which be∣ing lift up, falls downe of it selfe; yet many of them get English boards and nailes, and make artificiall doores and bolts themselves, and
others make slighter doores of Burch or Ches∣nut barke, which they make fast with a cord in the night time, or when they go out of town, and then the last (that makes fast) goes out at the Chimney which is a large opening in the middle of their house, called: Wunnauchicómock, A himney. Anúnema Helpe me. Neenkuttannūmous. I will helpe you. Kuttánnummi? Will you helpe me? Shookekeas Behola here. Nummouekékineam I come to see. Tou autèg Know you where it lies? Tou núckquaque How much? Yo naumwâuteg Thus full. Aquie Leave off, or doe not. Waskche On the top. Naumatuck In the bottome. Aûqunnish Let goe. Aukeeaseu Downewards. Keesuckqiu Vpwards. Aumàunsh Ausàuonsh Aumáunamòke. Take away. Nanóuwetea A Nurse, or Keeper. Naunóuwheant   Nanowwūnemum I looke to, or keepe.
Obs. They nurse all their childrem them∣selves; yet, if she be an high or rich woman, she maintaines a Nurse to tend the childe. Wauchaunama Keep this for me. Cuttatashinnas Lay these up for me. Obs. Many of them begin to be furnished with English Chests; others, when they goe forth of towne, bring their goods (if they live neere) to the English to keepe for them, and their money they hang it about their necks, or lay it under their head when they sleepe. Peewâuqun Have a care. Nnowauchâunum I will have a care. Kuttaskwhè Stay for me. Kuttaa, & Cowauchaunum? Have you this or that? Pokesha, & Pokeshawwa. It is broke. Mat Coanichégane Have you no hands? Tawhitch? Why aske you? Nóonshem Pawuck∣quámmin. I cannot reach. Aquie Pokesháttous. Doe not breake. Pokesháttouwin. To breake. Assótu, & Assóko. A foole. Obs. They have also amongst them natu∣rall fooles, either so borne, or accidentally de∣prived of reason.
Aquie assókish Be not foolish. Awanick Some come. autamwock   uchewannauog They are loden. attapeu & . shenawsui A woman keeping alone in her monethy sick∣nesse. Moce ntúnnan I will tell him by and by. Cowequetúmmous I pray or intreat you. Wunniteóuin To mend any thing. Wunniteous, or, Mend this, Wússiteous. Mend this. Wúskont noche∣muckqun. I shall be chidden. Nickúmmat Easie. uckat Hard. ummequâwname? Do you remember me? Mequaunamiinnea Remember me. Puckquatchick Without doores. Nissawhócunck ewò He puts me out of doores. Kussawhóki? Doe you put mee out of doores? Kussawhocowóog. Put them forth. Tawhitch kussawho∣kiêan? Why doe you put mee out? Swwhush, Goe forth. Swhèke   Wussauhemútta Let us goe forth.
Matta nickquéhick I want it not. Machag nickquehic∣koma. I want nothing. Ob. Many of them naturally Princes, or e industrious persons, are rich; and the poo amongst them will say, they want nothing Pawawash. Drie or ayre this. Pawsunnúmmin. To drie this or that. Cuppausummúnnash Drie these things. Apsumma. Warme this for me. Paucótche Already. Cutsshitteoùs Wash this. Tatágganish Shake this. Napònsh Lay downe. Wuchè machùg About nothing. Puppucksháckhege A Box. Paupaqúonteg A Key. Mowáshuck Iron. Wâuki. Crooked. Saûmpi Strait. Aumpanimmin To undoe a knot. Aúmpanish Vntie this. Paushinûmmin To divide into two. Pepênash Take your choyce. Nawwuttùnsh Throw hither. Pawtáwtees   Negáuowash Send for him. Ngauchhúwash Send this to him.
Nnegâuchemish Hee send to mee. Nowwta No matter. Mauo. To cry and bewaile; hich bewailing is very solemne amongst em morning and evening and sometimes in the night they bewaile their lost husbands, wives, children brethren or sisters &c. Some∣times a quarter, halfe, yea, a whole yeere, and longer, if it be for a great Prince. In this time (unlesse a dispensation be given) they count it a prophane thing either to play (as they much use to doe) or to paint them∣selves, for beauty, but for mourning; or to be angry, and fall out with any, &c. Machemóqut It stincks. Machemóqussu A vile or slinking person. Wúnnickshaas Mingled. Wúnnickshan To migle. ésick, & nashóqua. A Combe. To fall downe. Ntetupshem I fall downe. Tou anúckquaque? How big? Wunnáshpishan To snatch away. Tawhitch wunnash∣pisháyean Why snach you? Wutrush Hitherward, & give me. nèick. or, áwwusse Further. eickomásu, & aw∣wassése. A little further.
Wuttushenaquáish Looke hither. Yo anaquayean. Looke about. Mauks maugoke Give this. Yo comméish I will give you this. Qussucqun-náukon Heavie, light. Kuckqússaqun You are heavie. Kunnauki You are light. Niekattash, singular. Leave, or depart. Nickattammoke, plur.   Nickattamútta. Let us depart. Yówa. Thus. Ntowwaukâumen. Iuseis. Awawkāwni. It is used. Yo awautees. Vse this. Yo wéque. Thus farre. Yo meshnowékeshem I went thus farre. Ayatche, & Conkitchea. as Often. Ayatche nippéeam. I am often here. Pakêtash. Fling it away. Npaketamúnnash. I will east him away. Wutámmasim. Give me Tobaco. Mat nowewuttámmo I take none. Obs. Which some doe not but they are ra Birds; for generally all the men throughou the Countrey have a Tobacco-bag, with a pip in it hanging at their back: sometimes the make such great pipes, both of wood and ston
at they are two foot long, with men or asts carved so big or mafsie, that a man ay be hurt mortally by one of them; but ese comonly come from the Mauquáuwogs,  the Men eaters, three or foure hundred les from us: They have an excllent Art  cast our Pewter and Brasse into very neate nd artificiall Pipes: They take their Wuttam∣uog (tkat is, a weake Tobacco) which the men ant themselves, very frequently; yet I ne∣r see any take so excessively, as I have seene en in Europe; and yet excesse were more lerable in them, because they want the re∣eshing of Beare and Wine, which God hath uchsafed Europe. uttámmagon. A Pipe. opuònck. A Pipe. hicks. A Cocke, or Hen: A ame taken from the English Chicke, because ey have no Hens before the English came. Chicks anawat. The Cocke crowes. Neesquttónckqussu. Ababler, or prater. Cunneesquttonck∣qussimmin. You prate. Obs. Which they figuratively transferre rom the frequent troublesome clamour of  Cocke.
Nanótateem. I keepe house alone. Aquie kuttúnnan. Doe not tell Aquie mooshkishát∣tous. Doe not disclose. Teàg yo augwháttick? What hangs there? Yo augwhattous. Hang it there. Pemisquai Crooked, or winding. Penâyi. Crooked. Nussútam. I remove house: Whic they doe upon these occasions: From thic warme vallies. where they winter, they re move a little neerer to their Summer fields  when 'tis warme Spring, then they remove t their fields where they plant Corne. In middle of Summer because of the abun dance of Fleas, which the dust of the house breeds. they will flie and remove on a sudde from one part of their field to a fresh place  And sometimes having filds a mile or two or many miles asunder. when the worke of one field is over, they remove house to the other: If death fall in amongst them, they prsently remove to a fresh place: If an ene∣mie approach, they remove into a Thicket, or Swampe. unlesse they have some Fort to re∣move unto. Sometimes they remove to a hunting house in the end of the yeere, and forsake it not un-
Snow lie thick, and then will travel home, n, women and children, thorow the snow, rtie, yea, fiftie or sixtie miles; but their at remove is from their Summer fields to rme and thicke woodie bottomes where y winter: They are quicke; in halfe a day, , sometimes at few houres warning to be he and the house up elsewhere. especially,  they have stakes readie pitcht for their ats. I once in travel lodged at a house, at which my returne I hoped to hve lodged againe re the nex night, but the house was gone that interim, and I was glad to lodge un∣ a tree: The men make the poles or stakes, but the men make and set up, take downe▪ order,  carry the Mats and housholdstuffe. Observation in generall. The sociablenesse of the nature of man ap∣ares in the wildest of them, who love so∣tit; Families, cohabitation, and consocia∣ of houses and townes together.
More particular: How busie are the sonnes of men? How full their heads and hands? What noyse and tumults in our owne, And eke in Pagan lands? Yet I have found lesse noyse, more peace In wilde America, Where women quickly build the house, And quickly move away. English and Indians busie are, In parts of their abode: Yet both stand idle, till God's call Set them to worke for God. Mat. 20. 7. CHAP. VII. Of their Persons and parts of body. UPpaquóntup. The head. Nuppaquóntup. My head. Wésheck. The hayre. Wuchechepúnnock. A great bunch of hayre bound up behind. Múppacuck. A long locke.
Obs. Yet some cut their haire round, and some as low and as short as the sober English; yet I never saw any so to forget nature it selfe in such excessive length and monstrous fashi∣on, as to the shame of the English Nation, I now (with griefe) see my Countrey-men in England are degenerated unto. Wuttip. The braine. Ob. In the braine their opinion is, that the soule (of which we shall speake in the Chapter of Religion) keeps her chiefe seat and residence: For the temper of the braine in quick ap∣prehensions and accurate judgements (to say no more) the most high and soveraign God and Creator, hath nt made them inferiour to Europeans. The Mauquaûogs, or Men-eaters, that live two or three miles West from us, make a de∣licious monstrous dish of the head and brains of their enemies; which yet is no barre (when the time shall approach) against Gods call, and their repentance and (who knowes but) a greater love to the Lord Jesus? great sinners forgiven love much. Mscattuck. The fore-head. Wuskeésuck-quash. Eye, or eyes. Tiyùsh kusskeésuck∣quash? Can you not see, or where are your eyes?
Wuchaûn. The nostrills. Wuttóvwogguàsh. Eare, eares. Wuttone. The mouth. Weenat. The tongue. Wépit-teash. Tooth, teeth. Pummaumpiteùnck. The tooth-ake. Obs. Which is the onely paine will force their stout hearts to cry; I cannot heare of any disease of the stone amongst them (the corne of the Countrey, with which they are fed from the wombe, being an admirable cleanser and opener:) but the paine of their womens childbirth (of which I shall speake af∣terward in the Chapter of Marriage) never forces their women so to cry, as I have heard some of their men in this paine. In this paine they use a certaine root dried, not much unlike our Ginger. Schipuck. The necke. Quttuck. The throat. Timeúassin. To cut off or behead. which they are most skilfull to doe in fight: for, when ever they wound, and their arrow sticks in the body of their enemie they (if they be valourous, and possibly may) they follow their arrow, and falling upon the per∣sn wounded and tearing his head a little aside by hi Locke, they in the twinckling of an eye
fetch off his head though but with a sorry knife. I know the man yet living, who in time of warre, pretended to fall from his owne campe to the enemie, proffered his service in the front with them against his own Armie from whence he had revolted. Hee propounded such plausible advantages, that he drew them out to battell himselfe keeping in the front; but on a sudden, shot their chiefe Leader and Captaine and being shot, in a trice fetcht off his head and returned immediatly to his own againe, from whom in pretence (though with this trecherous ntention) hee had revolted: his act was false and trecherous, yet herein appeares policie, stoutnesse and activitie, &c. Mapànnog. The breast. Wuppittene énash. Arme, Armes. Wuttàh. The heart. Wunnêtu nittà. My heart is good. Obs. This speech they use when ever they professe their honestie; they naturally con∣fessing that all goodnesse is first in the heart. Mishquinash. The vaines. Mishquè, néepuck. The blood. Uppusquàn. The backe. Nuppusquànnick. My back, or at my back.
Wunnicheke. Hand. Wunnickègannash. Hands. Mokasfsuck. Nayles. Ob. They are much delighted after battell t0 hang up the hands and heads of their enemies: (Riches, long Life, and the Lives of enemies being objects of great delight to all men na∣turall; but Salomon begg'd Wisedome before these.) Wunnaks, The bellie. Apòme, Apòmash. The thigh, the thighs. Mohcont, tash. A legge, legs. Wussète, tash. A foot, feet. Wunnichéganash. The tes. Tou wuttnsin. What manner of man? Tou núckquaque. Of what bignesse? Womésu, Mowêsu, & Suckêsu. White, Blacke, or swarfish. Obs. Hence they call a Blackamore (them∣selves are tawnie, by the Sunne and their an∣noyntings, yet they are borne white:) Suckáutacone. A cole. blacke man. For, Sucki is black, and Waûtacone, one that weares clothes, whence English, Dutch, French, Scotch, they call Wautaconâog, or Coatmen. Cumminakese. You are strong. Minikêsu. Strong.
Minioquêsu. Weake. Cumminiocquese. Weake you are. Qunnaúqussu. A tall man. Qunnauqussitchick. Tall men. Tiaquónqussu. Low and short. Tiaquonqussichick. Men of lowe stature. Wunnêtu-wock. Proper and personall. The generall Observation from the parts of the bodie. Nature knowes no difference between Eu∣rope and Americans in blood, birth, bodies, &c. God having of one blood made all mankind, Acts 17. and all by nature being children of wrath, Ephes. 2. More particularly: Boast not proud English, of thy birth & blood, Thy brother Indian is by birth as Good. Of one blood God made Him and Thee & All, As wise, as faire, as strong, as personall. By nature wrath's his portiō, thine ne more (store Till Grace his soule and thine in Christ re- Make sure thy second birth, else thou shalt see, Heaven ope to Indians wild, but shut to thee.
CHAP. III. Of Discourse and Newes. AUnchemokau∣hettittea. Let us discourse, or tell newes. Tocketeaunchim? What newes? Aaunchemókaw. Tell me your newes. Cuttanehemókous. I will tell you . Mautaunchemokou∣êan. When I have  the nwes. Cummautaunche∣mókous. I have done my nwes. Obs. Their desire of, and delight in newes, is great as the Atkemans, and all men, more or leste; a stranger that can relate newes in their owne language, they will stle him , a God. Wutaunchēocouôog. I will tell it them. Awaun mesh aunche∣mókau. Who brought this noes? Awaun mesh kuppit∣touwaw. Of whom did you heare it? Uppanáunchim. Your newes is true. Cowawwunnáun∣chim. He tells false newes.
Nummautanùme. I have spoken enough. Nsouwusanneme. I am wery with speaking Obs.  manner is upon any tidings to sit round double or treble or more as their numbers be; I have seene ner a thousand in a round, where  could not well neere halfe so many have siten: Every man hath his pipe of their Tobacco, and a depe silence they make, an attention give to him that speaketh; and many of them will deliver themselves either in a relation of news, or in a consultation with very emphaticall speech and great action, commonly an houre, and sometimes two houres together. Npenowauntawâu∣men. I cannot speak your lan∣guage. Matta nippannawem I lie not. Cuppannowem. You lie. Mattanickogga∣choùsk.   Matntianta∣cómpaw. I am no lying fellow. Matntianta∣sampáwwa.   Achienonumwem. I speake very true. Kukkita. Hearken to me. Kukkakittoùs. I heare you.
Obs. They are impatient (as all men and God himselfe is) when their speech is not at∣tended and listened to. Cuppittous. I understand you. Cowautous.   Machagenowáutam. I understand not. Manowawtawate∣mina. Wee unàestand net each other. Wunnâumwash. Speake the truth. Coanaumwem. You speake true. Obs. This word and and the next are words of great flattery which they use each to other, but constantly to their Princes at their spee∣ches, for which, if they be cloquent, they esteeme them Gods as Heroa among the Iewes. Wunnâumwaw . He speaks true. Cuppannawautous. I doe not believe you. Cuppannawâui▪ Doe you not believe? Nippannawautunek ewo. He doth not believe me. Michéme nippanna∣utam. I shall never believe it. Obs. As one answered me when I had dis∣coursed about many points of God, of the creation. of the soule, of the danger of it, and the saving of it, he assented; but when I spake o the rising againe of the body, he cryed out, I shall never believe this.
Pannóuwa awàun. awaun keesitteóu∣win. Some body hath made this lie. Tattâ Pitch I cannot tell, it may so come to passe. Nni▪ eu. It is true. Mat enâno, or, mat eano. It is not true. Kekuttokâunta. Let us speake together. Kutokash. Speake. Tawhitch mat cut∣tôan? Why speake you not? Teaqua ntúnnawem, or, ntéawem? What should I speake? Wetapmmin. To fit downe. Wetapwâuwwas. Sit and talke with us. Taupowaw. A wise speaker. Enapwáuwwaw, Eississûmo. He speaks Indian. Matta nowawwâuon, matta nowáhea. I know nothing of it. Pitchnowâuwon, I shall know the truth. Wunnaumwâuonck.   Wunnaumwáyean. If he say true. Obs. Canounicus, the old high Sachim of the Nariganset Bay (a wise and peaceable Prince) nce in a solemne Oration to my self, in a so∣emne assembly, using this word, said, I have
never suffered any wrong to be offered to th Englsh since they landed; nor never will:  often repeated this word, , Eng▪ lishman; if the Englishman speake true, if h meane truly, then shall I goe to my grave i peace, and hope that the Engsh and my poste ritie shall live in love and peace togther.  replied, that he had no cause (as I hoped) t question Englishmans,  that i faithfulnesse he having had long experience o their friendlincsse and trustnefle. He tooke sticke, and broke it into ten pieces▪ and relat ten instances (laying downe a sticke to ever instance) which gave him cause thus to fear and say; I satisfied him in some presently, a presented the rest to the Governours of th English, who, I hope, will be far from givin just cause to have  to question thei Wunnaumwâuanck, or faithfulnesse. Tocketunnántum, Tocketunáname, Tocketeántam? What doe you thinke? Ntunnántum, I thinke. Nteántum.   Nánick nteeâtum. I thinke so to. Nteatámmowonck. That is my thought, o opinion. Matntunnantámmen I thinke not so. Matnteeantámmen.  
owecóntam, I am glad. oweeteántam.   oanáumatous. I believe you. Obs. This word they use just as the Greeke ngue doth that verbe, : for believing  obeying as it is often used in the new Te∣meni, and they say Cannáumatous, I will ey you. o aphettit. When they are here. o peyáhettit. When they  cm. his Ablative case absolute they much use, nd comp ise much in little; waunagrss, suck. Engsh-man, men. is they call us, as much as to say, Thee ngers. acone-nûaog. Englishman, men. Tht is▪ Coat-men, or clothed. uquaqock. English-men, properly sword-men. Wautacónisk. An English woman. Wautaconémese. An English youth. Waske peyáeyan. When you came first. Waske peyáhetit, Wautaconâuog. When English-men came first. Tawhitch peyahettit Why come they hither? Obs. This question they oft put to me: Why ome the Englishmen hither? and measuring others by themselves; they say, It is because
you want firing: for they, having burnt up the wood in one place, (wanting draughts to bring wood to them) they are faine to follow the wood; and so to remove to a fresh new place for the woods sake. Matta mihtuckqun∣nūnno? Have you no trees? Mishaunetash, Maunetash. Great slore. Maunâuog, Wussaumemaunâuog They are too full of people. Noonapúock. They have not roome one by another. Aumáumuwaw Páudsha. A messenger comes. Wawwhawtowâuog. They hollow. Wauwhaûtowaw ánawat. 'Tis an Alarme. Obs. If it be in time of warre, he that is a Messenger runs swiftly, and at every towne the Messenger comes, a fresh Messenger is sent: he that is the last, comming within a mile or two of the Court, or chiefe house, he hollowes often and they that heare answer him. untill by mutuall hollowing and answering hee is brought to the place of audience whereby this meanes is gathered a great confluence of peo∣ple to entertaine the newes.
Wussuckwhèke, Wussúckwhonck. A letter which they so call from hommin, to paint; for, having no letters, heir painting comes the neerest. Wussúckquash. Write a Letter. Wussuckwheke, yimmi. Make me a Letter. Obs. That they have often desired of me pon many occasions; for their good and eace, and the English also, as it hath pleased od to vouchsafe opportunitie. uenowâuog. They complaine. Tawhitch quena∣wáyean? Why complaine you? Mucco. It is true you say. Tuckawntéawem? What should I say to it? The generall Observation from their Discourse and Newes The whole race of mankind is generally in∣cted with an itching desire of hearing Newes. more particular: Mans restlesse soule hath restlesse eyes and eares. anders in change of sorrows, cares and feares.
Faine would it (Bee-like) suck by the ears, by the ey Something that might his hunger satisfie: The Gospel, or Glad tidings onely can, Make glad the English, and the Indian. CHAP. IX. Of the time of the day. Obs. THey are punctuall in measuring the Day by the Sunne, and their Night by the Moon and the Starres, and their lying much abroad in the ayre; and so living in the open fields, occasioneth even the youngest among them to be very observant of those Heavenly Lights. Mautáubon, Chich∣áuquat wompan. It is day. Aumpatâuban. It is broad day. Tou wuttúttan? How high is the Sunne  that is, What is't  clocke Paspisha. It is Sunne-rise. Nummáttaquaw. Fore-noone. Yáhen Páushaquaw. Allmost noone. Páweshaquaw. Noone. Quttúkquaquaw Panicómpaw. After dinner.
awwâuwquaw. After-noone. o wututtan The Sunne thus high. ahen waiyàuw. Allmost Sun-set. ayaawi. The Sun is set. unnauquit: Evening. oppakunnetch, au∣chaugotch. Darke night. Tuppaco, & ematippocat. Toward night. anashowatippocat. Midnight. houóeatch. About Cockcrowing. tompanisha Breake of day. ò tàunt nippéean. The Sun thus high, I will come. Obs. They are punctuall in their promises  keeping time; and sometimes have charged ee with a lye for not punctually keeping ime, though hindred. Yo tàunt cuppee∣yâumen Come by the Sunne thus high. amakéesuck. This day. ùop. Tomorrow. uisâume tátsha. It is too late. iaquockaskéesakat. A short day. Quawquonikéesakat. A long day. Quawquonikeesaqút∣cheas. Long dayes.
Nquittakeesiquóckat, Nquittakeespúmmi∣shen. One dayes walke. Paukúnnum. Darke. Wequâi. Light. Wequáshim. Moon-light. The generall observation from their time of the day. The Sunne and Moone, in the observation of all the sonnes of men, even the wildest a the great Directors of the day and night; as  pleased God to appoint in the first Creation. More particular. The Indians find the Sun so sweet, He is a God they say; Giving them Light, and Heat, and Fruit, And Guidance all the day. They have no helpe of Clock or Watch, And Sunne they overprize. Having those artificiall helps, the Sun, We unthankfully despise. (more bright God is a Sunne and Shield, a thousand times Indians, or English, though they see. Yet how few prise his Light?
CHAP. X. Of the season of the Yeere. NQuittaqúnnegat. One day. Neesqúnnagat. 2 dayes. Shuckqunóckat. 3 dayes. Yowunnóckat, &c. 4 dayes. Piuckaqúnnagat. 10 dayes. Piuckaqunnagat nab∣naquit. 11 dayes. Piuckaqúnnagat nab neeze, &c. 12 dayes. Neesneechektashuck qunnóckat. 20 dayes. Neesneechektashuck qunnockat-nabna∣quit &c. 21 dayes. Séquan. The Spring. Aukeeteamitch. Spring, or Seed-time. Néepun, & Quaqusquan. Summer. Taquonck. Fall of leafe and An∣tumne. Papòne. Winter. Saléquacup. This Spring last.
Yo neepunnacup. This Summer last. Yò taquonticup. This Harvest last. Papapôcup. Winter last. Yaûnedg. The last yeere. Nippaûus. The Sunne. Munnánnock.   Nanepaûshat. The Moone. Nqnitpawsuckenpaû∣us. 1 Moneth. Neespausuck npaûus. 2 Moneths. Shwe pausuck npaû∣us &c. 3 Moneths. Neesneáhettit 2 Moneths. Shwinneáhettit. 3 Moneths. Yowinneáhettit, &c. 4 Moneths. Obs. They have thirteen Moneths accordi to the severall Mooes; and they give to ea of them significant names: as, Sequanakeeswush. Spring moneth. Neepunnakéeswush. Summer moneth. Taquontikéeswush. Harvest moneth. Paponakéeswush &c. Winter moneth, &c. Nquittecautúmmo. 1 Yeere. Tashecautúmmo? How many yeeres? Chashecautúmmo cuttappemus? How many yeeres si you were borne? Neesecautummo. 2 Yeere. hwecautúmmo. 3 Yeere.
Yowecautúmmo. 4 Yeere. Piukquecautúmmo. 10 Yeere. Piuckquecautúmmo, nabnaquit, &c. 11 Yeere, &c. Obs. If the yeere proove drie, they have great and solemne meetings from all parts at one high place, to supplicate their gods, and to begaine, and they will continue in this worship ten dayes, a fortnight; yea, three weekes, untill raine come. ashinash papónash? How many winters? hauqushapapòne. A sharpe winter. éesqush keesuck∣quâi. By day. aukocks nokan∣nawi. By night. Generall Observation from their Seasons of the Yeere. The Sunne and Moone, and Starres and sea∣s of the yeere doe preach a God to all the onnes of men, that they which know no let∣rs, doe yet read an eternall Power and God∣ad in these: More speciall. The Sun and Moone and Stars doe preach, e Dayes and Nights sound out:
Spring. Summer, Fall, and Winter eke Each Moneth and Yeere about. 2 So that the wildest sonnes of men Without excuse shall say, Gods righteous sentence past on us, (In dreadfull Iudgement day.) If so, what doome it theirs that see, Not onely Natures light; But Sun of Righteousnesse, yet chose To live in darkest Night? CHAP. XI. Of Travell. Mayi. Away. Mayuo? Is there away? Mat mayanúnno. There is no way. Peemáyagat. A little way. Mishimmayagat. A great path. Machipscat. A stonepath. Obs. It is admirable to see, what paths their naked hardned feet have made in the wilder∣nesse in most stony and rockie places. Nnatotemúckaun. I will aske the way. Kunnatótemous. I will inquire of you. Kunnatotemi? Doe you aske me?
Tou nishin méyi? Where lies the way? Kokotemiinnea méyi Shew me the way. Yo ainshick méyi. There the way lies. Kukkakótemous. I will shew you. Yo cummittamáyon. There is the way you must goe. Yo chippachâusin. There the way divides. Maúchatea. A guide. Máuchase. Be my guide. Obs. The wildernesse being so vast, it is a mercy, that for a hire a man shall never want guides, who will carry provisions, and such as hire them over the Rivers and Brookes, and find out often times hunting-houses, or other lodgings at night. Anoce wenawash. Hire him. Kuttánnoonsh. I will hire you. Kuttaúnckquitta∣unch. I will pay you. Kummuchickónck∣quatous. I will pay you well. Tocketaonekquittiin∣nea. What wil you give me? Cummáuchanish. I will conduct you. Yò aûnta, Let us goe that way. Yò cuttâunan. Goe that way. Yo mtúnnock. The right hand. Yo nmúnnatch. The left hand.
Cowéchaush. I will goe with you. Wétash. Goe along. Cowéchaw ewò. He will goe with you. Cowechauatimmin. I will goe with you. Wechauatittea. Let us accompany. Taûbot wétayean. I thanke you for you company. Obs. I have heard of many English lost, and have oft been lost my selfe, and my selfe and others have often been found, and succoured by the Indians. Pitchcowáwwon. You will lose your way. Meshnowáwwon. I lost my way. Nummauchèmin, Ntanniteimmin. I will be going. Mammauchêtuck. Let us be going. ânakiteunck. He is gone. Memauchêwi anittui.   Memauchegushan∣nick. They are gone. Anakugshánnick. They are gone. Tunnockuttome   Tunnockkuttoyeâim Whither goe you? Tunnockkuttinshem.   Nnegónshem. I will goe before. Cuppompáish. I will stay for you. Negónshesh. Goe before. Mittummayaûcup. The way you went before▪
Cummattanish. I will follew you. Cuppahimmin. Stay for me. Tawhich quaunqua quêan? Why doe you run so? Nowecóntum púm∣mishem. I have a mid to travell Konkenuphshâuta. Let us goe apace. Konkenuppe. Goe apace. Michéme nquaun∣quaquêmin. I have run alwayes. Yo ntoyamâushem. I goe this pace. Obs. They are generally quick on foot, rought up from the breasts to running: their gs being also from the wombe stretcht and ound up in a strange way on their Cradle ackward, as also annointed; yet have they ome that excell: so that I have knowne many f them run betweene fourescoure or an hun∣red miles in a Summers day, and back with∣n two dayes: they doe also practice running f Races; and commonly in the Summer, hey delight to goe without shoes, although hey have them hanging at their backs: they re so exquisitely skilled in all the body and owels of the Countrey (by reason of their untings) that I have often been guided twen∣ie, thirtie, sometimes fortie miles through e woods, a streight course. out of any path.
Yò wuchê. From hence. Tounúckquaque yo wuchê How far from hence? Yò anúckquaque. So farre. Yo anuckquaquêse. So little a way. Waunaquêse. A little way. Aukeewushaûog. They goe by land. Mishoon hómwock. They goe or come by water. Naynayoûmewot. A Horse. Wunnia, naynayoû∣mewot. He rides on Horse-back. Obs. Having no Horses, they covet them above other Cattell, rather preferring ease in riding, then their profit and belly, by milk and butter from Cowes and Goats, and they are loth to come to the English price for any. Aspumméwi He is not gone by. As pumméwock They are not gone by. Awanick payanchick Who come there? Awanick negonshá∣chick? Who are these before us? Yo cuppummesicóm min. Crosse over into the way there. Cuppi-machàug. Thick wood: a Swamp Obs. These thick Woods and Swamps (like the Boggs to the Irish) are the Refuges for Women and children in Warre, whil'st the
men fight. As the Country is wondrous full of Brookes and Rivers, so doth it also abound with fresh ponds, some of many miles com∣passe. Nips-nipsash Pond: Ponds. Wèta: wétedg The Woods on fire. Wussaumpatámmin To view or looke about. Wussaum patámo∣onck. A Prospect. Wuttocékémin To wade. Tocekétuck Let us wade. Tou wuttáuqussin? How deepe? Yò ntaúqussin Thus deep. Kuniish. I will carry you. Kuckqússuckqun You are heavy. Kunnäukon You are light. Pasuckquish Rise. Anakish: maúchish: Goe. Quaquish Runne. Nokus káuatees Meet him. Nockuskauatitea Let us meet. Neenmeshnóckuskaw. I did meet. Obs. They are joyfull in meeting of any in travell, and will strike fire either with stones or sticks, to take Tobacco, and dis∣course a little together.
Mesh Kunnockqus kauatimmin? Did you meet? &c. Yo Kuttauntapim∣min. Let us rest here. Kustackquêtuck. Let us sit downe. Yo appituck Let us sit here. Nistowanis   Nistowanishkaû men. I am weary. Nickqússaqus I am lame. Ntouagonnausinnúm min We are distrest   undone, or in misery. Obs. They use this word properly in wan∣dring toward Winter night, in which case I have been many a night with them, and many times also alone, yet alwayes mercifully preserved. Teâno wonck nippée am I will be here by and by againe. Mat Kunnickansh I will not leave you. Aquie Kunnickat∣shash. Doe not leave me. Tavvhitch nickat shiêan? Why doe you for∣sake me? Wuttánho A staffe. Yò sh Wuttánho Use this staffe.
Obs. Sometimes a man shall meet a lame man or an old man with a Staffe: but gene∣rally a Staffe is a rare sight in the hand of the eldest, their Constitution is so strong, I have upon occasion travelled many a score, yea many a hundreth mile amongst them, without need of stick or staffe for any ap∣pearance of danger amongst them: Yet it is a rule amongst them, that it is not god for a man to travell without a Weapon nor a∣lone. Taquáttin Frost. Auke taquátsha The ground is frozen. Séip taquattin. The River is frozen. Now ánnesin I have forgotten. nippitt akúnna mun. I must goe back. Obs. I once travalled with neere 200 who had word of neere 700. Enemies in the way, yet generally they all resolved that it was a shame to feare and goe back. Nippanishkokómmin Npussago. kommin I have let fall something. Mattaâsu A little way Naûwot. A great way. Náwwatick Farre of at Sea. Ntaquatchuwaûmen I goe up hill.
Taguatchòwash Goe up hill. Waumsu Downe hill. Mauúnshesh Goe slowly or gently. Mauanisháuta Let us goe gently. Tawhitch cheche qunnuwáyean? Why doe you rob me? Aquie chechequn∣núwash. Doe not rob me. Chechequnnuwá∣chick. Robbers. Chechequnnittin There is a Robbery committed. Kemineantúock They murder each other. Obs. If any Robbery fall out in Travell, between Person of diverse States, the offend∣ed State sends for Justice, If no Justice bee granted and recompence made, they grant out a kind of Letter of Mart to take satisfa∣ction themselues, yet they are carefull not to exceed in taking from others, beyond the Proportion of their owne losse. Wúskont àwaùn nkemineiucqun. I feare some will murther mee. Obs. I could never heare that Murthers or Robberies are comparably so frequent, as in parts of Europe amongst the English, French, &c.
Cutchachewussim min. You are almost there. Kiskecuppeeyāu∣men. You are a little short. Cuppeeyāumen Now you are there. Muckquétu Swift. Cummúmmuck∣quete. You are swift. Cussásaqus You are slow. Sassaqushâuog They are slow. Cuttinneapúmmish∣em Will you passe by? Wuttineapum∣mushâuta. Let us passe by. Keeatshaûta. I come for no busines. Ntinneapreyaû∣men In vaine or to no purpose. Acoûwe   Ntackówvvepe∣yaùn. I have lost my labour. Cummautússakou. You have mist him. Kihtummâyi-wus∣sáuhumwi. He went just now forth. Pittúckish. Goe back. Pittuckétuck. Let us goe back. Pónewhush. Lay downe your burtlen.
Generall Observations of their Travell. As the same Sun shines on the Wildernesse that doth on a Garden! so the same faithfull and all sufficient God, can comfort∣feede and safely guide even through a deso∣late howling Wildernesse. More particular. God makes a Path, provides a Guide, And feeds in Wildernesse! His glorious Name while breath remaines, O that I may confesse. Lost many a time, I have had no Guide, No House, but hollow Tree! In stormy VVinter night no Fire, No Food, no Company: In him I have found a House, a Bed, A Table, Company: No Cup so bitter, but's made sweet, VVhen Go'd shall Sweetning be.
CHAP. XII. Concerning the Heavens and Hea∣venly Lights, Kéesuck. The Heavens. Keesucquiu. Heavenward. Auke, Aukeeaseiu. Downwards. Nippâwus. The Sun. Keesuckquànd. A name of the Sun. (Obs.) By which they acknowledge the Sun, and adore for a God or divine power. Munnánnock. A name of the Sun. Nanepaùshat, & Munnánnock. The Moone. Wequáshim. A light Moone. Pashpishea. The Moone is up. Yowuttúttan. So high. Obs. And so they use the same rule, and words for the course of the Moone in the Night, as they use for the course of the Sun by Day, which wee mentioned in the Chapter of the oure, or time of the Day concerning the Sunnes rising, course, or Sunne setting.
Yò Ockquitteunk. A new Moone. Paushésui. Halfe Moone. Yo wompanámmit.   Obs. The Moone so old, which they mea∣sure by the setting of it, especially when it shines till Wómpan, or day. Anóckqus: anócksuck. A Starre Starres. Obs. By occasion of their frequent lying in the Fields and Woods, they much observe the Starres, and theirvery children can give Names to many of them, and observe their Motions, and they have the same words for their rising-courses and setting, as for the Sun or Moone, as before. Mosk or Paukúnawaw the great Beare, or Charles Waine, which words Mosk or Pau∣kúnnawwaw signifies a Beare, which is so much the more observable, because, in most Lan∣guages that signe or Constellation is called the Beare. Shwishcuttowwáuog The Golden Metewand. Mishánnock. The morning Starre. Chippápuock. The Brood-hen, &c. Generall Observations of the Heauenly Bodies. The wildest sons of Men heare the preach∣ing
of the Heavens, the Sun, Moone, and Starres, yet not seeking after God the Maker are justly condemned, though they never have nor despise other preaching, as the ci∣viliz'd World hath done. More particular. When Sun doth rise the Starres doe set, Yet there's no need of Light, God shines a Sunne most glorious, When Creatures all are Night. The very Indian Boyes can give, To many Starres their name, And know their Course and therein doe, Excell the English tame. English and Indians none enquire, Whose hand these Candles hold: Who gives these Stars their Names Iob. 35. More bright'ten thousand fold. (himself
CHAP. XIII. Of the Weather. TOcke tussinnám∣min kéesuck? What thinke you of the Weather? Wekineaûquat. Faire Weather. Wekinnàuquocks. When it is faire weather. Tahki, or tátakki. Cold weather. Tahkeès. Cold, Obs. It may bee wondred why since New-England is about 12. degrees neerer to the Sun yet some part of Winter it is there ordinari∣ly more cold then here in England: the rea∣son is plaine: All Ilands are warmer then maine Lands and Continents, England being an Iland, Englands winds are Sea winds, which are commonly more thick and vapoury, and warmer winds: The Nor-West wind (which occcasioneth New-England cold) comes over the cold frozen Land, and over many milli∣ons of Loads of Snow: and yet the pure wholsomnesse of the Aire is wonderfull, and the warmth of the Sunne, such in the sharp▪ est weather, that I have often seen the Na∣tives Children runne about starke naked in
the coldest dayes, and the Indians Men and Women lye by a Fire, in the Woods in the oldest nights, and I have been often out my elfe such nights without fire, mercifully, and onderfully preserved. Taúkocks. Cold weather. Káusitteks. Hot weather. Kussúttah. It is ht. úckqusquatch nnóonakom. I am a cold. ickqussittâunum. I Sweat. attauqus. A cloud. áttaquat. It is over-cast. úppaquat.   kenun. Raine. ánaquat.   namakéesuck sókenun. It will raine to day. kenitch. When it raines. chepo, or Cône. Snow. nimanâukock-Sóchepo. It will snow to night. chepwutch. When it snowes. ishúnnan. A great raine. uqui, pâuquaquat. It holds up. áppi. Drie. áppaquat. Drie weather. pu. Afrost.
Missittopu. A great Frost. Capat. Ice. Néechipog. The Deaw. Michokat. A Thaw. Michokateh. When it thawes. Missuppâugatch. When the rivers are op Cutshâusha. The Lightning. Neimpâuog. Thunder. Neimpâuog pesk hómwock. Thunderbolts are shot. Obs. From this the Natives conceiving  consimilitude between our Guns and Thun∣der, they call a Gunne Péskunck, and to dis∣charge Peskhommin that is to thunder. Observation generall of the VVeather. That Judgement which the Lord Jesu pronounced against the Weather-wise (bu ignorant of the God of the weather) will fal most justly upon those Natives, and all me who are wise in Naturall things, but willing∣ly blind in spirituall. English and Indians spie a Storme. and seeke a hiding place: O hearts of stone that thinke and dreame. Th'everlasting stormes t'out-face. Proud filthy Sodome saw the Sunne, Shine  her head most bright.
The very day that turn'd she was To stincking heaps, 'fore night. How many millions now alive, VVithin few yeeres shall rot? O blest that Soule, whose portion is, That Rocke that changeth not. CHAP. XIV. Of the Winds. VVAûpi. The Wind. Wâupanash. The Winds. Tashinash waupanash How many winds are there? Obs. Some of them account of seven, some ight, or nine; and in truth, they doe upon he matter reckon and observe not onely the oure, but the eight Cardinall winds, although hey come not to the accurate division of he 32. upon the 32. points of the compasse, as we doe. Nanúmmatin, & Sunnâdin. The North wind. Chepewéssin. The North east. Sáchimoachepewés∣sin. Strong North east wind.
Nopâtin. The East wind. Nanóckquittin The South east wind. Touwuttin South wind. Papônetin West wind. Chékesu The Northwest. Chékesitch When the wind blowe Northwest. Tocketunnántum? What thinke you? Tou pitch wuttin? Where wil the wind be? Nqénouhick wuttin I stay for a wind. Yo pitch wuttin Sâuop Here the wind will be  morrow. Pitch Sowwánishen. It will be Southwest. Obs. This is the pleasingest, warmest wind in the Climate, most desired of the Indians, making faire weather ordinarily; and there∣fore they have a Tradition, that to the South∣west, which they call Sowwaniu, the gods chief∣ly dwell; and hither the soules of all their Great and Good men and women goe. This Southwest wind is called by the New-English, the Sea turne, which comes from the Sunne in the morning, about nine or ten of the clock Southeast, and about South, and then strongest Southwest in the after-noone, and towards night, when it dies away. It is rightly called the Sea turne, because the wind commonly all the Summer, comes
off from the North and Northwest in the ight, and then turnes againe about from the South in the day: as Salomon speaks of the va∣itie of the Winds in their changes, Eccles. 1. 6. Mishâupan A great wind. Mishitáshin A storme. Wunnágehan. or, Wunnêgin waúpi. Faire wind. Wunnêgitch wuttin When the wind is faire. Mattágehan A crosse wind. Wunnagehatch When the wind comes fair Mattágehatch When the wind is crosse. Cowunnagehúcka∣men. You have a faire wind. Cummattagehúcka∣men. The wind is against you. Nummattagehúcka∣men. The wind is against mee. Generall Observations of the Winds. God is wonderfully glorious in bringing the Winds out of his Treasure, and riding up∣on the wings of those Winds in the eyes of all the sonnes of men in all Coasts of the world. More particular: English and Indian both observe, The various blasts of wind:
And both I have heard in dreadfull stormes Cry out aloud, I have sinn'd. But when the stormes are turn'd to calmes, And seas grow smooth and still: Both turne (like Swine) to wallow in, The filth of former will. 'Tis not a storme on sea, or shore, 'Tis not the VVord that can; But 'tis the Spirit or Breath of God That must renèw the man. CHAP. XV. Of Fowle. NPeshawog Pussekesësuck. Fowle. Ntauchâumen. I goe afowling or hun∣ting. Auchaûi. Hee is gone to hunt or fowle. Pepemôi. He is gone to fowle. Wómpissacuk. An Eagle. Wompsacuck quâuog. Eagle.▪
Néyhom, mâuog. Turkies. Paupock, sûog. Partridges. Aunckuck, quâuog. Heath-cocks. Chogan, ēuck. Black-bird, Black-birds. Obs. Of this sort there be millions, which are great devourers of the Indian corne as soon as it appeares out of the ground; Unto this sort of Birds, especially, may the mysticall Fowles, the Divells be well resembled (and so it pleaseth the Lord Jesus himselfe to ob∣serve, Matth. 13. which mysticall Fowle fol∣low the sowing of the Word, and picke it up from loose and carelesse hearers, as these Black-birds follow the materiall seed. Against the Birds the Indians are very care∣full, both to set their corne deep enough that it may have a strong root, not so apt to be pluckt up, (yet not too deep, lest they bury it, and it never come up:) as also they put up little watch-houses in the middle of their fields, in which they, or their biggest children lodge, and earely in the morning prevent the Birds▪ &c. Kokókehom, Ohómous. An Owle. Kaukont▪ tuock. Crow, Crowes. Obs. These Birds, although they doe the corne also some hurt, yet scarce will one Na∣tive
amongst an hundred wil kil them, because they have a tradition, that the Crow brought them at first an Indian Graine of Corne in one Eare, and an Indian or French Beane in another, from the Great God Kautánuwits field in the Southwest from whence they hold came all their Corne and Beanes. Hònck,-hónckock, Wómpatuck-quâuog. Goose, Geese. Wéquash-shâuog. Swans, Swans. Munnùcks-munnùck suck. Brants, or Brantgeese. Quequēcum-mâuog. Ducks. Obs. The Indians having abundance of these sorts of Foule upon their waters, take great pains to kill any of them with their Bow and Arrowes; and are marvellous desirous of our English Guns, powder and shot (though they are wisely and generally denied by the Eng∣lish) yet with those which they get from the French, and some others (Dutch and English) they kill abundance of Fowle, being naturally excellent marks-men; and also more hardned to endure the weather, and wading, lying, and creeping on the ground, &c. I once saw an exercise of training of the English, when all the English had mist the mark
set up to shoot at, an Indian with his owne Peece (desiring leave to shoot) onely hit it. Kitsuog. Cormorants. Obs. These they take in the night time, where they are asleepe on rocks, off at Sea, and bring in at break of day great store of them: Yo aquéchinock. There they swim. Nipponamouôog I lay nets for them. Ob. This they doe on shore, and catch many fowle upon the plaines, and feeding under Okes upon Akrons, as Geese, Turkies, Cranes, and others, &c. Ptowēi. It is fled. Ptowewushannick They are fled: Wunnup,-pash Wing, Wings: Wunnúppanick anawhone Wing-shot: Wuhóckgock ânwhone Body-shot: Wuskówhàn A Pigeon: Wuskowhānannûaog Pigeons: Wuskowhannanaûkit Pigeon Countrie: Obs. In that place these Fowle breed abun∣dantly, and by reason of their delicate Food (especially in Strawberrie time when they pick up whole large Fields of the old grounds of the Natives, they are a delicate fowle, and because of their abundance, and the facility
of killing of them, they are and may be plen∣tifully fed on. Sachim: a little Bird about the bignesse of a swallow, or lesse, to which the Indians give that name, because of its Sachim or Princelike courage and Command over greater Birds, that a man shall often see this small Bird pur∣sue and vanquish and put to flight the Crow, and other Birds farre bigger then it selfe. Sowwánakitauwaw They go to the South ward. That is the saying of the Natives, when the Geese and other Fowle at the approach of Winter betake themselves, in admirable Or∣der and discerning their Course even all the night long. Chepewâukitaûog They fly Northward. That is when they returne in the Spring. There are abundance of singing Birds whose names I have little as yet inquired after, &c. The Indians of Martins vineyard, at my late being amongst them, report generally, and confidently of some Ilands, which lie off from them to Sea, from whence every morn∣ing early, certaine Fowles come and light a∣mongst them, and returne at Night to lodg∣ing, which Iland or Ilands are not yet disco∣vered, though probably, by other Reasons they give, there is Land, &c.
Taûnek-kaûog. Crane, Cranes? Wushówunan. The Hawke. Whch the Indians keep tame about their houses to keepe the little Birds from their Corne. The generall Observation of Fowle. How sweetly doe all the severall sorts of Heavens Birds, in all Coasts of the World, preach unto Men the prayse of their Makers Wisedome, Power, and Goodnesse, who feedes them and their young ones Summer and Winter with their severall suitable sorts of Foode: although they neither sow nor reape, nor gather into Barnes? More particularly: If Birds that neither sow nor reape. Nor store up any food, Constantly find to them and theirs A maker kind and Good! If man provide eke for his Birds, In Yard, in Coops, in Cage. And each Bird spends in songs and Tunes, His little time and Age! What care will Man, what care will God,
For's wife and Children take? Millions of Birds and Worlds will God. Sooner then His forsake. CHAP. XVI. Of the Earth, and the Fruits thereof, &c. Aûke, & Sanaukamuck. Earth or Land. Nittauke Nissa wnâwkamuck. My Land. Wuskaukamuck. New ground. Aquegunnitteash. Fields worne out. Mihtúck-quash. Trees. Pauchautaqun∣nêsash. Branch, Branches. Wunnèpog-guash. Leafe, leaves. Wattap. A root of Tree, Séip. A River. Toyùsk. A bridge. Sepoêse. A little River. Sepoêmese. A little Rivelet. Takêkum. A Spring. Takekummûo? Is there a Spring.
Sepûo? Is there a River? Toyusquanûo. Is there a Bridge. Obs. The Natives are very exact and pun∣ctuall in the bounds of their Lands, belonging to this or that Prince or People, (even to a River, Brooke) &c. And I have knowne them make bargaine and sale amongst them∣selves for a small piece, or quantity of Ground: notwithstanding a sinfull opinion amongst many that Christians have right to Heathens Lands: but of the delusion of that phrase, I have spoke in a discourse concer∣ning the Indians Conversion. Paugautemisk. An Oake. Wómpimish. A Chesnut Tree. Wómpimineash. Chesnutts. Obs. The Indians have an Art of drying their Chesnuts, and so to preserve them in their barnes for a daintie all the yeare. Anáuchemineash. Akornes. These Akornes also they drie, and in case of want of Corne, by much boyling they make a good dish of them: yea some times in plentie of Corne doe they eate these Acornes for a Novelty. Wússoquat. A Wallnut Tree. Wusswaquatómineug. Wallnut. Of these Wallnuts they make an excellent
Oyle good for many uses, but especially for their annoynting of their heads. And of the chips of the Walnut-Tree (the barke taken off) some English in the Countrey make ex∣cellent Beere both for Tast, strength, colour, and in offensive opening operation: Sasaunckapâmuck. The Sassafrasse Tree. Mishquáwtuck. The Cedar tree. Cówaw-ésuck. Pine-young Pine. Wenomesippaguash. The Vine-Tree. Micúckaskeete. A Medow. Tataggoskituash. A fresh Medow. Maskituash. Grasse or Hay. Wékinash-quash. Reed, Reedes. Manisimmin. To cut or mow. Qussuckomineânug. The Cherry Tree. Wuttáhimneash. Strawberries. Obs. This Berry is the wonder of all the Fruits growing naturally in those parts: It is of it selfe Excellent: o that one of the chief∣est Doctors of England was wont to say, that God could have made, but God never did make a better Berry: In some parts where the Natives have planted, I have many times seen as many as would filla good ship with∣in few miles compasse: the Indians bruise them in a Morter, and mixe them with meale and make Strawberry bread.
Wuchipoquáme∣neash. A kind of sharp Fruit like a Barbary in tast. Sasemineash another sharp cooling Fruit growing in fresh Waters all the Winter, Ex∣cellent in conserve against Feavers. Wenomeneash. Grapes. Wuttahimnasippa∣guash. Strawberry leaves. Peshaûiuash. Violet leaves. Nummoúwinneem. I goe to gather. Mowinne-aûog. He or they gather. Atauntowash. Clime the Tree. Ntáuntawem. I clime. Punnoûwash. Come downe. Npunnowaumen. I come downe. Attitaash. Hurle-berries. Of which there are divers sorts sweete like Currants, some opening, some of a bin∣ding nature. Saūtaash are these Currants dried by the Natives, and so preserved all the yeare, whih they beat to powder, and mingle it with their parcht meale, and make a delicate dish which they cal Sautáuthig; which is as sweet to them as plum or spice cake to the English. They also make great use of their Straw∣berries having such abundance of them, ma∣king Strawberry bread, and having no other
Food for many dayes, but the English have ex∣ceeded, and make good Wine both of their Grapes and Strawberries also in some places as I have often tasted. Ewáchim-neash. Corne. Scannémeneash. Seed-Corne. Wompiscannémene∣ash. White seed-corne. Obs. There be diverse sorts of this Corne and of the Colours: yet all of it either boil in milke, or buttered, if the use of it wer knowne and received in England (it is the opi∣nion of some skillfull in physick) it migh save many thousand lives in England, occasio∣ned by the binding nature of English wheat the Indian Corne keeping the body in a con∣stant moderate loosenesse. Aukeeteaûmen. To plant Corne. Outtáunemun. To plant Corne. Anakáusu. A Labourer. Anakáusichick. Labourers. Aukeeteaûmitch. Planting time. Aukeeteáhettit. When they set Corne. Nummautaukeeteaû∣men. I have done planting. Anaskhómmin. To how or break up. Obs. The Women set or plant, weede, and hill, and gather and barne all the corne, and
Fruites of the field: Yet sometimes  an himselfe, (either out of love to h   care for his Children, or being an  an) will help the Woman which (by the ustome of the Countrey) they are n ound to. When a field is to be broken up▪ they  very loving sociable speedy way to disp : All the neighbours men and Women  , fifty, a hundred &c, joyne, and come in to elp freely. With friendly joyning they breake up thir elds, build their Forts, hunt the , op and kill fish in th Rivers, it being true ith them as in all the World in the Affaires  Earth or Heaven: By concord little hings grow great, by discord the greatest ome to nothing Concordiâ parvae res crescunt, iscordiâ magnae dilabuntur. naskhig-anash. How, Howes. naskhómwock. They how. naskhommonteâ∣min. They break for me. naskhomwáutow∣win. A breaking up How. The Indian Women to this day (notwith∣anding our Howes, doe use their naturall owes of shells and Wood.
Monaskúnnemun. To weede. Monaskunnummaù∣towwin. A weeding or broad How. Petascunnemun, To hill the Corne. Kepenúmin & Wutunnemun. To gather Corne. Núnnowwa. Harvest time. Anoùant. At harvest. Wuttúnnemitch-Ewáchim. When harvest is in. Paufinnummin. To dry the corne. Which they doe carefully upon heapes and Mats many dayes, before they barne it up∣covering it up with Maat night, and open∣ing when the Sun is hot. Sokenug. A heap of corne. Obs. The woman of the family will com∣monly raise two or three heaps of twelve fifteene, or twentie bushells a heap, which they drie inround broad heaps; and if she hav helpe of her children or friends much more Pockhómmin. To beat or thrash out. Npockhómmin. I am threshing. Cuppockhómmin? Doe you thrash? Wuskokkamuckóme∣neash. New ground Corne. Nquitawánnanash. One basket fulll. Munnote,-tash. Basket, Baskets.
Máûseck. A great one Peewâsick. A little one. Wusaumepewâsick. Too little. Pokowánnanash Halfe a basket full. Necsowmanash. Two baskets full. Shóanash. Three. Yowanannash. Foure, &c. Aniash. Rotton corne. Wawéekanash. Sweet corne. Tawhitch quitche máuntamen? Why doe you smell to it? Auqúnnash. Barnes. Necawnaúquanash. Old barnes. Askútasquash, their Vine aples, which the English from them call Squashe about the big∣nesse of Apples of severall colours, a sweet, light wholesome refreshing. Uppakumineash. The seed of them. The Observation generall of the Fruits of the Earth. God hath not left himselfe without wit∣in all parts and coasts of the world; the raines and fruitfull seasons, the Earth, Trees, Plants, &c. filling mans heart with food and glad∣nesse, witnesseth against, and condemneth man for his unthankfulnesse and unfruitful∣nesse towards his Maker.
More particular: s thousands since, God gaue command (as we in Scripture find) Earth and Trees & Plants should bring Forth fruits each in his kind. he Wildernesse remembers this, The wild and howling land rs the toyling labour of, The wilest Indians hand. an forgets his Maker, who, am'd him in Righteousnesse. adise in Paradise, now worse hen Indian Wildernesse CHAP. XVII. Of Beasts, &c. nashimwock. Beasts. tasuog. Cattll. This name the Indians give to tame  yea, and Birds also which they keepe  bout their houses:
Muckquashim-wock. Wolves. Moattôqus. A blacke Wolfe. Tummòck quaûog Nóosup Súmhup. paûog. Beaver,-Beavers. Obs. This is a Beast of wonder; for cut∣ting and drawing of great pieces of trees with his teeth, with which, and sticks and earth I have often seen, faire streames and rivers damm'd and stopt up by them: upon these streames thus damm'd up, he builds his house with stories, wherein he sits drie in his cham∣bers, or goes into the water at his pleasure. Mishquashim. A red Fox. Pquawus. A gray Fox. Obs. The Indians say they have black Foxes; which they have often seene, but never could take any of them: they say they are Manittóoes, that is, Gods Spirits or Divine powers, as they say of every thing which they cannot comprehend. Aûsup-pannog. Racoone, Racoones Nkèke, nkéquock. Otter, Otters. Pussoûgh. The wildcat. Ockqutchaun-ng. A wild beast of a reddish haire about the bignesse of a Pig, and rooting like a Pig; from whence they give this name to all our Swine.
Mishánneke-quock. Squirrill, quirrils. Anéqus anéquussuck. A litle coloured Squirril Waûtuckques. The Conie. Obs. They have a reverend esteeme of this Creature, and conceive there is some Deitie in it. Attuck, quock Deere. Noonatch noónat∣chaug. Moosqun. A Fawn. Wawwunnes. A young Bucke. Kutt omp & Paucot∣tawaw. A great Bucke. Aunan quunèke. A D. Qnneq wese. A little young D. Naynayoûmewot. A Horse. Cowsnuck. Cowes. . Goats. Hégsuck. Swine. Pigsuck.   Obs. This Termination suck, is common in their language; and therefore they adde it to our English Cattell, not else knowing what names to give them; Anùm. A Dg. Yt the varietie of their Dialects nd proper speech within thirtie or fort  each of
other, is very great, as appeares in that word, Anùm, The Cowwese Dialect. Ayim, The Narriganset Dialect. Arúm. The Qunnippinck Dialect. Alùm. The Neepmuck Dialect. So that although some pronounce not L, nor R. yet it is the most proper Dialect of other places, contrary to many reports. Enewashim. A Male. Squáshim. A Female. Moos-sóog. The great Oxe, or rather a red Deere. Askùg. A Snake. Móaskug. Black Snake. Sések. Ratile Snake. Natúppwck. hey feed. Téaqua natuphéttit? Wha shall they eat? Natuphéttitch yo sanukamick. Let them feed on this ground. The generall Observation of the Beasts. The Wildernesse is a cleere resemblance of the world, where greedie and furious men persecute and devoure the harmlesse and in∣nocent as the wilde beasts pursue and devoure the Hinds and Roes.
More particular. The Indians, Wolves, yea, Dogs and Swine, I have knowne the Deere devoure, Gods children are sweet prey to all; But yet the end proves sowre. For though Gods children lose their lives, They shall not loose an haire; But shall arise, and judge all those, That now thier Iudges are. New-England's wilde beasts are not fierce, As other wild beasts are: Some men are not so fierce, and yet From mildnesse are they farre. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Sea. VVEchêkum Kitthan. The Sea. Paumpágussit. The Sea-God, or, that name which they give that Deitie or God∣head which they conceive to be in the Sea. Obs. Mishoòn an Indian Boat, or Canow made of a Pine or Oake, or Chesnut-tree: I have seene a Native goe into the woods with his hatchet carrying onely a Basket of Corne
with him, & stones to strike fire when he had feld his tree (being a chesnut) he made him a lit∣tle House or shed of the bark of it, he puts fire and followes the burning of it with fire, in the midst in many places: his corne he boyles and hath the Brook by him, and sometimes angles for a little fish: but so hee continues burning and hewing untill he hath within ten or twelve dayes (lying there at his worke a∣lone) finished, and (getting hands,) lanched his Boate; with which afterward hee ven∣tures out to fish in the Ocean. Mishoonémese. A little Canow. Some of them will not well carry above three or foure: but some of them twenty, thirty, forty men. Wunnauanoûnuck. A Shallp. Wunnauanounuck∣quèse. A Skiffe. Obs. Although themselves have neither, yet they give them such names, which in their Language signifieth carrying Vessells. Kitônuck. A Ship. Kitónuckquese. A little ship. Mishittouwand. A great Canow. Peewàu. A little one. Paugautemissaûnd. An Oake Canow.
Kowawwaûnd. A pine Canow. Wompmissaûnd. A chesnut Canow. Ogwhan. A boat adrift. Wuskon-tógwhan. It will goe a drift. Cuttunnamiinnea. Help me to launch. Cuttunnummútta. Let us launch. Cuttúnnamoke. Launch. Cuttannummous. I will help you. Wutkunck. A paddle or Oare. Namacóuhe cómi∣shoon. Lend me your Boate. Paûtousnenótehunck Bring hither my paddle. Comishoónhom? Goe you by water? Chémosh-chémeck. Paddle or row. Mauminikish & Maumanetepweéas. Pull up, or row lustily. Sepākehig. A Sayle. Sepagehommaûta. Let us saile. Wunnâgehan. We have a faire wind. Obs. Their owne reason hath taught them, to pull of a Coat or two and set it up on a small ole, with which they will saile before a wind ten, or twenty mile, &c. Wauaúpunish. Hoyse up. Wuttáutnish. Pull to you. Nókanish. Take it downe. Pakétenish. Let goe or let slie. Nikkoshkowwaûmen We shall be drown'd.
Nquawu pshâwmen. We overset. Wussaûme peche∣paûsha. The Sea comes in too fast upon us. Maumaneeteántass. Be of good courage. Obs. It is wonderfull to see how they will venture in those Canoes, and how (being oft overset as I have my elfe been with them) they will swim a mile, yea two or more safe to Land: I having been necessitated to passe waters diverse times with them, it hath plea∣sed God to make them many times the in∣struments of my preservation: and when sometimes in great danger I have questioned safety, they have said to me: Feare not, if we be overset I will carry you safe to Land. Paupautuckquash. Hold water. Kinnequass. Steere. Tiáckomme kinni∣quass. Steere right. Kunnosnep. A Killick, or Anchor. Chowwophómmin. To cast over-boord. Chouwóphash. Cast over-board. Touwopskhómmke. Cast anchor. Mishittshin. It is a storme. Awêpesha. It caulmes. Awêpu. A calme. Nanouwashin. A great caulme, Tamóccon. Floud.
Nanashowetamóccon Halfe Floud. Keesaqúshin. High water. Taumacoks. Vpon the Floud. Mishittommóckon. A great Floud. Maūchetan & skàt. Ebb. Mittâeskat. A low Ebb. Awánick Paûdhuck? Who comes there? Obs. I have knowne thirty or forty of their Canowes fill'd with men, and neere as many more of their enemies in a Sea-fight. Caupaūshess.▪ Goe ashoare. Caupaushâuta. Let us goe ashoare. Wusséheposh. Heave out the water. Asképunish. Make fast the Boat. Kspúnsh & Kspune∣moke. Tie it fast. Mauminikish. Tie it hard. Neene Cuthómwock. Now they goe off. Kekuthomwushán∣nick. They are gone already. Generall Observations of the Sea. How unsearchable are the dth of the Wisedome and Power of God in separating from Europe, Asia and  such a mightie vast continent as America i and that for so
many ages? as also, by such a Westerne Oce∣an of about three thousand of English miles breadth in passage over? More particular: They see Gods wonders that are call'd Through dreadfull Seas to passe, In tearing winds and roaring seas, And clames as smooth as glasse. I have in Europes ships, oft been In King of terrours hand; When all have cri'd, Now, now we sinck, Yet God brought safe to land. Alone 'mongst Indians in Canoes, Sometime ore-turn'd, I have been Halfe inch from death, in Ocean deepe, Gods wonders I have seene. CHAP. XIX. Of Fish and Fishing. NAmaùs,-suck. Fish, Fishes. Pauganaùt, tam∣wock. Cod, Which is the first that comes a little be∣re the Spring.
Qunnamáug-suck. Lampries, The first that come in the Spring into the fresh Rivers. Aumsûog, & Munna∣whaeaûg. A Fish somewhat like a Herring. Missúckke-kéquock. Basse. The Indians (and the English too) make a daintie dish of the Uppaquóntup, or head of this Fish; and well they may, the braines and fat of it be∣ing very much, and sweet as marrow. Kaúposh-shaûog. Siurgeon. Obs. Divers part of the Countrey abound with this Fish; yet the Natives for the good∣nesse and greatnesse of it, much prize it, and will neither furnish the English with so many, nor so cheape, that any great trade is like to be made of it, untill the English themselves are fit to follow the fishing. The Natives venture one or two in a Ca∣now, and with an harping Iron, or such like Instrument sticke this fish, and so hale it into their Canow; sometimes they take them by their nets, which they make strong of Hemp. Ashop. Their Nets. Which they will set thwart some little River or Cov wherein they kil Basse (at the fall of the water) with their arrows, or sharp sticks, especially if headed with Iron, gotten from the English, &c.
Aucùp. A little Cove or Creeke. Aucppâwese. A very-little one. Wawwhunnekesûog. Mackrell. Mishquammaūquock. Red fish, Salmon. Oacóntuck. A fat sweet fish, some∣thing like a Haddock. Mishcùp-paûog, Sequanamauquock. Breame. Obs. Of this fish there is abundance which the Natives drie in the Sunne and smoake; and some English begin to salt, both wayes they keepe all the yeere; and it is hoped it may be as well accepted as Cod at a Market, and bet∣ter, if once knowne. Taut-auog. Sheeps-heads. Neeshaūog Sassammaūquock Nquittéconnaog▪ Ecles. Tatackommmâūog. Porpuses. Pótop-pauog. Whales: Which in some placs are often cast up; I have seene some of them, but not above sixtie foot long: The Natives cut them out in severall parcells, and give and send farre and neere for an ac∣ceptable present, or dish. Misêsu. The whole. Poquêsu. The halfe. Waskèke. The Whalebone.
Wussúckqun. A taile. Aumaūog. They are fiishing. Ntaûmen. I am fishing. Kuttaūmen? Doe you fish? Nnattuckqunnūwem. I goe a fishing. Aumáchick, Natuckqunnuwâ∣chick. Fishes. Aumaûi. He is gone to fish. Awacenick kukkatti∣neanaùmen? What doe you fish for? Ashaūnt-teaūg. Lobsters. Opponenaūhock. Osters. Sickisuog. Clams. Obs. This is a sweet kind of shelfish, which all Indians generally over the Countrey, Win∣ter and Summer delight in; and at low wate the women dig for them: this fish, and th naturall liquor of it, they boile, and it make their broth and their Nasaūmp (which is kind of thickned broth) and their bread sea▪ sonable and savory, in stead of Salt: and fo that the English Swine dig and root thes Clams wheresoever they come, and watc the low water (as the Indian women do) there∣fore of all the English Cattell, the Swine (a also because of their filthy disposition) ar
most hatefull to all Natives, and they call em filthy cut throats, &c. équnnock oquaûhock.. A Horse-fish. Obs. This the English call Hens, a little ck shel▪ fiish which the Indians wade deepe d dive for, and after they have eaten the eat there (in those which are good) they eake out of the shell, about halfe an inch  a blacke part of it, of which they make eir Suckaūhock, or black money, which is  them pretious. eteaûhock. The Periwinckle. Of hich they make their Wómpam, or white mo∣y, of halfe the value of their Suckáwhock, or cke money, of which more in the Chapter  their Coyne. mménakiss, mmenakissamen ? Have you taken store? mménakiss. I have taken store. . I have killed many. ge. I have caught none. manep. A fishing-line. manapeash. Lines.
The Natives take exceeding great paine in their fishing, especially in watching thei seasons by night; so that frequently they lay their naked bodies many a cold night on th cold shoare about a fire of two or three stick and oft in the night search their Nets; an sometimes goe in and stay longer in froze water. Hoquaùn aûnash. Hooke, hookes. Peewâsicks. Little hookes. Maúmacocks. Great hookes. Nponamouôog. I set nets for them. Npunnouwaùmen. I goe to search my nets. Mihtúck quashep. An Eele-pet. Kunnagqunneuteg. A greater sort. Onawangónnakaun. A baite. Yo onawangónnatees Bate with this. Moamitteaug. A little sort of fish, halfe as big as Sprats, plentifull in Winter. Paponaumsūog. A winter fish, whic comes up in the brookes and rivulets; so call them Frost fish, from their comming  from the Sea into fresh Brookes, in times  frost and snow. Qunôsuog. A fresh fish; which t Indians break the Ice in fresh ponds, when th take also many other sorts: for, to my kno ledge the Country yeelds many sorts of oth fish, which I mention not.
The generall Observation of Fish. How many thousands of Millions of those under water, sea-Inhabitants, in all Coasts of the world preach to the sonnes of men on shore, to adore their glorious Maker, by pre∣senting themselves to Him as themselves (in a manner) present their lives from the wild Ocean, to the very doores of men, their fel∣low creatures in New England. More Particular. What Habacuck once spake, mine eyes Have often seene most true, The greater fishes devoure the lesse, And cruelly pursue. Forcing them though Coves and Creekes, To leape on driest sand, To gaspe on earthie element, or die By wildest Indians hand. Christs little ones must hunted be Devour'd; yet rise as Hee. And eate up those which now a while Their fierce devourers be.
CHAP. XX. Of their nakednesse and clothing. PAūskesu. Naked. Pauskesitchick Naked men and women. Nipposkiss. I am naked. They have a two-fold nakednesse: First ordinary and constant, when although they have a Beasts skin or an English mantle on, yet that covers ordinarily but their hin∣der parts and all the foreparts from top to toe, (excep their secret parts, covered with a little Apron, after the patterne of their and our first Parents) I say all else open and naked. Their male children goe starke naked, and have no Apron untill they come to ten or twelve yeeres of age; their Female they, in a modest blush cover with a little Apron of an hand breadth from their very birth. Their second nakednesse is when their men often abroad and both men and women with∣in doores, leave off their beasts skin, or Eng∣lish cloth and so (excepting their little Apron) are wholly naked; yet but few of the women but will keepe their skin or cloth (though
loose) or neare to them ready to gather it up about them. Custome hath used their minds and bodies to it, and in such a freedom from any wan∣tonnesse, that I have never seen that wanton∣nesse amongst them as, (with griefe) I have heard of in Europe. Nipposkenitch. I am rob'd of my coat. Nipposkenick ewò. He takes away my Coat. Acoh. Their Deere skin. Tummóckquashunck. A Beavers coat. Nkéquashunck. An Otters coat. Mohéwonck. A Rakoone-skin coat. Natóquashunck. A Wolues-skin coat. Mishannéquashunck. A Squirrill-skin coat. Neyhommaûashunck A Coat or Manlte cu∣riously made of the fairest feathers of their Neyhommaūog, or Turkies, which common∣ly their old men make; and is with them as Velvet with us. Maūnek: nquittiashi∣agat. An English Coat or Man∣tell. Caudnish. Put off. Ocquash. Put on. Neesashiagat. Two coats. Shwishiagat. Three coats. Piuckquashiagat. Ten coats, &c. Obs. Within their skin or coat they creepe
contentedly, by day or night, in house or in the woods, and sleep soundly counting it a fe∣licitie, (as indeed an earthly one it is;  peliculam quemque . That every man be content with his skin. Squaus auhaqut. a Womans Mantle. Mucki is auhaqut. A childs Mantle. Pétacaus. an English Wastecoat. Petacawsunnèse. a little wastecoat. Aūtah & aútawhun. Their apron. Caukóanash. Stockins. Nquittetiagáttash. a paire of stockins. Mocússinass, & Mockussnchass. Shooes. Obs. Both these, Shoes and Stockins they make of their Deerc skin worne out, which yet being excellently tann'd by them is ex∣cellent for to travell in wet and snow; for it is so well tempered with oyle that the water cleane wrings out; and being hang'd up in their chimney, thy presently drie without hurt as my selfe hath often proved. Noonacminash. Too little. . Big enough. Saunketippo, or, Ash naquo. a Hat or Cap. Moôse. The skin of a great Beast as ig as an Ox some call it a red Deere.
Wussuckhósu. Painted. They also commonly paint these Moose and Deere-skins for their Summer wearing, with varietie of formes and colours. Petouwásinug. Their Tobacco-bag, which hangs at their necke▪ or sticks at their girdle, which is to them in stead of an Eng∣lish pocket. Obs. Our English clothes are so strange un∣to them, and their bodies inured so to indure the weather, that when (upon gift &c.) some of them have had English cloathes, yet in a showre of raine, I have seen them rather ex∣pose their skins to the wet then their cloaths, and therefore pull them off, and keep them drie. Obs. While they are amongst the English they keep on the English apparell, but pull of all, as soone as they come againe into their owne Houses, and Company. Generall Observations of their Garments. How deep are the purposes and Councells, of God? what should bee the reason of this mighty difference of One mans children that all the Sonnes of men on this side the way (in Europe, Asia and Africa should have such plenteous clothing for Body for Soule! and the rest of Adams sonnes and Daughters on
the other side, or America (some thinke as big as the other three,) should neither have nor desire clothing for their naked Soules, or Bodies. More particular: O what a Tyrant's Custome long, How doe men make a tush, At what's in use, though ne're so fowle: Without once shame or blush? Many thousand proper Men and Women, I have seen met in one place: Almost all naked, yet not one, Thought want of clothes disgrace. Israell was naked, wearing cloathes! The best clad English-man, Exod. 32. Not cloth'd with Christ, more naked is: Then naked Indian. CHAP. XXI. Of Religion, the soule, &c. MAnit-manittó∣wock. God, Gods.
Obs. He that questions whether God made the World, the Indians will teach him. I must acknowledge I have received in my converse with them many Confirmations of those two great points, Heb. 11. 6. viz: 1. That God is. 2. That hee is a rewarder of all them that diligently seek him. They will generally confesse that God made all: but then in speciall, although they deny not that English-mans God made English Men, and the Heavens and Earth there! yet their Gods made them and the Heaven, and Earth where they dwell. Nummusquauna∣múckqun manit. God is angry with me? Obs. I have heard a poore Indian lamenting the losse of a child at break of day, call up his Wife and children and all about him to La∣mentation, and with abundance of teares cry out! O God thou hast taken away my child! thou art angry with me: O turne thine an∣ger from me, and spare the rest of my chil∣dren. If they receive any good in hunting, fishing, Harvest &c. they acknowledge God in it. Yea, if it be but an ordinary accident, a fall, &c. they will say God was angry and did it.
musquantum manit God is angry. But herein is their Misery. First they branch their God-head into ma∣ny Gods. Secondly, attribute it to Creatures. First, many Gods: they have given m the Names of thirty seven which I have, al which in their solemne Worships they invo cate: as Kautántowwit the great South-West God, t to whose House all soules goe, and fro whom came their Corne Beanes, as they say Wompanand. The Easterne God. Chekesuwànd. The Westerne God. Wunnauaméanit. The Northerne God. Sowwanànd. The Southerne God. Wetuómanit. The house God. Even as the Papists have their He and Sh Saint Protectors as St. George, St. Patric St. Denis. Virgin Mary, &c. Squáuanit. The Womans God. Muckquachuck∣quànd. The Childrens God. Obs. I was once with a Native dying of wound, given him by some murtherous  (who rob'd him and run him throug with a Rapier, from whom in the heat of h wound, he at present escaped from them b
dying of his wound, they suffered Death at new Plymouth, in New-England, this Native dying call'd much upon Muckquachuckquànd, which of other Naves I understood (as they believed) had appeared to the dying young man, many yeares before, and bid him when ever he was in distresse call upon him. Secondly, as they have many of these fain∣ed Deities: so worship they the Creatures in whom they conceive doth rest some Deitie: Keesuckquànd. The Sun God. Nanepaushat. The Moone God. Paumpágussit. The Sea. Yotanit. The Fire God, Supposing that Deities be in these, &c. When I have argued with them about their Fire-God: can i say theybe, but this fire must be a God, or Divine power, that out of a stone will arise in a Sparke, and when a poore naked Indian is ready to starve with cold in the House and especially in the Woods, oft∣en saves his life, doth dresse all our Food for us, and if it be angry will burne the House about us, yea if a spark fall into the drie wood, burnes up the Country, (though this burning of the Wood to them they count a
Benefit both for destroying of vermin, and keeping downe the Weeds and hickets?) Praesentem narrat quaelibet herba Deum. Every little Grasse doth tell, The sons of Men, there God doth dwell. Besides there is a generall Custome amongst them, at the apprehension of any Excellen∣cy in Men, Women, Birds Beasts, Fish, &c. to cry out Manittóo, that is, it is a God, as thus if they see one man excell others in Wis∣dome, Valour, strength, Activity &c. they cry out Manittóo A God: and therefore when they talke amongst themselves of the English ships, and great buildings, of the plow∣ing of their Fields, and especially of Bookes and Letters, they will end thus: Manittôwock They are Gods: , you are a God, &c A strong Conviction naturall in the soule of man, that God is▪ filling all things, and places, and that all Excellencies dwell in God, and proceed from him, and that they only are blessed who have that Jehovah their portion. Nickómmo. A Feast or Dance. Of this Feast they have publike, and private and that of two sorts. First in sicknesse, or Drouth, or Warre, or Famine.
Secondly, After Harvest, after hunting, when they enjoy a caulme of Peace, Health, Plenty, Prosperity, then Nickómmo a Feast, especially in Winter, for then (as the Turke saith of the Christian, rather the Antichri∣stian,) they run mad once a yeare) in their kind of Christmas feasting. Powwaw. A Priest. Powwaûog. Priests. Obs. These doe begin and order their ser∣vice, and Invocation of their Gods, and all the people follow, and joyne interchangeably in a laborious bodily service, unto sweating, especially of the Priest, who spends himselfe in strange Antick Gestures, and Actions even unto fainting. In sicknesse the Priest comes close to the sick person, and performes many strange A∣ctions about him, and threaten and conjures out the sicknesse. They conceive that there are many Gods or divine Powers within the ody of a man: In his pulse, his heart, his Lungs, &c. I confesse to have most of these their cu∣stomes by their owne Relation, for after nce being in their Houses and beholding hat their Worship was, I durst never bee an ye witnesse, Spectatour, or looker on, least I
should have been partaker of Sathans Inventi∣ons and Worships, contrary to Ephes. 5. 14. Nanouwétea. An over-Seer ana Or∣derer of their Worship. Neen nanowwúnne∣mun. I will order or oversee. They have an exact forme of King, Priest, and Prophet, as was in Israel typicall of old in that holy Land of Canaan, and as the Lord Iesu ordained in his spirituall Land of Canaan his Church throughout the whole World: their Kings or Governours called Sachimag, Kings, and Atowaūg Rulers doe govern: Their Priests performe and manage their Worship: Their wise men and old men of which number the Priests are also,) whom they call  they make solemne speeches and Orations, or Lectures to them, concerning Religion Peace, or Warre and all things. Nowemaúsiteem. I give away at the Worship. Heo she that makes this Nickòmmo Feast or Dance besides the Feasting of somet mes twenty, fifty, an hundreth yea I have seene neere a thousand persons at one of these Feasts) they give I say a great quantity of money, and all sort of their goods (accor∣ding to and sometimes beyond their Estate)
in severall small parcells of goods, or money, to the value of eighteen pence, two Shillings, or thereabouts to one person: and that per∣son that receives this Gift, upon the receiving of it goes out, and hollowes thrice for the health and prosperity of the Party that gave it, the Mr. or Mistris of the Feast. Nowemacaūnash. Ile give these things. Nitteaūguash. My money. Nummaumachiu∣wash. My goods. Obs. By this Feasting and Gifts, the Divell drives on their worships pleasantly (as he doth all false worships, by such plausible Earthly Arguments of uniformities, universalities, Antiquities, Immunities, Dignities, Rewards, unto submitters, and the contrary to Refu∣sers) so that they run farre and neere and aske Awaun. Nákommit? Who makes a Feast? Nkekinneawaûmen. I goe to the Feast. Kekineawaūi. He is gone to the Feast. They have a modest Religious perswasion not to disturb any man, either themselves English, Dutch, or any in their Conscience, and worship, and therefore say: Aquiewopwaūwash. Peace, hold your peace. Aquiewopwaūwock.  
Peeyaūntam. He is at Prayer. Peeyaúntamwock. They are praying. Cowwéwonck. The Soule, Derived from Cowwene to sleep, because say they, it workes and operates when the body sleepes. Michachuck the soule, in a highe notion, which is of affinity, with a word sig∣nifying a looking glasse, or cleere resem∣blance, so that it hath its name from a cleer fight or discerning, which indeed seemes ve∣ry well to suit with the nature of it. Wuhóck The Body. Nohòck: cohòck. My body, your body. Awaunkeesitteoūwi∣cohock. Who made you? Tunna-awwa com∣mtchichunck∣kitonckquéan? Whether goes your soul when you die? An. Sowanakit∣aūwaw. It goes to the South-West. Obs. They beleive that the soules of Me and Women goe to the Souwest, their grea and good men and Women to  his House, where they have hopes (as th Turkes have of carnall Joyes): Murtherer thieves and Lyers, their Soules (say they  wonder restlesse abroad. Now because this Book (by Gods good pro∣vidence)
may come into the hand of many fearing God, who may also have many an o∣portunity of occasionall discourse with some of these their wild brethren and Sisters, and may speake a word for their and our glorious Maker, which may also prove some prepara∣ory Mercy to their Soules: I shall propose ome proper expressions concerning the Cre∣tion of the World, and mans Estate, and in articular theirs also, which from my selfe many hundreths of times, great numbers of hem have heard with great delight, and reat convictions: which who knowes (in ods holy season) may rise to the exalting f the Lord Jesus Christ in their conversion, d salvation? etop Kunnatóte∣mous. Friend, I will aske you a Question. atótema: Speake on. ocketunnantum? What thinke you? waun Keesiteoù∣win Kéesuck? Who made the Heavens? uke Wechêkom? The Earth, the Sea? ittauke. The World. Some will answer Tattá I cannot tell, some ill answer Manittôwock the Gods. suóg Manitto∣wock. How many Gods bee there?
Maunaūog Mishaúna∣wock. Many, great many. Netop machàge. Friend, not so. Pausuck naunt manit. There is onely one God. Cuppsittone. You are mistaken. Cowauwaanemun. You are out of the way. A phrase which much pleaseth them, being proper for their wandring in the woods, and similitudes greatly please them. Kukkakótemous, wa∣chit-quashouwe. I will tell you, presently▪ Kuttaunchemókous. I will tell you newes. Paûsuck naūnt manit kéesittin keesuck, &c One onely God made th Heavens, &c. Napannetashèmittan naugecautummo∣nab nshque. Five thousand yeers ago and upwards. Naugom naūnt wuk∣kesittinnes wâme teagun. He alone made all thing▪ Wuche mateâg. Out of nothing. Quttatashuchuckqún∣nacaus-keesitinnes wâme. In six dayes he made  things. Nquittaqúnne. The first day Hee ma Wuckéesitin wequâi. the Light. Néesqunne. The second day Hee Wuckéesitin Keésuck. made the Firmameut
Shúckqunne wuckée∣sitin Aūke kà wechê∣kom. The third day hee made the Earth and Sea. Yóqunne wuckkéesi∣tin Nippaūus kà Na∣nepaūshat. The fourth day he made the Sun and the Moon. Neenash-mamockiu∣wash wêquananti∣ganash. To great Lights. Ka wáme anócksuck. And all the Starres. Napannetashúck∣qunne Wuckéesittin pussuckseésuck wâme. The fifth day hee made all the Fowle. Keesuckquiuke. In the Ayre, or Heavens. Ka wáme namaūsuck. And all the Fish in the Wechekommiuke. Sea. Quttatashúkqunne wuckkeésittin pena∣shimwock wamè. The sixth day hee made all the Beasts of the Field. Wuttàke wuchè wuckeesittin pau∣suck Enin, or, Enes∣kéetomp. Last of all he made one Man Wuche mishquòck. Of red Earth, Ka wesuonckgonna∣kaûnes Adam, túp∣pautea mishquôck. And call'd him Adam, or red Earth.
Wuttàke wuchè. Then afteward, while Câwit mishquock. Adam, or red Earth slept. Wuckaudnummenes manit peetaūgon wuche Adam. God tooke a rib from Adam, or red Earth. Kà wuchè peteaúgon. And of that rib he made Wukkeesitinnes pau∣suck squàw. One woman, Ka pawtouwúnnes And brought her to Adamuck. Adam, Nawônt Adam wut∣túnnawaun nuppe∣teâgon ewo. When Adam saw her, he said, This is my bone. Enadatashuckqunne, aqui, The seventh day hee rested, Nagaù wuchè qutta∣tashúckqune ana∣caūuock English∣mnuck. And therefore English∣men worke sixdayes. Enadatashuckqun∣nóckat taubataum∣wock. On the seventh day they praise God. Obs. At this Relation they are much sa∣tisfied, with a reason why (as they observe) the Eglish and Dutch, &c. labour six dayes, and rest and worship the seventh. Besides, they will say, Wee never heard of
this before: and then will relate how they have it from their Fathers, that Kawánowwit made one man and woman of a stone, which disliking, he broke them in pieces, and made another man and woman of a Tree, which were the Fountaines of all mankind. They apprehending a vast difference of Knowledge betweene the English and them∣selves, are very observant of the English lives: I have heard them say to an Englishman (who being hindred, broke a promise to them) You know God, Will you lie Englishman? Nétop kihkita. Hearken to mee. Englishmánnuck, English-men. Dutchmánnuck, kée∣nouwin kà wamè mittaukêuk-kitonck quéhettit. Dutch men, and you and all the world, when they die. Mattùx swowánna kit aûog, Michichonckquock. Their soules goe not to the Southwest. Wame, ewò pâwsuck Manit wawóntakick. All that know that one God. Ewò man it waumaû sachick kà uckqus∣hanchick. That love and feare Him. Keésaqut aog. They goe up to Heaven.
Michéme weetean∣támwock. They ever live in joy. Naùgom manit wê∣kick. In Gods owne House. Ewo manit mat wau∣óntakick. They that know not this God. Matwaumaûsachick. That love. Mat ewò uckqushán∣chick. And feare him not. Kamóotakick. Thieves. Pupannouwachick. Lyers. Nochisquauonchick. Vncleane persons. Nanompanissichick, Idle persons. Kemineiachick. Murtherers. Mammaúsachick. Adulterers. Nanisquégachick. Oppressors or fierce. Wame naûmaki∣aûog. They goe to Hell or the Deepe. Micheme maûog. They shall ever lament. Awaun kukkakote∣mógwunnes? Who told you so? Manittóo wússuck∣wheke. Gods Booke or Writing. Obs. After I had (as farre as my language would reach) discoursed (upon a time) before the chiefe Sachim or Prince of the Countrey, with his Archpriests, and many other in a full Assembly; and being night, wearied with
travell and discourse, I lay downe to rest; and before I slept, I heard this passage: A Qunnihticut Indian (who had heard our discourse) told the Sachim Miantunnōmu, that soules went up to Heaven, or downe to Hell; For, saith he, Our fathers have told us, that our soules goe to the Southwest. The Sachim answered, But how doe you know your selfe, that your soules goe to the Southwest; did you ever see a soule goe thi∣ther? The Natiue replyed; when did he (naming my selfe) see a soule goe to Heaven or Hell? The Sachim againe replied: He hath books and writings, and one which God himselfe made, concerning mens soules, and therefore may well know more then wee that have none, but take all upon trust from our fore∣fathers. The said Sachim, and the chiefe of his peo∣ple, discoursed by themselves, of keeping the Englishmans day of worship, which I could easily have brought the Countrey to, but that I was perswaded, and am, that Gods way is first to turne a soule from it's Idolls, both of heart, worship, and conversation, before it is capable of worship, to the true and living God, according to 1 Thes. 1. 9. You turned
to God from Idolls to serve or worship the living and true God. As also, that the two first Principles and Foundations of true Re∣ligion or Worship of the true God in Christ, are Repentance from dead workes, and Faith towards God, before the Doctrine of Bap∣tisme or washing and the laying on of hands, which containe the Ordinances and Practises of worship; the want of which, I conceive, is the bane of million of soules in England, and all other Nations professing to be Christian Nations who are brought by publique autho∣rity to Baptisme and fellowship with God in Ordinances of worship, before the saving worke of Repentance, and a true turning to God, Heb. 6. 2. Nétop, kitonckquêan kunnúppamin mi∣chéme. Friend, when you die you perish everlastingly. Michéme cuppauqua neimmin. You are everlastingly un∣done. Cummusquauna muckqun manit. God is angry with you. Cuppauquanúckqun He will destroy you. Wuchè cummanittó∣wockmanauog. For your many Gods.
Wáme pitch chickau∣ta mittauke. The whole world shall ere long be brnt. Obs. Upon the relating that God hath once destroyed the world by water; and that He will visit it the second time with consuming fire: I have been asked this profitable questi∣on of some of them, What then will bcome of us? Where then shall we be? Manit anawat. God commandth, Cuppittakúnnamun wèpe wáme. That all men now re∣pent. The generall Observation of Religion, &c. The wandring Generations of Adams lost posteritie, having lost the true and living God their Maker, have created out of the nothing of their owne inventions many false and fain∣ed Gods and Creators. More particular: Two sorts of men shall naked stand. Before the burning ire  Thes. . . Of him that shortly shall appeare, In dreadfull flaming fire. First, millions know not God, nor for His knowledge, care to seeke:
Millions have knowledge store, but in Obedience are not meeke. If woe to Indians, Where shall Turk, Where shall appeare the ew? O, where shall stand the Christian false? O blessed then the True. CHAP. XXII. Of their Government and Iustice. Sâchim-maûog. King, Kings. Sachimaûonck, A Kingdome or Mo∣narchie. Obs. Their Government is Monarchicall yet at present the chiefest government in th Counrey is divided betweene a younger Sa∣chim, Miantunnômu, and an elder Sachim Caunoúnicus, of about fourescore yeeres old this young mans Uncle; and their agreemen in the Government is remarkable: The old Sachim will not be offended a what the young Sachim doth; and the young Sachim will not doe what hee conceives wil displease his Uncle.
Saunks. The Queen, or Sachims Wife. Sauncksquûaog. Queenes. Otan, -nash. The towne, townes. Otânick. To the towne. Sachimmaacómmock A Princes house, which according to their condition, is farre different from the other house, both in capacity or re∣ceit; and also the finenesse and quality of their Mats. Ataúskawaw-wauog. Lord, Lords. Wauôntam. A Wise man or Coun∣sellour. Wauóntakick. Wise men. Enàtch or eatch Keèn anawáyean. Your will shall be law. Enàtch neèn ánowa. Let my word stand. Ntinnume. He is my man. Ntacquêtunck ewò. He is my subject. Kuttáck quêtous. I will subject to you. Obs. Beside their generall subjection to the highest Sachims, to whom they carry presents: They have also particular Protectors, under Sachims, to whom they also carry presents, and upon any injury received, and complaint made, these Protectors will revenge it. Ntannôtam. I will revenge it. Kuttannótous. I will revenge you.
Miâawene. A Court or meeting. Wèpe cummiâawene. Come to the meeting. Miawêtuck. Let us meet. Wauwhautowash. Call a meeting. Miawêmucks. At a meeting. Miawéhettit. When they meet. Obs. The Sachims, although they have an absolute Monarchie over the people; yet they will not conclude of ought that concernes all, either Lawes, or Subsides, or warres, un∣to which the people are averse, and by gentle perswasion cannot be brought. Peyautch naúgum. Let himselfe come here. Pétiteatch. Let him come. Mishauntowash. Speake out. Nanantowash. Speake plaine. Kunnadsittamen wèpe. You must inquire after this. Wunnadfittamútta. Let us seach into it. Neen pitch-nnadsitta∣men. I will inquire into it. Machissu ewo. He is naught. Cuttiantacompáw∣wem. You are a lying fellow. Cuttiantakiskquaw∣quaw. You are a lying woman. Wepe cukkúmmoot. You have stole. Mat méshnawmônash I did not see those things.
Màt mèsh nummám menash. I did not take them. Wepe kunnishquêko cummiskissawwaw. You are fierce and quar∣relsome. Obs. I could never discerne that excesse of scandalous sins amongst them, which Europe aboundeth with. Drunkennesse and gluttony, generally they know not what sinnes they be; and although they have not so much to re∣straine them (both in respect of knowledge of God and Lawes of men) as the English have▪ yet a man shall never heare of such crimes amongst them of robberies murthers, adulte∣ries &c. as amongst the English: I conceive that the glorious Sunne of so much truth as shines in England, hardens our English hearts: for what the Sunne softeneth not, it hardens. Tawhitch yò enêan? Why doe you so? Tawhitch cummoo∣tóan? Why doe you steale? Tawhitch nanompa∣niêan? Why are you thus idle or base? Wewhepapúnnoke. Bind him. Wèpe kunnishaûmis. You kild him. Wèpe kukkemean∣tin. You are the murtherer. asaumitaúwhitch. Let him be whipt. pponck quittauw∣hitch. Let him be imprisoned.
Nippitch ewo. Let him die. Niphéttitch. Let them die. Niss-Nissoke. Kill him. Púm-púmmoke. Shoot him. Obs. The most usuall Custome amongst them in executing punishments, is for the Sachim either to beat, or whip, or put to death with his owne hand, to which the common sort most quietly submit: though sometimes the Sachim sends a secret Executi∣oner, one of his chiefest Warriours to fetch of a head, by some sudden unexpected blow of a Hatchet, when they have feared Muti∣ny by publike execution. Kukkeechequaû∣benitch. You shall be hanged. Nippansinnea. I am innocent. Uppansinea-ewo. He is innocent. Matmeshnowaû∣won. I knew nothing of it. NNnowaûntum. I am sorry. Nummachiemè. I have done ill. Aumaúnemoke. Let it passe, or take away this accusation Konkeeteatch Ewo. Let him live. Konkeeteáhetti Let them live.
Observation generall, of their Government. The wildest of the sonnes of Men have e∣ver found a necessity, (for preservation of themselves, their Families and Properties) to cast themselves into some Mould or forme of Government. More particular: Adulteries, Murthers, Robberies, Thefts, Wild Indians punish these! And hold the Scales of Iustice so, That no man farthing leese. When Indians heare the horrid filths, Of Irish, English Men, The horrid Oaths and Murthers late, Thus say these Indians then. We weare no Cloaths, have many Gods, And yet our finnes are lesse: You are Barbarians, Pagans wild, Your Land's the Wildernesse.
CHAP. XXI. Of Marriage. VVuskéne. A young man. Keegsquaw. A Virgin or Maide. Segaûo. A Widdower. Segousquaw. A Widdow. Wussénetam. He goes a wooing. Nosenemuck. He is my sonne in Law, Wussenetûock, Awetawátuock. They make a atch. Obs. Single fornication they count no sin but after Mariage (which they solemnize by consent of Parents and publique approbati∣on publiquely) then they count it hainou∣fer either of them to befalse. Mammaûsu. An adulterer. Nummam mógwun∣ewò He hath wronged my bed. Pallè nochisquaûaw. He or She hath com∣mitted adultery. Obs. In this case the wronged party ma put away or keepe the party offending: com∣monly, if the Woman be false, the offende Husband will be solemnely revenged upo
the offendor, before many witnesses, by ma∣ny blowes and wounds, and if it be to Death, yet the guilty resists not, nor is his Death re∣venged. Nquittócaw. He hath one Wife. Neesocaw. He hath two Wives. Sshocowaw. He hath three. Yocowaw. Foure Wives, &c. Their Number is not stinted, yet the chief Nation in the Country, the Narrigansets (ge∣nerally) have but one Wife. Two causes they generally alledge for their many Wives. First desire of Riches, because the Women ring in all the increase of the ield, &c. he Husband onely fisheth, hunteth, &c. Scecondly, their long sequestring them∣selves from their wives after conception, un∣ill the child be weaned, which with some is ong after a yeare old, generally they keep heir children long at the breast: Committamus. Your Wife. Cowéewo.   ahanawatu? ta shin∣commaugemus. How much gave you for her? apannetashom paûgatash. Fivefathome of their Money. utta, énada shoa∣suck ta shompa∣gatash Six, or seven, or eight Fathome.
If some great mans Daughter Piuckquom▪  ten . Obs. nerally the Husband gives these payments for a Dowrie, (as it was in Israell) to the Father or Mother, or guardian of the Maide. To this purpose if the man be poore his Friends and neighbours doe pummenúmm te áuguash, that is contribute Money towar the Dowrie. Numm ttamus. My Wife. Nuliogana.   Waumasu. Loving. Wunnkesu. Proper. Maanu. Sober and chast. Muchickhea. Fruifull. Cutchashekeamis? How many children have you had? Nquittkea. I have had one. . Two, &c. Obs. They commonly abund with Chil∣dren, and increase mightily; except th plauge fall amongst them or other lesser sick∣nesses and then having no meanes of recove∣ry, they perish wonderfully. atoû enechaw. She is falling into Travell.
Néechaw. She is in Travell. Paugcoche nechaú∣waw. She is already deli∣vered. Kitummâyi-mes-né∣chaw. She was just now deli∣vered. Obs. It hath pleased God in wonderfull manner to moderate that curse of the sor∣rowes of Child-bearing to these poore Indi∣an Women: So that ordinarily they have a wonderfull more speedy and easie Travell, and delivery then the Women of Europe: not that I thinke God is more gracious to them above other Women, but that it followes, First from the hardnesse of their constituti∣on, in which respect they beare their sor∣rowes the easier. Secondly from their extraordinary great labour (even above the labour of men) as in the Field, they sustaine the labour of it, in carrying of mighty Burthens, in digging clammes and getting other Shelfish from the Sea, in beating all their corne in Mor∣ters: &c. Most of them count it a shame fr a Woman in Travell to make complaint, and many of them are scarcely heard to groane. I have often knowne in one Quarter of an houre a Woman merry in the House, and de∣livered and merry againe: and within two
dayes abroad, and after foure or five dayes at worke, &c. Noosâwwaw. A Nurse. Noònsu Nonánnis. A sucking Child: Wunnunògan. A Breast, Wunnunnoganash. Breasts. Munnunnug. Milke. Aumaunemun. To take from the breast, or Weane. Obs. They put away (as in Israell) fre∣quently for other occasions beside Adultery, yet I know many Couples that have lived twenty, thirty, forty yeares together. Npakétam. I will put her away. Npakénaqun. I am put away. Aquiepakétash. Doe not put-away. Aquiepokesháttous Awetawátuonck. Doe not break the knot of Marriage. Tackquiūwock. Twins. Towiû ûwock. Orphans. Ntouwiū. I am an Orphane. Wáuchaūnat. A Guardian. Wauchaúamachick. Guardians. Nullóquaso. My charge or Pupill, or Ward. Peewaūqun. Looke well to him &c.
Generall Observations of their Mariage. God hath planted in the Hearts of the Wildest of the sonnes of Men, an High and Honourable esteeme of the Mariage bed, in somuch that they universally submit unto it, and hold the Violation of that Bed, Abo∣minable, and accordingly reape the Fruit thereof in the abundant increase of posterity. More Particular. When Indians heare that some there are, (That Men the Papists call) Forbidding Mariage Bed and yet, To thousand VVhoredomes fall: They aske if such doe goe in Cloaths, And whether God they know? And when they heare they're richly clad, know God, yet practice so. No sure they're Beasts not men (say they,) Mens shame and foule disgrace, Or men have mixt with Beasts and so, brought forth that monstrous Race.
CHAP. XXVI. Concerning their Coyne. THe Indians are ignorant of Europes Coyne; yet they have given a name to ours, and call it Monē from he Englsh Money. Their owne is of two sorts; one white which they make of the stem or stocke of the Periwincle, which they call Meteaûhock, when all the shell is broken off: and of this sort six of their small Beads (which they make with holes to string the bracelets) are curran with the English for a peny. The second is black, incling to blew, which is made of the shell of a fish, which some Eng∣lish call Hens, Poquaûhock, and of this sor three make an English peny. They that live upon the Sea side, generally make of it, and as many make as will. The Indians bring downe all their sorts o Furs, which they take in the Countrey, both to the Indians and to the English for this India Money: this Money the English, French and Dutch, trade to the Indians, six hundred miles in severall parts (North and South from New-England)
for their Furres, and whatsoever they stand in need of from them: as Corne, Ve∣nison, &c Nquittómpscat. 1 peny. Neesaúmscat. 2 pence. Shwaúmscat. 3 pence. Yowómscat. 4 pence. Napannetashaúmscat. 5 pence. Quttatashaúmscat, or, quttauatu. 6 pence. Enadatashaúmscat. 7 pence. Shwoasuck tashaúms∣cat. 8 pence. Paskugittashaúmscat. 9 pence. Piuckquaúmscat. 10 pence. Piuckquaúmscat nab naqùit. 11 pence. Piuckquaúmscat nab nèes, &c. 12 pence. Obs. This they call Neèn, which is two of their Quttáatues, or six pence. Piukquaúmscat nab nashoàsuck, which they call Shwin. 18d. 3 quttáuatues. Neesneecheckaúmscat nab yòh, or, yowin. 2s. 4 quttáuatues. Shwinchékaúmscat, or napannetashin. 2s. 6d. 5 quttáuatues.
Shwinchekaúmscat 2s. 6d. 6 quttáuatues. Yow innchekaúmscat nab neèse. 3s. 6d. 7 quttáuatues. Yow inncheckaúms∣cat nabnashòasuck. 4s. 8 quttáuatues. Napannetashwin∣checkáumscat nab yòh. 4s. 6d. 9 quttáuatues Quttatashincheck aumscat, or, more com∣monly used Piúckquat. 5s. 10 quttaúatues, or, 10 six pences. Obs. This Piúckquat being sixtie pence, they call Nquittómpeg, or nquitnishcāusu, that is, one fathom, 5 shillings. This one fathom of this their stringed mo∣ney, now worth of the English but five shil∣lings (sometimes more) some few yeeres since was worth nine, and sometimes ten shillings per Fathome: the fall is occasioned by the fall of Beaver in England: the Natives are very impatient, when for English commodities they pay so much more of their money, and not understanding the cause of it; and ma∣ny say the English cheat and deceive them, though I have laboured to make them under∣stand the reason of it.
Neesaumpaúgatuck, 10 shil. 2 Fathom. Shwaumpáugatuck. 15 shil. 3 Fathom. Yowompáugatuck, &c. 20 shil. 4 Fathom. Piuckquampáugatuck or, Nquit pâusck. 50 shil. 10 Fathome. Neespausuckquom∣páugatuck. 5 lib' 20 Fathome. Shwepaûsuck. 30 Fathome. Yowe paûsuck, &c. Nquittemittannau∣ganompaugatuck. 40 Fathome, or, 10. pounds. Neesemittannug, &c. Tashincheckompáu∣gatuck? How many Fathom? Obs. Their white they call Wompam (which signifies white): their black Suckáuhock (Súcki signifying blacke.) Both amongst themselves; as also the Eng∣lish and Dutch, the blacke peny is two pence white; the blacke fathom double, or, two fa∣thom of white. Wepe kuttassawom∣patimmin. Change my money. Suckauhock, nausaké∣sachick. The blacke money.
Wauômpeg, or Wau∣ompésichick-mêsim Give me white. Aawompatittea. Come, let us change. Anâwsuck. Shells. Meteaûhock. The Periwinckle. Suckauanaûsuck. The blacke shells. Suckauaskéesaquash. The blacke eyes. or that part of the shel-fish called Poquūhock (or Hens) broken out neere the eyes, of vvhich they make the blacke. Puckwhéganash & Múcksuck. Awle blades. Papuckakiuash. Britle, or breaking, Which they desire to be hardened to a britle temper. Obs Before ever they had Awle blades from Europe, they made shift to bore this their shell money with stone, and so fell their trees with stone set in a wooden staff, and usedwode howes: which some old & poore women (fear∣full to leave the old tradition) use to this day Natouwómpitea. A Coyner or Minter▪ Nanatouwómpi∣teem. I cannot coyne. Natouwómpitees. Make money or Coyne. Puckhùmmin. To bore through. Puckwhegonnaûtick. The Awle blade sticks.
Tutteputch anâwsin. they doe on stones. To smooth them, which Qussuck-anash. Stone, Stones. Cauompsk. A Whetstone. Nickáutick. A kinde of wooden Pin∣cers or Vice. Enomphómmin. To thread or string. Aconaqunnaûog. Thread the Beads. Enomphómmin. Thread, or string these. Enomphósachick. Strung ones. Sawhóog & Sawhósa∣chick. Loose Bads. Naumpacoûin. To hang about the necke. Obs. They hang these strings of money a∣bout their necks and wrists; as also upon up∣on the necks and wrists of their wives and children. Machequoce. A Girdle: Which they make curiously of one two, three, foure, and five inches thicknesse and more, of this money which (sometimes to the value of ten pounds and more) they weare about their middle and as a scarfe about their shoulders and breasts. Yea the Princes make rich Caps and Ap∣rons (or small breeches) of these Beads thus curiously strung into many formes and fi∣gures: their blacke and white finely mixt to∣gether.
Observations generall of their Coyne. The Sonnes of men having lost their Ma∣ker, the true and onely Treasure, dig downe to the bowels of the earth for gold and silver; yea, to the botome of the Sea, for shells of fishes, to make up a Treasure, which can ne∣ver truly inrich nor satisfie. More particular: The Indians prize not English gold, Nor English Indians shell: Each in his place will passe for ought, What ere men buy or sell. English and Indians all passe hence, To an eternall place, VVhere shels nor finest gold's worth ought, VVhere nought's worth ought but Grace, This Coyne the Indians know not of, VVho knowes how soone they may? The English knowing, prize it not, But fling't like drosse away,
CHAP. XXV. Of buying and selling. ANaqushaūog, or Traders. Anaqushánchick   Anaqushénto. Let us trade. Cuttasha? Have you this or that? Cowachaūnum?   Nitasha. I have. Nowachaūnum.   Nquénowhick. I want this, &c. Nowèkineam. I like this. Nummachinámmin. I doe not like. Máunetash nqué∣nowhick. I want many things. Cuttattaúamish. I will buy this of you. Nummouanaquish. I come to buy. Mouanaqushaúog, Chapmen. Mouanaqushanchick.   Obs. Amongst themselves they trade their Corne, skins, Coates, Venison, Fish, &c. and sometimes come ten or twenty in a Compa∣ny to trade amongst the English. They have some who follow onely making of Bowes, some Arrowes, some Dishes, and
(the Women make all their earthen Vessells) some follow fishing, some hunting: most on the Sea-side make Money, and store up shells in Summer against Winter whereof to make their money. Nummautanaqúsh. I have bought. Cummanohamin? Have you bought? Cummanohamoùsh. I will buy of you. Nummautanóhamin. I have bought. Kunnauntatáuamish. I come to buy this. Comaunekunnúo? Have you any Cloth? Kopócki. Thick cloth. Wassppi. Thin. Súckinuit. Black or blackish. Mshquinuit. Red Cloth. Wómpinuit. White Cloath. Obs. They all generally prize a Mantle of English or Dutch Cloth before their owne wearing of Skins and Furres, because they are warme enough and Lighter. Wompeqūayi. Cloth inclining to white, Which they like not, but desire to have a sad coulour without any whitish haires, suit∣ing with their owne naturall Temper, which inclines to sadnesse. Etouwawâyi. Wollie on both sides. Muckucki. Bare without Wool.
Chechéke maútsha. Long lasting. Qúnnascat. Of a great breadth. Tióckquscat. Of little breadth. Wùss. The Eage or list. Aumpácunnish. Open it. Tuttepácunnish. Fold it up. Mat Weshegga∣núnno. There is no Wool on it. Tanógganish. Shake it. Wúskinuit. New Cloth. Tanócki, tanócksha. It is torne or rent. Eatawûs. It is Old. Quttaûnch Feele it. Audtà A paire of small breech∣es or Apron. Cuppáimish I will pay you, which is a word newly made from the English word pay. Tahenaúatu? What price? Tummòck cummé∣sh. I will pay you Beaver. Teaguock Cum∣méinsh. I will give you Money. Wauwunnégachick. Very good. Obs. They have great difference of their Coyne. as the English have: some that will not passe without Allowance, and some again made of a Counterfeit shell, and their very
black counterfeited by a Stone and other Ma∣terialls: yet I never knew any of them much deceived, for their danger of being deceived (in these things of Earth) makes them caute∣lous. Cosaúmawem. You aske too much. Kuttiackqussaûwaw. You are very hard. Aquie iackqussaūme. Be not so hard. Aquie Wussaúmo∣wash. Doe not aske so much. Tashin Commê∣sim? How much shall I give you? Kutteaûg Commé∣insh. I will give you your Mo∣ney. Nkèke Comméinsh. I will give you an Otter. Coanombúqusse Kuttassokakómme. You have deceived me. Obs. Who ever deale or trade with them, had need of Wisedome, Patience, and Faith∣fulnesse in dealing: for they frequently say Cuppàmanem, you lye, Cuttassokakómme, you deceive me. Misquésu Kunúkkeke Your Otter is reddish. Yo aúwusse Wunnê∣gin This is better. Yo chippaúatu. This is of another price. Augausaúatu. It is Cheap. Muchickaúatu. It is deare.
Wuttunnaúatu. It is worth it. Wunishaūnto. Let us agree. Aquie neesquttónck qussish. Doe not make adoe. Wuchè nquittomps∣cat. About a penny. They are are marvailous subtle in their Bargaines to save a penny: And very suspi∣cious that English men labour to deceive hem: Therefore they will beate all markets nd try all places, and runne twenty thirty, ea. forty mile, and more, and lodge in the Woods, to save six pence. Cummámmenash nitteaūguash? Will you have my Mo∣ney? Nonânum. I cannot. Noonshem.   awhitch nonanum êan? Why can you not? achage nkòckie. I get nothing. ashaumskussayi commêsim? How many spans will you give me? Neesaumsqussayi. Two spans. hwaumscussayi. Three spans. owompscussayi. Foure Spans. apannetashaums∣cussâyi. Five spans. uttatashaumskus Sayi. Six spans.
Endatashaumscussâyi. Seven spans. Enadacashaumskut∣tonâyi. Seven spans. Cowénaweke. You are a rich man. Obs. They will often confesse for their own ends that the English are richer and wiser and valianter then themselves; yet it is for their owne ends, and therefore they adde Nanoūo, give me this or that a disease which they are generally infected with: some more ingenu∣ous, scorne it; but I have often seene an Indi∣an with great quanties of money about him beg a Knife of an English man, who happily hath had never a peny of money. Aketash-tamòke. Tell my money. Now annakese. I have mis-told. Cosaumakese. You have told too much. Cunnoonakese. You have told too little. Shoo kekineass. Lo ke here. Wunêtu nitteaùg. My money is very good. Mamattifluôg kut∣teaùquock. Your Beads are naught. Tashin mesh com∣maûg? How much have yo given? Chichgin. A Hatchet. Anskunck. A Howe. Maumichémanege. A Needle. Cuttatuppaúnamum. Take a measure.
Tatuppauntúhom∣min. To weigh with scales. Tatuppauntúock. They are aweighing. Netâtup. It is all one. Kaukakineamuck. Peben ochichauquâ∣nick. A Looking Glasse. Obs. It may be wondred what they do with Glasses, having no beautie but a swarfish co∣lour, and no dressing but nakednesse; but pride appeares in any colour, and the meanest dresse: and besides generally the women paint their faces with all sorts of colours. Cummanohamó∣gunna. They will buy it of you. Cuppittakúnnemous. Take your cloth againe. Cuppittakunnami. Will you serve me so? Cosaumpeekúnne∣mun. You have tore me off too little cloth. Cummachetannakún namous. I have torn it off for you. Tawhitch cuppitta∣kunamiêan? Why doe you turne it up∣on my hand? Kutchichêginash, kaukinne pokéshaas. Your Hatchets will be soone broken. Teâno wáskishaas. Soone gapt. Natouashóck quittea. A Smith. Kuttattaú amish aûke I would buy land of you.
Tou núckquaque? How much? Wuchè wuttotânick Plantation. For a Towne, or, Nisskineam. I have no mind to seeke. Indiansuck sekineám∣wock. The Indians are not wil∣ling. Noonapuock naûgum They want roome them∣selves. Cowetompátimmin. We are friends. Cummaugakéamish. I will give you land. Aquie chenawaûsish. Be not churlish. Generall Observation of Trade. O the infinite wisedome of the most holy wise God, who hath so advanced Europe above America, that there is not a sorry Howe, Hat∣chet, Knife, nor a rag of cloth in all America, but what comes over the dreadfull Atlantick Ocean from Europe: and yet that Europe be not proud, nor America discouraged. What treasures are hid in some parts of America, and in our New English parts, how have foule hands (in smoakie houses) the first handling of those Furres which are after worne upon the hands of Queens and heads of Princes?
More particular: Oft have I heard these Indians say, These English will deceive us. Of all that's ours, our lands and lives. In th' end they will bereave us. So say they, whatsoever they buy, (Though small) which shewes they're shie Of strangers, fearefull to be catcht By fraud, deceipt, or lie. Indians and English feare deceits, Yet willing both to be Deceiv'd and couzen'd of precious soule, Of heaven, Eternitie. CHAP. XXVI. Of Debts and Trusting. Noónat. I have not money enough Noonamautuck∣quàwhe. Trust me. Kunnoonamaútuck quaush. I will owe it you.
Obs. They are very desirous to come into debt, but then he that trusts them, must su∣staine a twofold losse: First, of his Commoditie. Secondly, of his custome as I have found by deare experience: Some are ingenuous, plaine hearted and honest; but the most ne∣ver pay unlesse a man follow them to their severall abodes, townes and houses, as I my selfe have been forc'd to doe, which hardship and travells it ha yet pleased God to swee∣ten with some experiences and some little gaine of Language. Nonmautuckquahé ginath. Debts. Nosaumautackqua∣whe. I am much in debt. Pitch nippáutowin. I will bring it you. Chenock nquombeg When cuppauútiin nteaù∣guash. Will you bring mee my money? Kunnaumpatous, I will pay you. Kukkeskwhush.   Keéskwhim teaug mésin. Pay me my money. Tawhitch pyáuyean Why doe you come? Nndgecom. I come for debts. Machêt. A poore man.
Nummácheke. I am a poore man. Mesh nummaúch∣nem. I have been ficke. Nowemacaûnash nit∣teaùquash. I was faine to spend my money in my sicknesse. Obs. This is a common, and as (they think) most satisfying answer, that they have been sick: for in those times they give largely to the Priests, who then sometimes heales them by conjurations; and also they keepe open house for all to come to helpe to pray with them, unto whom also they give mo∣ney. Mat noteaûgo. I have no money. Kekineash nippê∣tunck. Looke here in my bag. Nummâche maúga∣nash. I have already paid. Mat coanaumwaû∣mis. You have not kept your word. Kunnampatôwin keénowwin. You must pay it. Machge wuttama∣ûntam. He minds it not. Machàge wuttamma∣untammôock. They take no care about paying. Michéme notamma∣ûntam. I doe alwayes mind it.
Mat nickowêmen naûkocks. I cannot sleep in the night for it. Generall Observations of their debts. It is an universall Disease of folly in men to desire to enter into not onely necessary, but unnecessary and tormenting debts, contrary to the command of the only wise God: Owe o thing to any man, but that you love each other. More particular: I have heard ingenuous Indians say, In debts, they could not sleepe. How far worse are such English then, Who love in debts to keepe? If debts of pounds cause restlesse nights In trade with man and man, How hard's that heart that millions owes To God, and yet sleepe can? Debts paid, sleep's sweet, sins paid, death's sweet, Death's night then's turn'd to light; Who dies in sinnes unpaid, that soule His light's eternall night.
CHAP. XXVII. Of their Hunting, &c. VVEe shall not name over the severall sorts of Beasts which we named in the Chapter of Beasts. The Natives hunt two wayes: First, when they pursue their game (espe∣cially Deere, which is the generall and won∣derfull plenteous hunting in the Countrey:) I say, they pursue in twentie, fortie, fiftie, yea, two or three hundred in a company, (as I have seene) when they drive the woods be∣fore them. Secondly, They hunt by Traps of severall sorts, to which purpose, after they have ob∣serued in Spring-time and Summer the haunt of the Deere, then about Harvest, they goe ten or twentie together, and sometimes more, and withall (if it be not too farre) wives and children also, where they build up little hun∣ting houses of Barks and Rushes (not com∣parable to their dwelling houses) and so each man takes his bounds of two, three, or foure miles, where hee sets thirty, forty, or fiftie
Traps, and baits his Traps with that food the Deere loves, and once in two dayes he walks his round to view his Traps. Ntauchaûmen. I goe to hunt. Ncáttiteam weeyoùs. I long for Venison. Auchaûtuck. Let us hunt. Nowetauchaûmen. I will hunt with you. Anúmwock. Dogs. Kemehétteas. Creepe. Pitch nkemehétteem I will creepe. Pumm púmmoke. Shoote. Uppetetoûa. A man shot accidentally. Ntaumpauchaûmen. I come from hunting. Cutchashineánna? How many have you kild Nneesnneánna. I have kild two. Shwinneānna. Three. Nyowinneánna. Foure. Npiuckwinneanna. Ten, &c. Nneesneechecttashn∣neanna. Twentie. Nummouashâwmen. I goe to set Traps. Apè hana. Trap, Traps. Asháppock. Hempe. Masaûnock. Flaxe. Wuskapéhana. New Traps. Eataúbana. Old Traps. Obs. They are very tender of their Traps where they lie, and what comes at them; for
they say, the Deere (whom they conceive have a Divine power in them) will soone smell and be gone. Npunnowwâumen. I must goe to my Traps. Nummishkommin. I have found a Deere; Which sometimes they doe, taking a Wolfe in the very act of his greedy prey, when some∣times (the Wolfe being greedy of his prey) they kill him: sometimes the Wolfe having glutted himselfe with the one halfe, leaves the other for his next bait; but the glad Indian finding of it, prevents him. And that wee may see how true it is, that all wild creatures, and many tame, prey upon the poore Deere (which are there in a right Embleme of Gods persecuted, that is, hunted people, as I observed in the Chapter of Beasts according to the old and true saying: Imbelles Damae quid nisi praeda sumus? To harmlesse Ros and Does, Both wilde and tame are foes.) I remember how a poore Deere was long hunted and chased by a Wolfe, at last (as their manner is) after the chase of ten, it may be more miles running, the stout Wolfe tired out the nimble Deere, and seasing upon it,
kill'd: In the act of devouring his prey, two English Swine, big with Pig, past by, assaulted the Wolfe, drove him from his prey, and de∣voured so much of that poore Deere, as they both surfeted and dyed that night. The Wolfe is an Embleme of a fierce blood∣sucking persecutor. The Swine of a covetous rooting world∣ling, both make a prey of the Lord Jesus in his poore servants. Ncummóotamúck qun natóqus. The Wolfe hath rob'd me. Obs. When a Deere is caught by the leg in the Trap, sometimes there it lies a day toge∣ther before the Indian come, and so lies a pray to the ranging Wolfe, and other wild Beasts (most commonly the Wolfe) who sea∣seth upon the Deere and robs the Indian (at his first devouring) of neere halfe his prey, and if the Indian come not the sooner, heē makes a second greedie Meale, and leaves him nothing but the bones, and the torne Deere∣skins, especially if he call some of his gree∣dy Companions to his bloody banquet. Upon this the Indian makes a falling trap called Sunnúckhig, (with a great weight of stones) and so sometimes knocks the Wolfe
on the head, with a gainefull Revenge, espe∣cially if it bee a blacke Wolfe, whose Skins they greatly prize. Nanowwussu. It is leane. Wauwunnockôo. It is fat. Weékan. It is sweet. Machemóqut. It smells ill. Anit. It is putrified. Poquêfu Poskáttuck & Missêsu. Halfe a Deere. Kuttiomp. A whole Deere. Paucottaúwat. A Buck. Wawúnnes. A young Buck. Qunnèke. A Doe. Aunàn. A Fawne. Moósqin. Thus thick of fat. Yo asipaúgon Noónatch, or, attuck ntiyu. I hunt Venison. Mishánneke ntiyu. I hunt a Squirrill. Paukunnawaw ntio. I hunt a Beare, &c. Wusséke. The hinder part of the Deere. pome-ichàsh. Thigh: Thghes. ppèke-quòck. Shoulder, shoulders: uskàn, A bone. ussúckqun A taile.
Awemanittin. Their Rutting time. Paushinummin. To divide. Paushinummaua∣tittea. Let us divide. This they doe when a Controversie falls out, whose the Deere should bee. Caúskashunck, The Deere skin. Obs. Púmpom: a tribute Skin when a Deere (hunted by the Indians, or Wolves) is kild in the water. This skin is carried to the Sachim or Prince, within whose territory the Deere was slaine. Ntaumpowwushau∣men. I come from hunting. Generall Observation of their hunting. There is a blessing upon endeavour, even to the wildest Indians; the sluggard rosts not that which he tooke in hunting but the substance of the diligent (either in earthly or heavenly affaires) is precious, Prov. 25. More particular: Great pains in hunting th' Indians Wild, And eke the English tame; Both take, in woods and forrests thicke, To get their precious game.
Pleasure and Profit, Honour false, (The wordl's great Trinitie) Drive all men through all wayes, all, times, All weathers, wet and drie. Pleasure and Profits Honour, sweet, Eternall, sure and true, Laid up in God, with equall paines; Who seekes, who doth pursue? CHAP. XXVIII. Of their Gaming, &c. THeir Games, (like the Englsh) are of two sorts; private and publike: Private, and sometimes publike; A Game ike unto the English Cards; yet, in stead of Cards they play with strong Rushes. Secondly, they have a kinde of Dice which are Plumb stones painted, which they cast in  Tray, with a mighty noyse and sweating: Their publique Games are solemnized with he meeting of hundreds; sometimes thou∣ands, and consist of many vanities, none of hich I durst ever be present at, that I might
not countenance and partake of their folly, after I once saw the evill of them. Ahânu. Hee laughes. Tawhitchahánean. Why doe you laugh? Ahánuock. They are merry. Nippauochâumen. We are dancing. Pauochaûog. They are playing or dan∣cing. Pauochaútowwin. A Bable to play with. Akesuog. They are at Cards, or telling of Rushes. Pissinnéganash. Their playing Rushes. Ntakésemin. I am aelling or coun∣ting; for their play is a kind of Arithmatick▪ Obs. The chiefe Gamesters amongst them much desire to make their Gods side with them in their Games (as our English Game∣sters so farre also acknowledge God) there∣fore I have ene them keepe as a preciou stone a piece of Thunderbolt, which is lik unto a Chrystall, which they dig out of th ground under some tree, Thunder-smitte and from this stone they have an opinon o successe, and I have not heard any of thes prove losers which conceive may be Sata policie and Gods holy Justice to harden the for their not rising higher from the Thun∣derbolt, to the God that send or shoots it
Ntaquie akésamen. I will leave play. Nchikossimunnash. I will burne my Rushes. Wunnaugonhómmin To play at ice in their Tray. Asaúanash. The painted Plumbstones which they throw. Puttuckquapúonck. A Playing Arbor. Obs. This Arbour or Play house is made of long poles set in the earth, foure square, sixteen or twentie foot high; on which they hang great store of their stringed money have great stakings, towne against towne, and two chosen out of the rest by course to play the Game at this kinde of Dice in the midst of all their Abettors, with great shouting and so∣lemnity: beside, they have great meetings of foot-ball playing, onely in Summer, towne against towne, upon some broad sandy shoare, free from stones, or upon some soft heahie plot because of their naked feet, at which they have great stakings, but seldome quarrell. Pasuckquakoho∣waûog They meet to foot-ball. Cukkúmmote wèpe. You steale; As I have often told them in their gamings, and in their great losings (when they have staked and lost their money, clothes, house, corne, and them∣selves, (if single persons) they will confesse it
being weary of their lives, and ready to make away themselves, like many an English man: an Embleme of the horrour of conscience, which all poore sinners walk in at last, when they see what wofull games they have played in their life, and now find themselves eternall Beggars. esaqúnnamun, Another kinde of solemne publike meeting, wherein they lie under the trees, in a kinde of Religious observation, and have a mixture of Devotions and sports: But their chiefest Idoll of all for sport and game, is (if their land be at peace) toward Harvest, when they set up a long house called Qunne∣kamuck. Which signifies Long house, sometimes an hundred somtimes two hundred foot long upon a plaine neer the Court (which they call Kittickan̄ick) where many thousands, men and women meet, where he that goes in dan∣ceth in the sight of all the rest; and is prepa∣red with money, coats, small breeches, knifes, or what hee is able to reach to, and gives these things away to the poore, who yet must par∣ticularly beg and say, Cowequetúmmous, that is, I beseech you: which word (although there is not one common beggar amongst them) yet they will often use when their richest a∣mongst them would fain obtain ought by gift.
Generall Observations of their Sports. This life is a short minute, eternitie fol∣lowes. On the improvement or dis-improve∣ment of this short minute, depends a joyfull or dreadfull eternity; yet (which I tremble to thinke of) how cheape is this invaluable Jewell, and how many vaine inventions and foolish pastimes have the sonnes of men in all parts of the world found out, to passe time & post over this short minute of life, untill like some pleasant River they have past into mare mortuum, the dead sea of eternall lamentation. More particular: Our English Gamesters scorne to stake Their clothes as Indians do, Nor yet themselves, alas, yet both Stake soules and lose them to. O fearfull Games! the divell stakes But trawes and Toyes and Trash, (For what is All, compar'd with Christ, But Phil. 3. 8.  Dogs meat and Swines wash? Man stakes his Iewell-darling soule, (His owne most wretched foe)
Ventures, and loseth all in sport At one most dreadfull throw. CHAP. XXIX. Of their Warre, &c. A Quène. Peace. Nanoúeshin, & Awêpu. A peaceable calme; for Awēpu signifies a calme. Chépewess, & Mishittâshin. A Northern storme of warre, as they witti∣ly speake, and which England now wofully feeles, untill the Lord Jesus chide the winds, and rebuke the raging seas. Nummusquântum. I am angry. Tawhitch musquaw∣naméan? Why are you angry? Aquie musquántash. Cease from anger. Chachépissu, nish∣qûetu. Fierce. Tawhitch chachepi∣séttit nishquéhet∣it? Why are they fierce?
Cummusquáuna∣muck He is angry with you. Matwaûog. Souldiers. Matwaûonck. A Battle. Cnmmusqnaúnamish I am angry with you. Cummusquawname? Are you angry with me? Miskisaûwaw. A quarrelsome fellow. Tawhitch niskqúe∣kean? Why are you so fierce? Ntatakcómmuck qun ewò. He strucke mee. Nummokókunitch I am robbed. Ncheckéqunnitch.   Mecaûtea. A fighter. Mecâuntitea. Let us fight. Mecaúnteass. Fight with him. Wepè cummécautch. You are a quarreller. Jûhettitea. Let us fight. Jûhetteke. Fight, Which is the word of incouragement which they use when they animate each other in warre; for they use their tongues in stead of drummes and trumpets. Awaún necáwni aum piasha? Who drew the first bow, or shot the first shot? Nippakétatunck. He shot first at me. Nummeshannantam Nummayaôntam. I scorne, or take it indig∣nation.
Obs. This is a common word, not only in warre, but in peace also (their spirits in naked bodies being as high and proud as men more gallant) from which sparkes of the lusts of pride and passion, begin the flame of their warres. Whauwháutowaw ánowat. There is an Alarum. Wopwawnónckquat. An hubbub. Amaumuwaw paud∣sha. A Messenger is come. Keénomp Muckquomp paûog. Captaines, or Valiant men. Negonshchick. Leaders. Kuttówonck. A Trumpet. Popowutráhig. A Drumme. Obs Not that they have such of their owne making; yet such they have from the French: and I have knowne a good Drumme made a∣mongst them in imitation of the English. Quaquawtatatteaug They traine. Machippog. A Quiver. Caúquat -tash. Arrow, Arrowes. Onúttug. An halfe Moone in war. Péskcunck. A Gunne. Saûpuck. Powder. Mátit. Vnloden. Méchimu. Loden.
Mechimúash. Lode it. Shottash. Shot; A made word from us, though their Gunnes they have from the French, and often sell many a score o the English, when they are a little out of frame or Kelter. Pummenúmmin teáuquash. To contribute to the warres. Askwhitteass. Keep watch. Askwhitteâchick. The Guard. Askwhitteaûg. Is s the Guard. Obs. I once travelled (in a place concei∣ed dangerous) with a great Prince, and his Queene and Children in company, with a Guard of neere two hundred, twentie, or thir∣ie fires were made every night for the Guard  the Prince and Queene in the midst) and entinells by course, as exact as in Europe; nd when we travelled through a place where mbushes were suspected to lie, a speciall Guard, like unto a Life-guard, compassed some neerer, some farther of) the King and Queen, my selfe and some English with me. They are very copious and patheticall in O∣ations to the people, to kindle a flame of rath, Valour or revenge from all the Com∣on places which Commanders use to insist n.
Weassu Afraid. Cowésass. Are you afraid? Tawhitch wesase∣an? Why feare you? Manowêsass. I feare none. Kukkushickquock. They feare you. Nosemitteūnck quock They fly from us. Onamatta cowaûta Let us pursue. Nuckqusha. I feare him. Wussémo-wock. He flies, they flie. Npauchippowem I flie for succour. Keesaūname. Save me. Npummuck. I am shot. Chenawaūsu. Churlish. Waumaûsu. Loving. Tawhitch chenawaû sean? Why are you churlish? Aumansk. A Fort. Waukaunòsint.   Cupshitteaûg. They lie in the way. Aumanskitteaūg. They fortifie. Kekaúmwaw. A scorner or mocker. Nkekaūmuck ewò. He scornes me. Aqekekaúmowash. Doe not scorne. Obs. This mocking (between their great ones) is a great kindling of Warres amongst them: yet I have known some of their chief∣est say, what should I hazard the lives of my
precious Subjects, them and theirs to kindle a Fire, which no man knowes how farre, and how long it will burne, for the barking of a Dog? Sekineam. I have no mind to it. Nissékineug He likes not me. Nummánneug. He hates me. Sekinneauhettūock.   Maninnewauhet∣tuock. They hate each other. Nowetompátimmin We are Friends. Wetompâchick. Friends. Nowepinnátimin. We joyne together. Nowepinnâchick. My Companions in War, or Associats. Nowechusettimmin. We are Confederates. Néchuse ewò This is my Associate. Wechusittûock. They joyne together. Nwéche kokkêwem. I will be mad with him. Chickaūta wêtu. An house fired. Once lodging in an Indian house full of peo∣ple, the whole Company (Women especial∣ly) cryed out in apprehension that the Ene∣my had fired the House, being about mid∣night: The house was fired but not by an Enemy: the men ran up on the house top, and with their naked hands beat out the Fire: One scorcht his leg, and suddenly after they
came into the house againe, undauntedly cut his leg with a knife to let out the burnt blood. Yo ánawhone There I am wounded. Missinnege A Captaine. Nummissinnàm ewo. This is my Captive. Waskeiûhettim∣mitch. At beginning of the fight. Nickqueintónck∣quock They come against us. Nickqueintouôog. I will make Warre upon them. Nippauquanaūog. I will destroy them. Queintauatittea. Let us goe against them. Kunnauntatáuhuck∣qun. He comes to kill you. Paúquana. There is a slaughter. Pequttôog paúqua∣nan. The Pequts are slaine. Awaun Wuttúnnene? Who have the Victory. Tashittáwho? How many are slaine? Neestáwho. Two are slaine? Piuckqunneanna. Ten are slaine. Obs. Their Warres are farre lesse bloudy, and devouring then the cruell Warres of Eu∣rope; and seldome twenty slaine in a pitcht field: partly because when they fight in a wood every Tree is a Bucklar. When they fight in a plaine, they fight
with leaping and dancing, that seldome an Arrow hits, and when a man is wounded, unlesse he that shot followes upon the wound∣ded, they soone retire and save the wound∣d: and yet having no Swords, nor uns, all hat are slaine are commonly slain with great Valour and Courage: for the Conquerour entures into the thickest, and brings away he Head of his Enemy. Niss-nissoke. Kill kill. Kunnish I will kill you. Kunnishickqun ewò. He will kill you. Kunnishickquock. They will kill you. iuckissûog. They are stout men. Nickummissūog They are Weake. Nnickummauná∣maûog. I shall easily vanquish. them. Neene núppamen. I am dying? Cowaúnckamish. Quarter, quarter. Kunnanaumpasúm∣mish. Mercy, Mercy. Kekuttokaūntá, Let us parley. Aquétuck. Let us cease Armes. unnishaūnta. Let us agree. Cowammáunsh. I love you. unnêtu ntá. My heart is true. uppaûntash. Consider what I say.
Tuppaūntamoke. Doe you all consider. Cummequaunum cummittamussus∣suck ka cummucki∣aûg. Remember your Wives, and Children. Eatch kèen anawâye∣an. Let all be as you say. Cowawwunnaûwem. You speake truly. Cowauôntam. You are a wise man Wetompátitea. Let us make Friends. Generall Observations of their Warres. How dreadfull and yet how righteous is it with the most righteous Judge of the whole World, that all the generations of Men be∣ing turn'd Enemies against, and fight∣ing against Him who gives them breath and Being, and all things, (whom yet they cannot reach, should stab, kill, burne, mur∣ther and devoure each other? More Particular. The Indians count of Men as Dogs, It is no Wonder then: They teare out one anothers throats! But now that English Men,
That boast themselves Gods Children, and Members of Christ to be,) That they should thus break out in flames. Sure 'tis a Mystery! The second sea'ld Mystery or red Horse, Whose Rider hath power and will, Rev. 2. 6. To take away Peace from Earthly Men, They must Each other kill. CHAP. XXX. Of their paintings. 1. THey paint their Garments, &c. 2. The men paint their Faces in Warre. 3. Both Men and Women for pride, &c. Wómpi White. Mówi-súcki. Black. Msqùi. Red. Wesaûi Yellow. Askáski. Greene. Peshaūi. Blew, &c. Obs. Wunnàm their red painting which they
most delight in, and is both the Barke of the Pine, as also a red Earth. Mishquock. Red Earth. Métewis. lack Earth. From this M'etewis is an Indian Towne a day and a halfes Journey, or lesse (West, from the Massachusets) called Metewêmesick. Wussuckhòsu. A painted Coat. Of this and Wússuckwheke, (the English Let∣ters, which comes neerest to their painting I spake before in the Chapter of their clothing. Aunakêsu. He is painted. Aunakéuck. They are painted. Tawhitch auna kéan? Why doe you paint your selfe? Chéskhosh. Wipe off. Cummachiteoûwu∣nash kuskeésuckquash. You spoile your Face. Mat pitch cowáhick The God that made you Manit keefiteónckqus will not know you. Generall Observations of their paintings. It hath been the foolish Custome of all barbarous Nations to paint and figure their Faces and Bodies (as it hath been to our shame and griefe. wee may remember it of some of our Fore-Fathers in this Nation.) How much then are we bound to our most holy Maker
for so much knowledge of himselfe revealed in so much Civility and Piety? and how should we also long and endeavour that Amé∣rica may partake of our mercy: More particular: Truth is a Native, naked Beauty; but Lying Inventions are but Indian Paints, Dissembling hearts their Beautie's but a Lye, Truth is the proper Beauty of Gods Saints. Fowle are the Indians Haire and painted Faces, More foule such Haire, such Face in Israel. England so calls her selfe, yet there's Absoloms foule Haire and Face of Jesabell. Paints will not bide Christs washing Flames of fire, Fained Inventions will not bide such stormes: O that we may prevent him, that betimes, Repentance Teares may wash of all such Formes. CHAP. XXXI. Of Sicknesse. NUmmaūchnem I am sick. Mauchinaūi. He is sick.
Yo Wuttunsin He keepes his Bed. Acie nummauch∣nem. I am very sick. Noonshem metesim∣min. I cannot eate. Mach ge nummete simmin. I eat nothing. Tocketusinammin? What think you? Pitch nkeeteem? Shall I recover? Niskéeaqush mau∣chinaash. My eyes faile me. Ncussawontapam. My head akes. Npummaumpiteunck My Teeth ake. Nchesammattam, Nchesammam. I am in paine. Obs. In these cases their Misery appeares, that they have not (but what sometimes they get from the English) a raisin or currant or any physick, Fruit or spice, or any Comfort more than their Corne and Water, &c. In which bleeding case wanting all Meanes of recove∣ry, or present refreshing I have been con∣strained to, and beyond my power to refresh them, and I beleeve to save many of them from Death, who I am confident perish many Millions of them (in that mighty continent) for want of Meanes. Nupaqqóntup Kúspissem. Bind my head.
Wauaúpunish Life up my head. Nipaquontup.   nséte. My Foot is sore. Mchàge nickow êmen I sleep not. Nnanotissu. I have a Feaver. Wame kussopita nohock. My body burnes. Ntátupe note, or chickot. I am all on fire. Yo ntéatchin. I shake for Cold. Ntatuppe wunnêpog. I shake as a leafe. Puttuckhumma. Cover me. Paútous nototam min. Reach me the drinke. Obs. Which is onely in all their extremi∣ties, a little boild water, without the additi∣on of crum or drop of other comfort: O Englands mercies, &c. Tahaspunâyi? What ayles he? Tocketúspanem? What aile you? Tocketuspunnaú∣maqun? What hurt hath he done to you? Chassaqúnsin? How long hath he been sick? Nnanowwêteem. I am going to visit. Obs. This is all their refreshing, the Visit
of Friends, and Neighbours, a poore empry isit and presence, and yet indeed this is ve∣ry solemne, unlesse it be in infectious diseases, and then all forsake them and flie, that I have often seene a poore House left alone in the ld Woods, all being fled, the living not able to bury the dead: so terrible is the ap∣prehension of an infectious disease, that not only persons, but the Houses and the whole Towne takes flight. Nummockquese. I have a swelling. Mocquesui He is swelled. Wame wuhòck▪ Mockqusui. All his body is swelled. Mamaskishaûi. He hath the Pox. Mamaskishaûonck. The Pox. Mamaskishaûmitch. The last pox. Wesauashaûi. He hath the plague. Wesauashaûonck. The plague. Wesauashaùmitch. The great plague. Obs. Were it not that they live in sweet Aire, and remove persons and Houses from the infected, in ordinary course of subordi∣nate Causes, would few or any be left alive, and surviving. Nmunnadtommin. I vomit Nqunnuckquus. I am lame. Npsa. I am dafe.
Npóckunnum. I am blind. Npockquanámmen. My desease is I know not what. Pésuponck. An Hot-house. Npesuppaûmen. I goe to sweate. Pesuppaûog. They are sweating. Obs. This Hot-house is a kind of little Cell or Cave, six or eight foot over, round, made on the side of a hill (commonly by some Ri∣vulet or Brooke) into this frequently the men enter after they have exceedingly heated it with store of wood, laid upon an heape of stones in the midle. When they have taken out the fire, the stones keepe still a great heat: Ten, twelve, twenty more or lesse, enter at once starke naked, leaving their coats small breeches (or aprons) at the doore, with one to keepe all: here doe they sit round these hot stones an houre or more, taking Tobacco, dis∣coursing, and sweating together; which swea∣ting they use for two ends: First, to cleanse their skin: Secondly, to purge their bodies, which doubtlesse is a great meanes of preser∣ving them, and recovering them from disea∣ses, especially from the French disease, which by sweating and some potions, they perfectly and speedily cure: whn they come forth (which is matter of admiration) I have seene
them runne (Summer and inter) into the Books to coole them, without the least hurt. M queash. The vaines. Msq, neépuck. Blood Nsau paushaumen. I have th bloody Flixe. Matux  auwaw. e cannot goe to stool. Powww. Their Priest. Maunêtu. A Con urer. Powwaw nippétea. The priest is curing him. Yo Wutteantawaw. He is acting his ure. Obs. These Priests and onjurers (like Si∣mon ) doe bewitch the people, and not onely take their Money, but doe most cer∣tainly (by the help of the Divell) worke great Cures though most certaine it is that the greatest part of their Priests doe meerely abuse them and get their Money, in the times of their sicknesse and to my knowledge, long for sick times: and to that end the poore people store up Money, and spend both Mo∣ney and goods on the Powwâws, or Priests in these times, the poore people commonly dye under their hands, for alas, they administer nothing but howle and roare, and hollow over them, and begin the song to the rest of the People about them, who all joyne (like a Quire) in Prayer to their Gods for them.
Maskit ponamiin. Give me a Plaiser. Maskit Give me some physicke Cotatámhea. Drinke. Both which they earnestly desire of the English, and doe frequently send to my selfe, and others for, (having experimentally found some Mercy of that kind (through Gods bles∣sing) from us. Nickeetem. I am recovered. Kitummayi nick êekon. I am ju now recovered. Generall Observation of their sicknesse. It pleaseth the most righteous, and yt pa∣tient God to warne and summon, to try and arraigne the universall race of Adams sonnes (commonly) upon Beds of sicknesse before he proceed to execution of Death and Judge∣ment: Blessed those soules which prevent Judgement, Death and sicknesse to, and be∣fore the evill dayes come, Arraigne, and Judge themselves and being sick for Love to Christ, find him or seek him in his Ordi∣nances below, and get unfained Assurance of Fternall enjoyment of Him, when they are here no more.
More particular: One step twix't Me and Death, (twas Davids speech,) And true of sick Folks all: Mans Leafe it fades, his Clay house cracks; Before it's dreadfull Fall. Like Grashopper the Indian leapes, Till blasts of sicknesse rise: Nor soule nor Body Physick hath, Then Soule and Body dies. O happy English who for both, Have precious physicks store: How should (when Christ hath both refresh't, Thy Love and zeale be more? CHAP. XXXII. Of Death and Buriall, &c. As Pummissin. He is not yet departed. Neene. He is drawing on. Pausawut kitonck∣quêwa. He cannot live long.
Chachéwunnea. He is neere dead. Kitonckquêi. Hee is dead. Nipwi mâw. He is gone. Kakitonckquêban. They are dead and gone. Sequttôi. He is in blacke, That is, He hath some dead in his house (whether wife or child &c.) for although at the first be∣ing sicke, all the Women and Maides blacke their faces with soote and other blackings; yet upon the death of the sicke, the father, or husband, and all his neighbours, the Men al∣so (as the English weare blacke mourning clothes) weare blacke Faces, and lay on soote very thicke, which I have often seene clotted with their teares. This blacking and lamenting they observe in most dolefull manner, divers weekes and moneths; yea, a yeere, if the person be great and publike. Sequt. Soote. Michemeshâwi. He is gone for ever. Mat wònck kunnaw∣mòne. You shall never see him more. Wunnowaúntam Wullóasin. Grieved and in bitter∣nesse. Nnowántam, lôasin. I am grieved for you. Obs. As they abound in lamentations for the dead, so they abound in consolation to
the living and visit them frequently, using this word Kutchimmoke, Kutchimmoke▪ Be of good cheere which they expresse by stroaking the cheeke and head of the father or mother, hus∣band or wife of the dead. Cepassotam. The dead Sachim. Mauchaúhom. The dead man. Mauchauhomwock Chepeck. The dead. Chepaquaw. A dead woman. Yo a papan. He that was here. Sachimaupan. He that was Prince here. Obs. These expressions they use, because, they abhorre to mention the dead by name, and therefore, if any man beare the name of the dead he changeth his name and if any stranger accidentally name him, he is checkt, and if any wilfully name him he is fined; and and amongst States, the naming of their dead Sachims, is one ground of their warres; so ter∣rible is the King of Terrors, Death, to all naturall men. Aquie mishash aquic mishómmokc. De not name. Cowewênaki. You wrong mee, to wit, in naming my dead. Posakunnamun. To bury.
Aukùck pónamun. To lay in the earth. Wesquaubenan. To wrap up, in winding mats or coats, as we say, winding sheets. , One of chiefest esteeme, who winds up and buries the dead common∣ly some wise, grave, and well descended man hath that office. When they come to the Grave, they lay the dead by the Grave's mouth and then all sit downe and lament; that I have seen teares run downe the cheekes of stoutest Captaines, as well as little children in abundance: and after the dead is laid in Grave, and sometimes (in some parts) some goods cast in with them, They have then a second great lamentation, and upon the Grave is spread the Mat that the party died on the Dish he eat in; and sometimes a faire Coat of skin hung upon the next tree to the Grave, which none will touch, ut suffer it there to rot with the dead: Yea, I saw with mine owne eyes that at my late comming forth of the Countrey, the chiefe and most aged peaceable Father of the Countrey, Caunoūnicus, having buried his fonne, he burn'd his owne Palace, and all his goods in it, (amongst them to a great value) in a sollemne remembrance of his sonne, and in a kind of humble Expiation to the Gods,
who (as they believe) had taken his sonne from him. The generall Observation of their Dead. O how terrible is the looke the speedy and serious thought of death to all the sons of men? Thrice happy those who are dead and risen with the Sonne of God, for they are past from death to life, and shall not see death (a heavenly sweet Paradox or Ridle) as the Son of God hath promised them. More particular: The Indians say their bodies die, Their soules they doe not die; Worse are then Indians such, as hold The soules mortalitie. Our hopelesse Bodie rots, say they, Is gone eternally, English hope better, yet some's hope Proves endlesse miserie. Two Worlds of men shall rise and stand 'Fore Christs most dreadfull barre; Indians, and English naked too, That now most gallant are.
True Christ most Glorious then shall make New Earth, and Heavens New; False Christs, false Christians then shall quake, O blessed then the True. Now, to the most High and most Holy, Immortall, Invisible, and onely Wise God, who alone is Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, the First and the Last, who Was and Is, and is to Come; from Whom, by Whom, and to Whom are all things; by Whose gracious assistance and wonderfull support∣ment in so many varieties of hardship and outward miseries, I have had such converse with Barbarous Nations, and have been mer∣cifully assisted, to frame this poore KEY, which may, (through His Blessing) in His owne holy season) open a Doore; yea, Doors of unkowne Mercies to Us and Them, be Honour, Glory, Power, Riches, Wisdome, Goodnesse and Dominion ascribed by all His  Jesus Christ to Eternity, Amen. FINIS.
The TABLE. CHAP. PAGE. I. OF Salutation. 1 II. Of Eating and Entertainment. 10 III. Of Sleepe. 17 IV. Of their Numbers. 2 V. Of Relations of Consanguinity, &c. 27 VI. Of House, Family, &c. 31 VII. Of Parts of Body. 48 VIII. Of Discourse and Newes. 54 IX. Of Time of the day. 62 X. Of Seasons of the Yeere. 65 XI. Of Travell. 68 XII. Of the heavenly Lights. 79 XIII. Of the Weather. 82 XIV. Of the Winds. 85 XV. Of Fowle. 88 XVI. Of the Earth and Fruits thereof. 92 XVII. Of Beasts and Cattell. 104 XVIII. Of the Sea. 108 XIX. Of Fish and Fishing. 113
XX. Of their Nakednesse and Clothing. 110 XXI. Of their Religion, Soule, &c. 114 XXII. Of their Government. 132 XXIII. Of their Marriages. 138 XXIV. Of their Coyne. 144 XXV. Of their Trading. 151 XXVI Of their Debts and Trusting. 159 XXVII. Of their Hunting 163 XXVIII. Of their Sports and Gaming. 169 XXIX. Of their Warres. 174 XXX. Of their Paintings. 183 XXXI. Of their Sicknesse. 185 XXXII: Of their Death and Buriall: 192 I have further treated of these Na∣tives of New-England, and that great point of their Conversion in a little ad∣ditionall Discourse apart from this.
I Have read over these thirty Chap∣ters of the American Language, to me wholly unknowne, and the Observa∣tions, these I conceive inoffensive; and that the Worke may conduce to the hap∣py end intended by the Author. IO. LANGLEY. Printed according to this Licence; and entred into Stationers Hall.
