W283A 12375420 60574
Captain Walcot's Letter before his Attainder of High-Treason, in compassing the Death of King C. II. confessing his Guilt, and proffering to be a Spy upon his own Party. To the Right Honourable Sir Leoline Jenkins, &c. Honoured Sir I Being in the Countrey, and to my great trouble seeing my self in His Majesty's Proclamation, I came last Night to Town, resolving to lay my self at His Majesty's Feet, let him do with me what he plea∣seth; This is the first Crime I have been guilty of, since His Maje∣sty's Restoration, and too soon by much now: If His Majesty thinks my Death will do him more good than my Life, God's Will, and His be done. Until I sent your Honour this Letter, my Life was in my own power, but now it is in the King's; to whom I do most humbly propose, That if His Majesty desires it, I will discover to him all that I know relating to England, Scotland, or Ireland; which I suppose may be something more than the Original Discoverer was able to acquaint His Majesty with; espe∣cially as to Ireland: There is not any thing His Majesty shall think fit to ask me, but I will answer him the Truth, as pertinently, and as fully as I can. My intimacy with a Scotch Minister, through whose Hands much of the Business went, I judge occasioned my knowing very much: And I do further humbly propose, That if His Majesty thinks it advisa∣ble, I will follow those Lords and Gentlemen that are fled into Holland, as if I fled thither, and had made my Escape also, and will acquaint the King, if I can find it out, what Measures they resolve of taking next: I do assure His Majesty, the Business is laid very broad, or I am misin∣formed. And I am sure as to that particular, if my being with His Majesty, and your Honour, be not discovered, I shall be ten times abler to serve him, than either Mr. Freeman, or Mr. Carr; for they will trust neither of them. There's scarce any thing done at Court, but is imme∣diately talk'd all the Town over; therefore if His Majesty thinks what I have presumed to propose, Advisable, I do then further most humbly Propose, That my waiting upon His Majesty may be some time within Night, that your Honour will acquaint me the Time and Place where I may wait upon you, in order to it; and that it may be within Night also; and that no body may be by, but His Majesty, and your Honour; And if His Majesty pleaseth to Pardon my Offences for the Time past, he shall find I will approve my self very Loyal for the future; if not, I resolve to give his Majesty no further trouble, but to lye at His Mer∣cy, let him do with me what he pleaseth. I purpose to spend much of this day in Westminster-Hall, at least from Two of the Clock to Four. I beg your Pardon I send your Honour this by a Porter: I assure your Honour, it was for no other reason, but because I would not have a third Person Privy to it; and that I might have the better opportunity to make good my Word to His Majesty, and to approve my self Your Honours most humble Servant, THO. WALCOT.
