H3068 13206616 98493
Divers Historicall DISCOURSES Of the late Popular INSURRECTIONS In Great BRITAIN, And IRELAND, Tending all, to the asserting of Truth, in Vindication of their MAJESTIES; By Iames Howell Esquire; Som of which Discourses were strangled in the Presse by the Power which Then SWAYED, But now are newly retreev'd, collected, and Publish'd by Richard Royston. The first TOME. LONDON, Printed by I. Grismond. 1661.
Belua multorum capitm Plebs vana vocatur, Plus satis Hoc Angli uper docuere Popelli. ▪ I: H: The People is a Beast which Heads hath many, England of late hath shew'd This more then any.
TO HIS MAJESTY SIR, THese Historical Dis∣courses (set forth in such variety of dres∣ses) having given so much satisfaction to the world for the asserting of Truth, in Vindication of Your Royal Fa∣ther of ever blessed Memory, and som of them relating also to Your Majesty, I humbly con∣ceiv'd might be proper for Your Majesties perusal & Patronage. Concerning the Author therof
his name needed not to have bin prefix'd, He being so universally well known and distinguishd from other Writers both at home and abroad by his stile, which made one of the Highest Wits of these Times say of Him, Author hic ex Genio notus, ut Ungue Leo. God Almighty blesse Your Majesty with a continuance of Happiness, and daily encrease of Glory, so prayeth Your Majesties most loyal, and humble Subject, ROYSTON.
A Catalog of the severall Peeces that are here con∣tain'd. I. A Dialog twixt Patricius and Peregrin presently after Kintonfield Battaile, which was the first Book that came forth for Vindication of His Majesty. II. The second part of that Discours. III. A seasonable Advice sent to Philip late Earl of Pembrock, to mind him of the severall solemn Oaths wherby he was bound to adhere to the King. IV. A Manifesto sent in His Majesties name to the Reformed Churches, and Prin∣ces beyond the Seas touching His Religion. V. Apologs, and Emblemes, in whose Moralls the Times are represented. VI. Of the land of Ire, or a Discours of that horrid Insurrection in Ireland, discovering the tru Causes therof.
VII. The Sway of the Sword, or a Dis∣urs of the Common Militia or Soldiery of the Land, proving, That the Command therof in chief, belongs to the Ruling Prince. VIII. An Italian Prospective, through which England may discern the desperat condi∣tion she stands in. IX. A Nocturnall Progresse, or per∣ambulation of most Countries in Christen∣dom. X. A Vindication of His Majesty touching a Letter He writ to Rome from Madrid, in Answer to a Letter which Pope Gregory the 15th. had sent Him upon passing the Dispensa∣tion for concluding the Match. XI. Of the Trety of the Ile of Wight, and the Death of His Majesty. XII. Advise from the prime Statesmen of Florence, how England shold come to Her self again, which can be by no other means under Heaven, but by calling in the King, and that, in a free confident way without Articles, but what He shall be pleas'd to offer Himself.
THE TRU Informer, WHO DISCOVERS To the World the first grounds Of this ugly REBELLION And Popular TUMULTS In England, Scotland, and Ireland. Deducing the Causes therof in an Historicall Discours from their Originall. —Neutrum modò, Mas modò Vulgus. Written in the Prison of the Fleet Anno 1642.
CASUALL DISCOURSES, AND Interlocutions BETWIXT Patricius and Peregrin, Touching the Distractions of the Times, VVith the Causes of them. Patricius. SUrely I shold know full well that face and phisnomy: O Hea∣vens! 'tis Peregrin. Gentle Sir, you are well met, and welcom to England, I am heartily glad of your safe arrivall, hoping now to apprehend some happie opportunity whereby I may requite part of those worthy favours I re∣ceived from you in divers places t'other side side of the Sea. Peregrin. Sir, I am as joyfull to see you, as any friend
I have upon earth; but touching favours, they deserve not such an acknowledgment, I must confesse my self to be farr in the arrear, therfore you teach me what I shold speak to you in that point: But amongst other offices of Friendship you have bin pleased to do me from time to time, I give you many thanks for the faithfull correspondence you have held withme, since the time of our separation, by intercours of Letters, the best sort of fuell to warm affection, and to keep life in that no∣ble vertue Friendship, which they say abroad, is in danger to perish under this cold Insulary clime for want of practise. Patricius. Truely, Sir, you shold have had an ac∣count of matters hence more amply and fre∣quently, but that of late it hath bin usuall, and allowed by authority, to intercept and break open any Letters; but private men need not complain so much, since the di∣spatches of Ambassadors, whose Pckets shold be held as sacred as their Persons, hve bin commonly open'd, besides some outra∣ges offered their houses and servants; nay, since their Majsties Letters under the Cabinet Signet have bin broke up, and other coun∣terfeit ones printed and published in their names.
Peregrin. Indeed I must confesse the report hereof hath kept a great noise abroad, and England hath suffered much in point of national re∣pute in this particular; for even among Bar∣barians, it is held a kind of sacriledge to o∣pen Letters; nay, it is held a baser kind of burglary, then to break into a House, Chamber, or Closet: for that is a plunde∣ring of outward things onely, but he who breaks open ones Letters which are the Idea's of the mind, may be said to rip up his brest, to plunder and rifle his very brain, and rob him of his most pretious and secretest thoughts. Patricius. Well, let us leave this distastfull subject, when these fatall commotions cease, this custom, I hope, will be abhorred in Eng∣land: But now, that you are newly arrived, and so happily met, I pray be pleased t make me partaker of some forraign news, and how the squares go betwixt France and Spain, those two great wheels, that draw af∣ter their motion (some more, some lesse) all the rest of the Western world: and when you have done, I will give you account of the state of things in England.
Peregrin. I thought you had so abounded with do∣mestick news, that you had had no list or leisure to hear any forrain; but to obey your commands, you know that I have been any time these six years a Land-loper up and down the world, and truly I could not set foot on any Chrstian shore that was in a perfect condition of peace, but it was en∣gagd either in a direct,  or collate∣rall war, or standing upon it's guard in conti∣nuall apprensions and alarmes of fear: For, since that last flaming Usher of Gods venge∣ance, that direful Comet of the yeer 1618. ap∣pear'd in the heavens, some malevolent and angy ill-aspected star hath had the predomi∣nance ever since, and by it's maligne influxes, made strange unusuall impressions upon the humors of subjects, by inciing them to such insurrections, revolts, and tumults; which caused a Jewish Rabbi to say lately, that it seems the grand Turk thrives extra∣ordinarily in his devotions, it being one of his prime prayers to Mahomet, that he shold prevaile with God Almighty to continue dis∣entions still among Christian Princes. And truly, as the case stands, one may say, that the Europaean world is all in pieces;
you know well with what fearfull fits of a high burning fever poor Germany hath been long shaken, which hath wrought a Lethar∣gie in some of her members, by wasting of the vital spirits which shold diffuse them∣selves equally through that great body; and how she stll ostereth a cold Northern Guest (the Swed) within her bosom, and is in  fear of a worse from the Le∣vant: In the Netherlands one shall hear the half-starv'd souldier murmur in every cor∣ner, and railing against his King, and ready to mutiny for want of pay. In France you shall see the poor Asinin Peasan half weary of his life, his face being so  grownd, ever and anon with new tallies. You know ther are som Soverain Princes, who have a long time wandred up and down in exile, being outed of their own antint Patrimoni∣all Territories, and little hopes yet, God wot, of restoring them. The world knows how Savoy is become of late a kind of Pro∣vince to France; Nay, Spain, who hath been so dexterous to put her neighbours o∣gether by the eares, and to foment war a far off, to keep her own home secure, is now her self in the midst of two fearfull fires, kindled on both sides of her by quite∣revolted
subjects, viz. the Portugues and Cat a∣lan, which so puzzles her, that shee cannot tell what Saint to pray unto. The Venetian also, with the pope, and all the Princes of Italy, are arming apace; the Hollander onely, Sala∣mander like, thrives in these flames: and as I have heard of some that by a long habitul custom could feed on poyson, and turn it to nourishment, so Hans alone can turn War to a Trade and grow fat by it. Now, Sir, being weary of eating my bread in such a distracted world abroad, and hoping to take some sweet repose in Eng∣land, I find that shee is in as bad a case, if not worse, then any other. So much news I give you in a lump, I will be more particu∣lar with you som other time, if you please to spare me now. Patricius. I hear, not without much resentment, these pithy expressions you have been plea∣sed to make of the torn estate of Europe a∣broad; and since you mention that blazing Star, I remember what a Noble Knight told me some yeers ago, That the Astronomers, who lay sentinel to watch the motion and a∣spect of that Comet, observ'd that the tail of it having pointed at divers Climats, at last it
seem'd to look directly on these North-west I lands, in which posture it spent it selfe, and so extinguish'd; as if thereby it meant to tell the world, that these Islands should be the Stage whereupon the last act of the Tragedie should be play'd. And how many Scenes have passed already, both here and in Ireland, we know, God wot, by too too wofull and fresh experience. Peregrin. There is a saying When your neighbours house is on fire, by it's light you may see in what danger your own stands: And was England so blind and blockish, as not to take warning by so many fearfull combustions abroad? When I took my leave last of her, I left her in such a compleat condition of happines, both in Court, Country, City and Sea, that shee was the envie of all Europ, in so much, that that Gol∣den Verse might be fily applied to her then Golden times, Mollia securae perageant otia Gentes. The Court was never so glorious, being han∣selld every yeer almost with a new Roya off∣spring; the Gentry no where more gallan and sportfull; the Citizen never more gorge∣ous and rich, and so abounding with treasure,
bullion and buildings, that no age can paral∣lel; Commerce, inward and outward was ne∣ver at that height; the customes increasing every yeer to admiration; the narrow Seas were never guarded with braver Ships, nor the navie Royall for number of vessels and magazines of all sorts of materials was ever so well replenished; the Universities had ne∣ver such springing dayes: and lastly, the Church did so flourish, that amongst the rest of the reformed Churches of Christen∣dome, I have heard her call'd the Church tri∣umphant. Besides, Ireland was arriv'd almost to the same degree of prosperity, for all the arrera∣ges of the Crowne were paid, and not a peny sent hence for many yeeres to maintain the standing army there, or for any other publick charge, as formerly; Trafique came to that mighty height of encrease, that in few years the Crown customes and imposts came to be five times higher. In fine, Ireland was brought not only to subsist of her selfe, but inabled to contribut towards the filling of the English Exchequer, and to make some retri∣bution of those vast expences the Crown of England hath been at any time these 400 yeeres to reduce her to civility; her boggs
were almost all dry'd up, and made good land▪ her mudde-walls turn'd apace to Brick in di∣vers places, so that in one Sommer that I fortun'd to be there, above 50. new Brick∣houses were built in one Towne. But it hath been the fate of that Island, to be  neer a condition of a setled, happiness, and yet to have some odd accident still intervene to crosse it. In conclusion, there wanted nothing to make England and her united Crowns so ex∣actly blessed, that she might have assumed the title of one of the Fortunat Islands. Good Lord, how comes it to passe, that she is now fallen into such horrid distempers, and like a distracted body, laying hans upon her self, would thrust the sword of civil war into her own bowels? I beseech you, Sir, impart unto me the true cause of this change; for I know none so capable to do it as your self. Patriciu. Infandum, Peregrine, jubes renovare dolorem: First, Sir, in the generall you know, that it is with the Regions upon Earth, as it is with those of the Ayre, sometimes we have a clear azur'd skie with soft gentle ventilations, and a sweet serenitie the whole Hemesphere over; at other times we know the face of
the heavens is over-cast with frowns, with Frog vapors, and thick clouds of various shapes, which look like Monsters, hove∣ring up and down, break at last into thunder and fulgurations, and so disquiet and raise a kind of war in the Aereall Com∣mon-wealth. Just so in the Regions that are dispers'd up and down this earthly Gloe, peepled with men (which are but a compo∣sition of the Elements) you have sometimes a gentle calm of peace and quietude, with a general tranquillitie all the Countrey over; at other times you have ugly mishapen clouds of jealousies, fears, and discontent∣ments rise up, which break out at last in∣to acts of disobedience, rebellion, and fury. And as those Aereall Meteors and Monsters above, are ingendered of those watery fogs and mists which are drawn up out of fennie and rotten low grounds here upon earth; so in the Region of the mind, the ill vapors which ascend to the brain from rotten and impostumated hearts, from desperate and mal-contented humorists are the causes of all civil commotions and distempers in State. But they have much to answer for in the world to come (though they escape it in this) who for any private interest or re∣spect
whatsoever, either of Promotion, Vain∣glory, Revenge, Malice, or Envie, will em∣broyl and plunge their own native Country in any publick ingagement or civil war, by putting a partition-wall betwixt their sove∣rain Prince and their fellow-subjects. True∣ly, in my opinion, these may be called the worst kind of Betrayers of their Countreys. But I am too far transported from satisfying your request in relating the true causes of these calamities, I will now fall to work, and bring you to the very source of them. Ther is a pack of perverse people (com∣posed for the most part of the scummie and basest sort) multiplied in England, who by a kind of natural inclination, are opposit so point blank to Monarchy in State, and Hie∣rarchy in Church, that I doubt if they were in Heven (whither 'tis to be fear'd they run a great hazard ever to enter, it being a rule, that he who is rotten-hearted to his King, can never be right-hearted to his Creaor) I say if these men were in Heven, they wuld go near to repine at the Monarchical power of God Almighty himself, as also at the de∣grees of Angels, and the postures of holiness in the Church triumphant. They call every Crotchet of the brain, tenderness of conscience
forsooth: which being well examined, is nothing else but a meer spirit of contradicti∣on, of malice and disobedience to all higher powers which possesseth them. Ther are no constitutions either Ecclesiastical or Ci∣vil can please them, but they wold cast both into such and such a mould, which their crack'd brains wold fain devise, yet are ne∣ver able to bring to any perfection; They are ever labouring to bring Religion to the dock, and to be new trimm'd, but they wold take down her fore-Castle, and scarce allow her the Kings Armes to adorn her: They are great listners after any Court-news, and prick up their ears when any thing is spoken of King, Queen, or Privie Councellour, and are always ready, though upon loose trust, to take up any report whereby they may whisper in conventicles and corners, and so traduce the Government. These great Zlots use to look upon themselves most commonly through multiplying glasses, which make them appear to be such huge Santons, that it renders them not one∣ly uncharitable in their opinions of others, but Luciferian-like proud in their own con∣ceit, insomuch that they seem to scorn all the world besides, beleeving that they are
he only Elect whose souls work according o the motion of the Spirit: that they are he true Children of promise, whose faces alone look towards Heven; They are more pleased with some new reach or fancy, (that may puzzle the pericranium) than a French∣man is in some new faction in cloathing: They are nearest to the nature of the Jew of any people upon earth, and will converse with him sooner than with some sort of Christians; And as in their pharisaicall Di∣spositions they symbolize with the Iew, so in some of their positions they jump pat with the Iesuit: for though they are both in the extremes, and as contrary one to the other, as the points of a diameter, yet their opinions and practises are concentrique, viz. to de∣presse regall power; Both of them wold bind their Kings in Chaines, and the Nobles in links of Iron; They both deny all passive obe∣dience, and as the one wold have the morter of the Temple tempred with blood, so the other wold beat Religion into the brain with the poleaxe. Their greatest master-piece of policy is to forge countereit news, and to divulge and disperse it as far as they can to amuse the world, for the advancement of their designs, and strengthing their party:
But the Iesuit doth it more cunningly and modestly, for he fetcheth his news from far, so that before the falshood of it can be contrould, his work is commonly done, and the news forgotten; But these later politi∣tians use to raise lies hard by home, so that the grosseness and palpablenesse of them is presently discovered. Besides, to avoid the extremes of the other, these later seem to fall into flat prophanness, for they may be called a kind of enemies to the very Name, Crosse, and Church of Christ. Touching the first, They repine at any reverence to be done unto the name of Jesus, though spon∣taneous, not coercive. For the second, which was held from the beginning to be the badg and Banner of a Christian, they cry up the Crosse to be the mark of the bast; And for the last, viz. the Church, they wold have it to be neither beautifull, holy, nor amiable, which are the three main pro∣perties that God requires in his house. To conclude, when any comes to be season'd with this sower leaven, he seems to dege∣nerat presently from the nature and garb of a Gentleman, and fals to be of a sordid and low disposition, narrow hearted and close handed; to be timerous, cunning and jea∣lous,
and far from the common freedom, and sweetness of morall society, and from all generous and loyal thoughts towards his King and Country. These, these have bin the chiefest ma∣chinators, and engeneers Englands unhappy divisions, who Viper-like have torn the en∣trailes of their own mother their dear Country: But ther were other extern con∣current causes, and to find them out, I must look Northward, for there the cloud began to condense first; You know Sir, the Scot's nation were ever used to have their King personally resident amongst them, and though King Iames by reason of his age, bounty, and long breeding there, with other advantages, drew such ex∣traordinary respect from them, that they continued in good conformity: yet since his death, they have been over-heard to mutter at the remotenesse and absence of their King, and that they shold become now a kind of province by reason of such a distance: some of their Nobles and Gentry found not at the English Court, nor at his Majesties Co∣ronation in Edenburgh that Countenance, Fa∣miliarity, Benefit and Honours which haply they expected, and 'tis well known who he
was, that having been denied to be lorded (David Lesley) took a pet, and went discon∣tented to his country, hoping that some title added to the wealth he had got abroad, should have purchased him more respect. These discontented parties tamperd with the mer∣cenary preachers up and down Scotland, to obtrude to the pple what doctrines they put into their mouthes, so that the pulpits every where rung of nothing but of invectives against certain obliquities and Solaecismes (and I cannot tell what) in government, and many glances they had upon the English Church: yet all this while there was not matter enough for an insurrection, nor to dispose the peoples hearts to a mutiny▪ until by the policy (as some affimed) of the said discontented party the English Lyturgie was sent thither: this by the initement of those fiery pulpiteers, was cryed up to be the great∣est I doll that possibly could be brought into their Kerke, insomuch that when it was first offer'd to be read, the woman and baer sort of mechaniks threw stooles and stones at the Bishops heads, and were ready to tear them in peeces▪ And here began the storm.  Majesty having notice hereof, sent a most gracious proclamation, signifying, that where∣as
he had recommended that Book to be practis'd amongst them, wherein he himself served God Almighty twice a day, he did it out of a pious endeavour to breed an uni∣formity of publick Divine service in all his dominions, specially in that his native King∣dom. But since it had produced such dange∣rous effects, he was contented to revoke it absolutely; for it was never his purpose to press the practise of the said book upon the consciences of any, he did onely commend, not absolutely command, the use of it; Therefore he exhorted and required that every one unto whom it had given any scan∣dal, shold return to his pristine obedience, and serve God as formerly, offering here∣with a gracious pardon, and to passe an Act of Amnestia for an abolition of all faults passed. Peregrin. And would not this suffice? In naturall motions we find that the cause being taken away, the effect ceaseth, and will not this hold in civil Actions? Patricius. No, this wold not serve the turn, but  was a further reach in it, and for an inch to take an ell: you know the Scots since
single Lion came to quarter with our three, are much elevated in their spirits, more re∣spected, emploied and trusted abroad, they are heightned in their resolutions and aims, and will questionless be daily more and more. You have heard of a Mine that reach'd from our exchequer to Edenburgh. And I beleeve you have not forgot Bocco∣linies balance, that was shewed us in Italie, wherein Lorenzo de Medici weighed all the states of Christendom, and throwing in Eng∣land amongst the rest, you know how much he made her to weigh less by this addition. The former Proclamation I say, and Pardon would not suffice, but they took opportuni∣ty to fish in those troubled waters, and vent their spleen further, by an utter extirpation of Episcopacy, and by trampling the mitre under their feet, hoping to have som of the birds plumes, being pluck, to feather their own nests; And they brought their work about; Good Lord, what a deal of dirt was present∣ly thrown into the Bishops faces by every Rurall pettie Clerk! what infamous bal∣lads were sung, what a thick clowd of Epi∣demical hatred hung suddenly over them, so far, that a dog with black and white spots was called a Bishop amongst them up and down the streets.
The chiefest contrivers of this up-roare, inding their design to go on so well, and perceiving the whole Country so eagerly bent against Bishops, (and what artifices and suggestions were us'd to render them so o∣dious is incredible) but finding withall his Majestie unwilling to alter the government his father (of so fresh and famous memory) had left him, and to which he had bin sworn at his Coronation, they put themselves in arms, and rais'd forces to beat down the mitre with the sword, if the scepter would not do it. To the frontiers they came with a great Army, (not half so great as was bru∣ted) pretending they came as Petitioners (though they brought their Petition upon the pikes▪ point,) Some of the great ones▪ a∣bout the King grew cold in the action: And what a pacification was then shuffled up, and how a Parliament was called thereupon in Scotland, with other passages, is a fitter subject for a story then a discourse. Peregrin. I could have wished two things, that ei∣ther His Majesty had given them battail then, having the flower of his Nobility and Gentry with him, who I understood came with all cheerfulnesse and pomptitude to at∣tend
him, or else that after the said pacifi∣cation, His Majestie had shaken off all jea∣lousies, and with a royall freedom and a commanding confidence gone amongst them to hancell their new Parliament House at Edenburgh; for it is probable, it had a∣verted those showers and cataracts of mise∣ries which have fallen pon us since; but I pray Sir, proceed. Patricius. As they say, there is no wind but blows some-body good, so it was thought, this Nor∣thern clowd did England some advantage, for a Parliament was summond hereupon: a Parliament do I call it? it was rather an Embryo of a Parliament, an Ephemeran of 20▪ days. In this sitting His Majesty decla∣red unto both Houses the indignities he had received by His Scotch Subjects, and therefore propos'd a supply to be made of twelve subsidies to suppress that Rebellion; and in lieu thereof he was willing to forbear and utterly to abolish the Ship-money, which he had reason to think legall at first, being advised thereunto by Noy his Attor∣ney Generall, who had such a mighty re∣pute in the Law; yet he would not rest ther, but he advised further with his learned
Councell, who concurred in opinion with Noy; Nor wold he rest ther also, but he had the approbation of all the Iudges singly, and afterwards of nine of the twelve jointly upon a demur. This was enough to induce his conscience to hold it legall all this while; It was clearly proved that the moneys levi∣ed this way, were employed to no other but the intended service, the garding of the narrow Seas; and not onely for that, but to preserve his right of Dominion in them, being the fairest flower of his Crown, which was not onely discoursed of abroad, but be∣gan to be questioned by the French Cardi∣nall: And touching danger, how could England be but in apparant dangers? con∣siderig how all her next neighbours were in actuall hostility, which made huge fleets of men of war, both French, Dunkerkers, Hamburgers and Hollanders to sail and flaunt ever and anon in her Channells, and hard be∣fore her royall Chambers: nor came ther one penny of that publick contribution to his privat coffers, but he added much of his own demeans for the maintenance of a royal fleet every sommer: yet he was ready to passe any Bill for the utter abolishing of the said Ship-money, and for redressing of ay
other grievances, provided they wold en∣able him to suppress this Scots Rebellion: some say the House was inclinable to com∣ply with his Majesties demands, but (as the ill spirit wold have it) that Parliament was suddenly brok up, and I wold they who gave that Counsel had bin then in Arabia, or beyond the Line, in their way to Madagas∣car, who neverthelesse have got to be in high request with this present Parliament. Among others, old Sir Harry Vane was one, who, when the House seem'd willing to give six subsidies, and the King inclinable to take them; The said Vane being the Se∣cretary of State stood up, and said, His Ma∣jesty expected no less then twelve, which words did so incense and discompose the House, that they drew after them that un∣happy dissolution. His Majesty being reduced to these straits, and resenting still the insolence of the Scot, proposed the busines to His Pri∣vy Councell, who suddenly made up a con∣siderable and most noble summe for his pre∣sent supply, whereunto divers of his dome∣stick servants and Officers did contribut. Amongst others who were active herein, the Earl of Strafford bestir'd himself nota∣bly,
and having got a Parliament to be call'd in Ireland he went over, and with in∣credible celeritie raised 8000. men, who procured money of that Parliament to maintain them, and got over those angry Seas again in the compasse of lesse then six weeks. You may infer hence to what an exact uncontrollable obedience he had reduced that Kingdom, as to bring about so great a work with such a suddennes and fa∣cilitie. An armie was also raised▪ here, which marched to the North, and there fed upon the Kings pay a whole Summer. The Scot was not idle all this while; but having pun∣ctuall intelligence of every thing that passed at Court, as farre as what was debated in the Cabinet Councel, and spoken in the bed∣chamber, (and herein amongst many others, the Scot had infinite advantage of us) He armed also, and preferring to make England the stage of the warre, rather then his own countrey, and to invade rather then to be in∣vaded, He got over the Tweed, and found the passage open, and as it were made for him all the way till hee came to the Tine, and though there was a considerable army of horse and foot at Newcastle, yet they never
offered so much as to face him all the while, At Newburgh indeed there was a small skir∣mish, but the English foot would not fight, so Newcastle gates flew open to the Scot without any resistance at all, where it is thought he had more friends then foes, and who were their friends besides for this invasion, I hope Time, and the Tribunall of Justice will one day discover. His Majesty being then at York, summo∣ned all his Nobles to appear, to advise with them in this exigence: Commissioners were appointed on both sides, who met at Rippon, and how the hearts and courage of some of the English Barons did boil within them, to be brought to so disadvantageous a Treatie with the Scot, you may well imagin. So the Treatie began, which the Scot wold not conform himself to do, unless he were first unrebell▪d and made Rectus in Curia, and the Proclamation, wherein he was declared Traitour, revoked, alledging it wold be dishonorable for His Majesty to treat with rebels. This treaty was adjourned to Lon∣don, where this present Parliament was summoned (which was one of the chiefest errands of the Sco, as some think.) And thus far by these sad and short degrees, have
I faithfully led you along to know the tru Originals of our calamities. Peregrin. Truly Sir, I must tell you, that to my knowledg these unhappy traverses with Scotland, have made the English suffer abroad very much in point of National ho∣nour; Therefore I wonder much that all this while ther is none set a work to make a solid Apologie for England in some com∣municable language, (either in French or Latin) to rectifie the world in the truth of the thing, and to vindicat her, how she was bought and sold in this expedition, conside∣ring what a party the Scot had here, and how his comming in, was rather an Invita∣tion, then an Invasion, and I beleeve if it had bin in many parts of the world besides, some of the Commanders had gone to the pot. Patricius. It is the practise of some States I know, to make sacrifice of some eminent Minister, for publick mistakes: but to follow the thred of my Discourse. The Parliament being sate, His Majesty told them, that he was resolved to cast himself wholly upon the affection and fidelity of his people, where∣of
they were the Representative body: Therfore he wished them to go roundly on to close up the ruptures that were made by this infortunat war, and that the two armies, one domestick, the other forrain, which were gnawing the very bowels of the King∣dom, might be dismissed. Touching grie∣vances of any kind (and what State was ther ever so pure, but some corruption might creep into it?) He was very ready to redresse them: concerning the Ship-money, he was willing to pass a Bll for the utter abolition of it, and to establish the proper∣ty of the subject; therefore he wished them not to spend too much time about that. And for Monopolies, he desired to have a list of them, and he wold damn them all in one Proclamation: Touching ill Counsellours, either in Westminster-Hall, or White-Hall, either in Church or State, he was resolved to protect none, Therefore he wished that all jealousies and misunderstandings might vanish: This, with sundry other strains of Princely grace he delivered unto them, but withall he told them, that they shold be very cautious how they shook the fram of an ancient Government too far, in regard it was like a Watch, which being put asunder,
can never be made up again, if the least pin be left out. So ther were great hopes of a calm, after that cold Northern storm had so blustered, and that we shold be suddenly rid of the Scot, but that was least intended, untill som designs were brought about. The Earl of Strafford, the Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry, the Iudges, and divers Monopolists are clapt up, and you know who took a timely flight (Lord Finch) to the other side of the Sea. And in lieu of these, the Bishop of Lincoln is enlarged, Bastwick, Burton, and Prynn are brought into London with a kind of Hosanna. His Majesty gave way to all this, and to comply further with them, he took as it were into his bosom, I mean, he ad∣mitted to his Privy Councell those Parlia∣ment Lords, who were held the greatest Zelots amongst them, that they might be witnesses of his secret'st actions, and to one of them (the Lord Say) he gave one of the considerablest Offices of the Kingdom, by the resignation of another most deserving Lord, upon whom they could never fasten the least misdemeanour; yet this great new Officer wold come neither to the same Ora∣tory, Chappell, or Church, to joyn in pray∣er
with his Royall Master, nor communicat with him in any publick exercise of devoti∣on: and may not this be called a tru Recu∣sancie? To another he gave one of the prime and most reposefull Offices about his own Person at Court (The Earl of Essex) and thereby he might be said to have given a Staff to beat himself. Moreover, partly to give his Subjects an Evidence how firmly he was rooted in his Religion, and how much he desired the strenthning of it abroad, The treaty of marriage went on 'twixt his eldest daughter, and the young Prince of Orenge. Hereunto may be added as a speciall argu∣ment of compliance and grace, the passing of the Bill for a Trienniall Parliament, and lastly (which is the greatest Evidence that possibly can be imagined, of that reall trust and confidence he reposed in them) he pas∣sed that prodigious Act of Continuance. Peregrin. Touching the Trienniall Parliament, there may come some whole some fruit out of it, will keep all Officers in awe, and excite the Nobilitie, and young Gentrie of the King∣dome to studie, and understand the Govern∣ment of the land, and be able to sit and serve their countrey in this great Senate: But for
this Act of Continuance I understand it not; Parliaments are good Physick, but ill meat; They say abroad that England is turned hereby from a Monarchy to a Democracy, to a perpe∣tual kind of Quingentumvirat; and whereas in former times ther was a Heptarchy of seven▪ Kings in her, they say now she hath seventy times seven. But in lieu of these unparallell'd Acts of grace and trust to the Parl. what did the Parliament for the King all this while? Patricius. They promised, specially upon the passing of the last Act, That they would make him the most glorious, the best beloved, and richest King that ever reigned in England: and this they did with deep protestings and assevera∣tions. But there intervened an ill-favoured accident which did much hurt, viz. A Dis∣course (for truely I think it was no more) but a discourse) which some green heads held to bring up the Northern armie, to check the Puritan partie, and the rabble of the citie: This kept a mightie noyse, and you know who fled upon it, and much use was made of it to make that cloud of jealousie which was but of the breadth of a hand before, to ap∣pear as big as a mountaine. Yet his Maje∣stie continued still in passing Acts of grace,
and complying with them in every thing▪ Hee put over unto them the Earle of Straf∣ford, who after a long costly triall (wherein he carried himself with as much acutenesse, dexteritie and eloquence, as humane braine could be capable of for his defence) hee was condemned to the Scaffold, and so made a sacrifice to the Scot, who stayed chiefly for his head, which besides those vast summes of money, was given him to boot. Peregrin. Touching the Earle of Strafford, 'tis tru, he was full of ability, elocution and confi∣dence, and understood the lawes of England as well as any, yet there were two things, I heard, wherein his wisdom was questioned; first that having a charge ready against his chiefest accusers, yet he suffered them to have the priority of sute, which if he had got he had thereby made them parties, and so incapable to be produced a∣gainst him: Secondly, that during the time of his tryall, he applyed not himself with that compliance to his Iury as well as to his Iudges, for he was observed to comply on∣ly with the Lords, and not with the House of Commons.
Patricius. Howsoever, as some say, his death was esolved upon, (si non per viam justitiae, sal∣tem per viam expedientiae) which appears in regard the proceedings against him are by a clause in the Act not to be produced for a lead∣ing case or example to future ages and inferi∣our Courts: I blush to tell you how much the rabble of the City thirsted after his blood, how they were suffered to strut up and down the streets before the royal Court, and the Parliament it self, with im∣punity; They cried out, that if the Common Law fail'd, club law should knock him down, and their insolency came to that height, that the names of those Lords that would not doome him to death, should be given them to fix upon posts up and downe; And this was the first tumult that happened this Parliament, whereof so many followed after their example, being not onely con∣niv'd at, but backed by authoritie, for there were prohibitions sent from the Parliament, to hinder all processe against some of them. These Myrmidons, as they termed them∣selves, were ready at a watchword, so that one might say there was a kind of discipline in disorder.
Peregrin. Were ther any troubled for delivering their votes in the Houses? I thought that freedom of opinion and speech, were one of the prime priviledges of that great Nationall Senat. Patricius. Yes, Those that were the Minions of the House before, became now the subjects of popular malice and detraction, (as the Lord Digby now Earl of Bristol for one) because a∣gainst the dictamen of their consciences they would not vote the Earl of Strafford to death, and renounce their own judgments, and captivate it to the sense of others, yet they stood firm to their first grounds, that he was a delinquent in a high nature, and incapable ever to beare office in any of His Majesties dominions. Peregrin. I perceive Sir by your speeches, that one of the chiefest causes of these combustions may be imputed to the Citie of London, which may be called the Metropolis of all these evils, and I little wonder at it, for it hath been alwaies incident to all great Townes, when they grow rich and popu∣lous, to fall into acts of insolence, and to spurne at government; where so many pots,
(so many braines I meane) are a boyling, ther must needs be a great deal of froth, but let her look to her self, for Majesty hath long arms, and may reach her at last. But the truth is, that London bears no proportion with the size of this Island, for either the one shold be larger, or the other lesser: London may be well compared to the liver of a cramm'd Italian goose, whose fatning ema∣cerates the rest of the whole body, and makes it grow lean and languish, and she may be well term'd a goose now more then ever, for her feathers are pluck'd apace; but now that you have done with the Earl of Strafford, what is become of all the rest who were committed? Patricius. They are still in durance, and have conti∣nued so these two years and upward, yet are not proceeded against, nor brought to their answer to this very day, though all the Courts of Justice have bin open ever since. Many hundreds more of the best sort of Subjects have bin suddenly clapt up, and no cause at all mentioned in many of their commitments, and new Prisons made of purpose for them, where they may be said to be buried alive, and so forgotten as if
ther were no such men in the world (wher∣of the Author was one:) And how this can stand with Magna Charta, with the Petition of Right (to vindicat which, ther was so much pains taken the last Parliament) let any man of a sane judgment determin. Yet one of the Judges, who hath an Impeach∣ment o High Treason still lying Dormant against him, though he be not Rectus in Cu∣ria himself, is suffered to sit as Judge upon the highest tribunall of England, whereas another for a pretended misdemeanour only is barr'd from sitting ther. Others who were at first cryed up and branded to be the most infamous Projectors and Monopolizers of the land, (as Hamilton, Holland, &c.) are not only at liberty, but crept into favour, and made use of. Peregrin▪ Hath the house of Commons power to commit any but their own Members with∣out conference with the Lords? Or hath any Order or Ordinance of one of the Hou∣ses singly, or of both conjunctly, power to enjoin a virtual, binding, generall obedience without the Royal consent? Patricius. The power of Parliament, when King,
Peers, and Commons, which is the whole Kingdom digested as it were into one vo∣lum, is indefinit, but what either of both Houses can do of themselves singly or joynt∣ly without the King who is the life of the Law, especially when a visible faction reigns amongst them, I will not deter∣min. —tantas componere lites non opis est nostrae— But for my own opinion, I think it is as im∣possible for them to make a Law without the King, as it was for Paracelsus to make a human creture without coition of both sexes. The results of Parliament without the Roy∣all consent, are as matches without fire; And it is an incontroulable principle, that the old Law must be our guide, till new be made, nor is any Act of the Subject justi∣fiable, but what is warranted by the old. But to proceed in the tru discovery of these Do∣mestick scissures, my Lord of Stafford being gone, we hop'd fair weather wold follow. (He who was the cause of the tempest (as they pretended) being thrown over-board) but unluckie mists of jealousie grew thicker and thicker; Yet the Scots were dismist, ha∣ving
had Fidlers fare, meat, drink, and money, for eleven long moneths together. So His Majesty went to Scotland, where the Parlia∣ment ther, did but ask and have any thing, though it be the unquestionable Preroga∣tive of Majesty to grant or deny Petitions, and to satisfie his conscience before any Councell whatsoever. But during his sojourn ther, this formida∣ble hideous Rebellion brok out in Ireland, which though it may be said to be but an old play newly reviv'd▪ yet the Scene was never so Tragicall and bloody as now: for the Barbarismes that have bin committed ther have bin so sanguinary, and mon∣strously savage, that I think posterity will hold them hyperbolicall when History re∣lates them. The Irish themselves affirm ther concurr'd divers causes to kindle this fire: One, was the taking off of Straffors head, (who awd them more then any Deputy ever did) and that one of his Accusations shold be to have used the Papists ther too favou∣rably: Secondly, the rigorous proceedings and intended courses against the Roman Ca∣tholiques here in England. Lastly, the stop∣ping of that Regiment of Irish, who was pro∣mised by His Majesties Royall Word and
Letter to the King of Spain, who relying upon that employment, rather then to beg, steal, or starve, turned Rebels: And that, which hath agravated the Rebellion all this while, and heightned much the spirit of the Irish, was the introduction of the Scot, whom they hate in perfection above all people els; And intended lastly the design spoken of in our Parliament, to make an absolute Con∣quest, and Nationall Eradication of them, which hath made them to make vertue of necessity, and to be valiant against their wills. Peregrin. Indeed I heard that Act of staying the Irish Regiment, considering how the Mar∣quesses de Velada, and Malvezzi, and Don Alonso de Cardenas, who were all three Am∣bassadours here for the King of Spain at that time, having by reliance upon the sacred Word and Letter of a King, imprested mo∣ney, and provided shipping for their tran∣sport, and bin at above 10000. Crowns charges, I say this Act was very much cen∣sured abroad, to the dishonour of His Maje∣sty and our reproach. Patricius. I am very sorry to hear it. Well Sir. His
Majesty by His presence having setled Scot∣land, was at his return to London received with much joy and exultation, but though he was brought in with a Hosanna at one end of the Town, he found a Crucifige at the o∣ther: For at Westminster ther was a Remon∣strance fram'd, a work of many weeks, and voted in the dead of night, when most of the moderat and well-thoughted Mem∣bers were retired to their rest, wherein with as much aggravation and artifice as could be, the least moat in Government was ex∣posed to publick view, from the first day of His Majesties Inauguraton to that very hour: Which Remonstrance as it did no good to the Publick but fill peoples heads with doubts, their hearts with gall, and re∣tard the procedure of all businesse besides, so you may well think it could expect but cold entertainment with His Majesty, who hoped his great Councel, according to their often deep protestations, had done some∣thing for his welcom home, that might have made him the best beloved King that ever  amongst his people. Peregrin. , ther is no Government upon  up of mn, but is subject to
corruption; there is no Court of judicature so cleane, but some cobwebs may gather in it, unlesse an Act of Parliament could be made to free and exempt men from all in∣firmities and errour; It cannot be denied, but Scotland might have something to com∣plaine of (though I think least of any) and so leapt first into the pooll to be cur'd, and what she fish'd besides in those troubled wa∣ters 'tis too well known: England also no doubt might have some grievances, which his Majestie freely offered not onely to re∣dresse for the present, but to free her of all feares for the future, from falling into re∣lapses of that kinde; but to redresse grie∣vances by Armes, by plunging the whole countrey into an intestine warre, this makes the remedy worse then the malady, it is as if one would go about to cure a sick body by breaking his head, or let him blood by giving him a dash on the nose, it is as mad a tricke as his was who set the whole House a fire to roast his egs. But truly Sir, in my opinion, his Majesty at his return from Scot∣land, might have justly expected some acts of compliance and gratitude from his Parlia∣ment, considering what unparallel'd acts of grace he had pass'd before.
Patricius. His Majesty did not rest there, but com∣plied further with them by condescending to an act for putting down the star-chamber Court the high Commission, the Court of honour, nay, he was contented his own Privy Coun∣cell should be regulated, and his forests bounded not according to ancient Prerogative but late custome; nay further, he pass'd a Bill for the unvoting, and utter exclusion of the Spirituall Lords from the Parliament for ever, whereby it cannot be denied, but by the casheering of 25 votes at a clap, and by excluding the Recusant Lords besides (who subsist most by his grace) he did not a little enervat his own prerogative. Adde hereunto that having placed two worthy Gentlemen Biron and Lunsford Lieutenants of the Tower, he remov'd them both one after the other, and was content to put in one of their Election: And lastly, he trusted them with his greatest strength of all, with his Navie Royall, and call'd home Pen∣nington who had the guard of the narrow Seas so many yeares. Peregrin. Truly Sir, I never remember to have heard or read of such notable acts of grace
and confidence from any King: but would not all this suffice? Patricius. No, But they demanded all the Land Souldiery and military strength of the King∣dome to be disposed of by them, and to be put into what posture, and in what Equipage, and under what Comman∣ders they pleas'd; And this was the first thing his Majesty ever denyed them, yet he would have granted them this also for a li∣mited time, but that would not serve the turn; Hereupon his Majesty grew a little sensible how they inch'd every day more and more upon his Royall Prerogatives; And intending to go to his Town of Hull to see his Magazin (which he had bought with his own money) with his ordinary train, he was in a hostile manner kept out, Canons mounted, Pistols cockt, and leveld at him. But whether that unlucky Knight (Hotham) did this out of his fidelity to the Parl. or out of an apprehension of feare that some about the King, being mov'd with the barbarous∣nesse of the action would have pistold him, I will not determine. Peregrin. I have read of divers affronts of this kinde
that were offerd to the French Kings, Ro∣chell shut her gates more than once against Henry the Great, and for the King now regnant, they did not only shut him out of many of his Towns, but upon the gates of some of them they writ in legible Cha∣racters, Roy san Foy, ville sans peur, a faith∣lesse King, a fearlesse Towne. Yet in the greatest heat of those warres, there was ne∣ver any Towne refus'd to let in her King, provided he came attended onely with his own traine; and besides other people abroad, I heard the Scot's nation did abhor that Act at Hull. But I pray Sir go on. Patricius. His Majesty being thus shut out of one Towne, he might justly suspect that an at∣tempt might be made to shut him in, in some other; Therefore he made a motion to the Yorke-shire Gentlemen, to have a gard for the preservation of his Person, which was done accordingly. But I am come to for∣ward, I must go backe and tell you how the King was driven from Westminster. When His Majesty was return'd from Scotland he retir'd to Hampton Court, whence upon the Lord Majors and the Cities humble solli∣ciation, he came back to White-hal to keep
his Christmas. But when the Bill against Bishops was in agitation, which businesse asted neer upon ten weekes, a crue of bold turdie mechanicks, and mariners, came rom the Citie and ruffled before White-hall and Westminster-hall, and would have violated the Abby of Westminster, so that for many ights a Court of gard was forced to be kept n the body of that Church, (the chiefest Sanctuary of the Kingdom.) Moreover, His Majesty having impeached some of the Members of both Houses, of High Treason, and being denied to have them delivered up, he went himself to the Lower House to demand them, assuring the House they should have as faire and legall a triall as ever men had. But as it pleas'd God, they were not there, but retir'd to London for refuge; The Londoners grew starke wilde thereupon, and notice be∣ing sent to all the adjacent Counties, this act of the Kings (though it wanted no pre∣cedents of former times) was aggravated in the highest degree that possibly could be. Hence you may easily inferre, what small securitie his Majesty had at White-hall, and what indignities he might have exposed himself unto, by that which had pass'd al∣ready from the Rabble, who had vilified and
cried tush at his proclamations, and disgorg'd other rebellious speeches with impunity: therefore he retird to Hampton Court (as we read, our Saviour withdrew himselfe once from the multitude) thence to Windsor Castle, whence accompanying her Majesty, with his eldest daughter to the sea side for Holland, and having commanded the Prince to attend him against his return at Greenwich, the Prince had been surpriz'd, and brought to London, had not the King come a little before. Thence he removed to Yorke, where he kept his Court all the Sommer. But to returne to London, the very next day after their Majesties departure, the Countrey about, especially Buckinghamshire being incited by the Ctie and Parliament, came in great swarmes, and joyning with the London mechanicks, they ruffled up and down the streets, and kept such a racket, making the fearfull'st riot that ever I be∣leeve was heard of in Parliament time: so those Members which formerly were fled into the Citie, were brought to the House in a kind of triumph, being garded by land and water in warlike manner by these Cham∣pions: After this, sundry troops of horse came from all the shires near adjoyning to
he Parliament, and Buckingham men were he first, who while they express'd their ve to (Hamden) their Knight, forgot their worn oath to their King, and in stead of fea∣thers they carried a printed Protestation in heir hats, as the Londoners had done a lit∣le before upon the Pikes point. Peregrin. This kept a foul noise beyond Sea I re∣ember, so that upon the Rialto in Venice, t was sung up and down, that a Midsummer Moon (though it was then midst of Winter) did raign amongst the English, and you must hink that it hath made the Venetian to hrink in his shoulders, and to look but ill∣favouredly upon us, since wee'l have none of his currans. But Sir, I heard much of that Protestation, I pray what was the substance of it? Patricius. It was penn'd, and enjoyn'd by the Par∣iament for every one to take, and it con∣sisted of many parts; the first was, to main∣tain the tru Potestant Religion against all Popish innovations, which word Popish (as som think) was scrued in of purpose for a loop hole to let in any other innovation: the second was to maintain the Prerogative an
Honour of the King; then the power and pri∣viledge of Parliament; and lastly, the Pro∣priety and Liberty of the subject; for thre parts of this Protestation, the people up an down seem'd to have utterly forgotte them, and continue so still, as if their con∣sciences had bin tied only to the third, viz the priviledge of Parliament, and never was ther a poor people so besotted, never wa reason and common sence so baffled in an part of the world. And now will I go to attend His Majesty at York, where, as I told you before, being loth to part with his Sword, (though he had half parted with his Scepter before) by de∣nying the Parliament an indefinite time to dispose of the Militia, (alleadging that as the Word, so the thing was new.) He sends forth his Commissions of Array, according to the old Law of England, which declares i to be the undoubted Right, and Royall Sig∣norie of the King, to arm or disarm any sub∣ject: The Parliament sends out clean coun∣termands for executing the said Militia, so by this clashing 'twixt the Commission of Array and the Militia, the first flash of this odious unnaturall war may be said to break out. The pulse of the Parliament beats
yet higher, they send an Admirall to the Sea (the Earl of Warwick) not only without, but expresly against the Kings special com∣mand. They had taken unto them a Mili∣tary gard from the City for their protection, without His Majesties consent, who by the advice of the Lord Keeper and others, had offered them a very strong gard of Constables and other Officers to attend them, which the Law usually allows; yet the raising of that gard in York-shire for the safegard of His Majesties person, was interpreted to be leavying of war against the Parliament, and so made a sufficient ground for them to raise an Army, to appoint a Generall (the Earl of Essex) with whom they made publick De∣clarations to live and die. And they assu∣med power to confer a new Appellation of honour upon him, (Excellency) as if any could confer Honour but the King! And this Army was to be maintain'd out of the mixt conribution of all sorts of people; so a great masse of money and plate was brought into the Guild hall, the Semstresse brought in her silver Thimble, the Chamber∣maid her Bodkin, the Cook his Spoons, and the Vintner his Bowles, and every one som∣thing, to the advancement of so good a
work, as to wage war directly against the Sacred person of their Soverain, and put the whole Countrey into a combustion. Peregrin. Surely it is impossible that a rationall Christian people shold grow so simple and sottish, as to be so far transported, without some colourable cause, therfore I pray tell me what that might be? Patricius. The cause is made specious enough, and varnished over wonderfull cunningly; The people are made to believe they are in danger, and a prevention of that danger is promised, and by these plausible ways the understanding is wrought upon, and an affection to the cause is usher'd in, by aggravation of this danger, as one wold draw a thred through a needles eye: This huge Bugbear Danger, was like a mon∣ster of many heads, the two chiefest were these▪ That ther was a plot to let in the Pope; And to  the civil Government into a French frame; It is incredible to think how the Pulpits up and down London did ring of this by brainsick Lecturers, of whom som were come from New-England, others were pick'd out of purpose, and sent for from their own flock in the Countrey, to possesse, or
rather to poison the hearts of the Londoners, to puzzle their intellectualls, and to intoxi∣cat their brains by their powerfull gifts; It was punishable to preach of Peace, or of Caesars Right, but the common subject of the pul∣pit was either blasphemy against God, diso∣bedience against the King, or incitements to sedition; Good Lord, what windy frothy stuff came from these fanatick brains; These Phrenetici Nebulones (for King Iames gives them no better Character in his (,) who may be said to be mad out of too much ignorance, not knowledg; who neverthelesse are come to that height of prophaness and pride, that they presume to father all their doctrines, all their non∣sense, raptures and ravings upon the holy Spirit. Nor did the Pulpit only help to kin∣dle this fire, but the Presse also did contri∣bute much stubble; What base scurrilous Pamphlets were cryed up and down the streets, and dispersed in the ? What palpable and horrid lies were daily printed? How they multiplied in every corner in such plenty, that one might say ter was a superfaetation of lies, which con∣tinue unto this day? One while the King of Denmark was comming over from the
Sound: Another while the King of France had a huge Army about Calais design'd for England: Another while ther was an Ar∣my of Irish Rebels comming over with the privity of the King: Another while a plot was cryed up and down to burn London: Another while ther were subterranean invi∣sible troups (at Ragland Castle) mustered under ground in Wales, and thousands of Pa∣pists armed in Lancashire, and divers reports of this nature were daily blown up, and though the Authors of them were worth∣lesse and mean futilous persons, yet the re∣ports themselves had that credit as to be en∣tertain'd and canvas'd in the High Court of Parliament. But these false rumors pro∣duc'd one politick effect (and it was the end indeed for which they were dispers'd) they did intimidat and fill the peoples hearts with fears, and dispose of them to up roars and so to part with money. Peregrin. I know ther be sundry sorts of Fears; ther are Conscientious Fears, and ther are annick Fears, ther are Pusillanimous Fears, and ther are Politick Fears. The first sort of Fear proceeds from guilt of Conscience, which turns often to Phrecy. The second
sort of Fear may be call'd a kind of Chyme∣ra, 'tis som sudden surprizall or Consternati∣on arising from an unknown cause. Pusilla∣nimous Fear makes a mountain of a mole∣hill, and proceeds from poverty of spirit, and want of courage, and is a passion of ab∣ject and degenerous minds, and may be call'd Cowardise, and this Fear is always ac∣companied with jealousie. Politick fear, is a created forg'd Fear wrought in another, to bring som design about; And as we find the Astronomers (the comparison is too good) do imagin such and such shapes and circles in the Heavens, as the Zodiak, Equi∣noctiall, Colures, Zones and Topiques with o∣thers, though ther be no such things really in nature, to make their conclusions good. So the Polititian doth often devise and in∣vent false imaginary Fears, to make his proceedings more plausible amongst the silly vulgar, and therby to compasse his ends: And as the Sun useth to appear far bigger to us in the morning then at noon, when he is exalted to his Meridian, and the reason the Philosophers use to give, is the in∣terposition of the vapours which are com∣monly in the lower Region, through which we look upon him (as we find a piece of sil∣ver
look bigger in a bucket of water then elsewhere) so the Polititian uses to cast strange mists of Fear, and fogs of jealousie before the simple peoples eyes, to make the dan∣ger seem bigger: But truly Sir, this is one of the basest kinds of policy, nor can I be∣lieve ther be any such Polititians amongst the Cabalists of your Parliament, who pre∣tend to be so busie about Gods work, a Glo∣rious Reformation, for you know ther is a good Text for it, that God needeth not the wicked man▪ he abominats to be beholding to liers to bring about his purposes: But I pray Sir deal freely with me, do you ima∣magin ther was a design to bring in the Mass again? Patricius. The Masse? You may say ther was a plot to bring in Mahomet as soon, to bring in the Alchoran, or Talmud as soon; For I dare pawn my soul, the King is as Cordiall a Protestant as any that breathes under his three Crowns, which besides his publick deep Protestations, and his constant quotidian ex∣emplary open practise, many other con∣vincing private reasons induce me to be∣lieve, and it is in vain to think the Pope can take footing here to any purpose without
the Kings leave. You know as well as I Sir, that of all the Reformed Churches in Christendom, the Lutheran retains most of the Roman, both in his positions and pra∣ctise, and comes much nearer to him then we do, yet I have observed, that from the first day of his Reformation, to this, He is as averse, and as far off from Rome, as the rigidest Calvinist that is; And shall I think, because ther are som humble and hansom postures, and decent vestures revived in our Church (for they were never abolished;) be∣cause the Communion table stands in the East end where it ever stood since Christia∣nity came in all our Cathedralls, which shold be a rule to all inferiour Churches, though the Seperatist cries it up most falsly to be an Innovation: because the Queen hath a few simple Capuchins (fewer then was allowed by the Matrimoniall Capitulations) whither to retire sometimes: Because Schismaticks were proceeded against with more care, and the Government of the Church born up ately with more countenance, shall I be∣ieve out of all this that the Pope must pre∣ently come in? shall I believe the weakness f our Religion to be such, as to be so easily aken and overturn'd? Yet I believe ther
was a pernicious plot to introduce a new Re∣ligion, but what I pray? not Popery, but Presbitry, and with it to bring in the doctrine of Buchanan and Knox for civill government, and so to cast our Church and State into a Scots mould. Peregrin. Indeed I heard the English much derided abroad for resigning their intellectualls in point of Religion to the Scots, whom from Infidels they made Christians, and Reformed Christians first, and now for the English to run to them for a Religion, and that the Unifor∣mity & reformation shold proceed from them, having disdain'd us formerly, what a dis∣paragement is it thinke you to the Anglican Church? This with other odd traverses, as the eclipsing the glory of the King, and bringing him back to a kind of minoritie, the tampering with his conscience, I will not say the straining it so farre, the depri∣ving him of all kind of propertie, the de∣pressing of his Regall power, wherein the honour of a nation consists, and which the English were us'd to uphold more then any other, for no King hath more awful attributs from his subjects, as Sacred Sovereigne, gra∣cious and most Excellent Majestie, nor any
King so often prayed for, for in your mor∣ning Liturgie he is five times prayed for, whereas other Princes are mentioned but once or twice at most in their's: I say that this, with interception of letters, some in∣civilities offered Ambassadors, and the bold lavish speeches that were spoken of the greatest Queenes in Christendome, and his Majesties late withdrawing his Royall pro∣tection from some of his Merchant-Sub∣jects in other countreys, hath made the Eng∣lish lose much ground in point of esteeme abroad, and to be the discourse, I will not say the scorne of other people. They stick not to say, that there is now a worse maladie fallen upon their minds, then fell upon their bodies about an age since by the Sweating sicknesse, which was peculiar onely unto them and found them out under all Climes. O∣thers say, there is a pure  amongst them, that they are turn'd to Wolves (as you know it is a common thing in Lpland) & that the old Adage is verified in them, Homo homini lupus; Nay our next neighbours give out, that the saying was never truer then now, Rex Anglorum, Rex Diabolorum. Nor is it a small disrepute to the English, that the word Cavalier, which is an attribute
that no Prince in Christendome will disdain, and is the common Appellation of the No∣bilitie and Gentrie in most parts of the world, is now us'd, not onely in Libels and frivolous Pamphlets, but in publicke Par∣liamentarie Declarations, for a terme of re∣proach. But truely Sir, what you have re∣lated touching the Pulpit and the Presse, transformes me into wonder, and I should want faith to beleeve it, did you not speak it upon your knowledge; but the English when they fall to worke upon a new humour, use to overdoe all people. Patricius. You have not yet the tithe of what I could give you, you would little think that Coach∣men, and Feltmakers, and Weavers were permitted to preach up and down without controulment, and to vent their froth and venome against Church and State, to cry downe our Hierarchy and Liturgie, by most base and reviling speeches. Peregrin. Touching your Lyturgie, I have heard it censur'd abroad by the regidest Calvinists of Generva and Dort, yet I never heard any o∣ther Character given of it, but that it is a most Pious, Pathetick, and perfect peece of
devotion, both for the matter and forme of it, which I have been a little curious to observe. It begins with some choise pas∣sages of holy Scripture, and a previous Declaration or Monitory to excite us to the worke in hand; The first addresse wee make to God is by an humble and joynt Confession which is appliable to any con∣science, and comprehends in it all kind of sins. Then followeth a pronuntiation of Gods promises and pronesse to pardon and absolve us; We goe on to the Lords Pray∣er, which having bin dictated by our Saviour himself we often use, and is as Amber throwne in amongst our Frankincense, to make the Sacrifice more precious and plea∣sing unto God; Then we proceed to som choice Psalms, and other portions of holy scripture taken out of the old and new testa∣ment; Then we fall to the Symbole of faith, whereof we make a solemn joynt confessi∣on in such a posture as shews a readinesse and resolution in us to defend it: and so to the Letany, wherein the poor penitent pec∣cant soul may be said to breath out herself into the bosome of her Saviour by tender ejaculations, by panting groans, & eviscerated ingeminations, and there is no sin, no tem∣ptation
whatsoever that humane frailty is subject unto, but you shall find a deliverance from it there, it is so full of Christian charity, that there is no condition of people, but are remembred and prayed for there. Then wee proceed by holy alternatif interlocuti∣ons (whereby wee heare our selves speak as well as the Minister) to some effectuall short prayers; because in long prayers the minde is subject to wander, as some Zelots now a dayes use to bring their Hearers into a Wildernesse by their Prayers, and into a Labyrinth by their Sermons. Then goe we on to the Decalogue, and if it be in a Cathe∣drall, there is time enough for the Hearer to examine himselfe, while the Musick playes, where and when he broke any of Gods holy Commandements, and ask particular for∣givenesse accordingly in the intervall; Then after other choice portions of Scripture, and passages relating to our Redemption, and endearing, unto us the merits of it, with a more particular Confession of our Faith, we are dismissed with a Benediction: So that this Liturgy may be call'd an Instrument of many strings, whereon the sighing soul sends up varions notes unto heaven: It is a posie made up of divers flowers, to make
it the more fragrant in the nostrills of God. Now touching your Bishops, I never knew yet any Protestant Church but could be content to have them, had they meanes to maintaine the Dignitie, which the Churches of France with others have not, in regerd the Reformation beg an first among the peo∣ple, not at Court, as here it did in Engl. For un∣lesse ther be som Supervisers of Gods house, endowed with eminent authority to check the fond fancies, and quench the false fatuous fires of every private spirit, and unlesse it be such an authority that may draw unto it a holy kind of awe and obedience what can be expected but confusion and Atheisme? You know what became of the Israelites when the wonted reverence to the Ark, and the Ephod, and the Priest, began to languish a∣mongst them: For the braine of man is like a garden, which unlesse it be fenced about with a wall or hedge, is subject you know to be annoyed by all kinde of beasts which will be ready to runne into it; so the braine unlesse it be restrain'd and bounded in holy things by rules of Canonicall authoritie, a thousand wild opinions, and extravagant fancies will hourely rush into it: nor was there ever any field so subject to produce
Cockle and Darnell, as the human brain is rank and ready to bring forth tares of Schism and Heresie of a thousand sorts, un∣lesse after the first culture the sickle of Au∣thority be applyed to grub up all such noi∣som weeds. Patricius. Yet this most antient dignity of Bishops is traduced and vilified by every shallow-pa∣ted petty Clerk, and not so much out of a tru zeal, as out of envy that they are not the like. And touching our Liturgy, wher∣of you have bin pleas'd to give so exact a Character, people are come to that height of impiety, that in som places it hath bin drown'd, in other places burnt, in som places torn in pieces to serve for the basest uses, nay it hath bin preached publickly in Pulpits, That it is a piece forg'd in the devils shop, and yet the impious foul mouth'd Babbler never was so much as questioned for it. Nor did the Church only eccho with these blasphe∣mies; but the Presse was as pregnant to pro∣duce every day som Monster either against Ecclesiasticall, or Secular Government. I am asham'd to tell you how som bold Pam∣phleters in a discourse of a sheet or two, wold presume to question, to dispute of, and de∣termin
the extent of Monarchik jurisdi∣ction, what sturdy doubts, what sawcy Quae∣ries they put, what odd frivolous distincti∣ons they fam'd, That the King though he was Gods Anointed, yet he was mans ap∣pointed: That he had the commanding, not the disposing power: That he was set to rule over, not to over-rule the people; That he was King by human choice, not by divine Charter; That he was not King by the Grace of God, so much as by the suffrage of the people; That he was a Creatur and produ∣ction of the Parliament: That he had no im∣plicit trust, nor peculiar property in any thing; That populus est potior Rege; That Grex lege, lex est Rege potentior; That the King was singulis major, universis minor, (wheras a successive Monarch—Uno mi∣nor est Iove.—Sometimes they wold bring instances from the States of Holland, sometimes from the Republick of Venice, and apply them so impertinently to abso∣lute and independant Royalty; But I find that the discourse and inferences of these grand Statists were bottom'd upon four false foundations, viz. That the King of whom they speak must be either a Minor, and Idiot, an insufferable Tyrant, or that the
Kingdom they mean, is Elective; None of all which is appliable, either to our most gracious and excellently qualified King, or to his renowned Kingdom, which hath bin always reputed an ancient successive Monar∣chy, govern'd by one Suprem undeposeable and independent head, having the Dignity, the Royall State, and power of an Imperiall Crown, and being responsible to none ut to God Almighty and his own  or his actions, and unto whom a Body oli∣tick compacted of Prelates, , and all degrees of people is naturally subject; but this is a theam of that transcendeny, that it requires a serious and solid Tractat, rather then such a slender Discourse as this is to handle. But I pray excuse me Sir, that I have stept aside thus from the road of my main narration; I told you before, how the clash∣ing 'twixt the Commission of Array, and the Militia, put all things in disarray through∣out the whole Kingdom; The Parliament as they had taken the first Military gard, so they began to arm first, and was it not high time then for His Majesty to do some thing think you? yet he essayed by all ways imagi∣nable to prevent a war, and to conquer by a
passive fortitude, by cunctation, and longa∣nimity. How many overtures for an accom∣modation did he make? How many Pro∣clamations of pardon? How many elaborat Declarations breathing nothing but clemen∣cy, sweetness and truth did drop from his own imperious invincible pen, which will remain upon Record to all ages, as so many Monuments to his eternall glory? Yet som ill spirit stept still in, between his Grace, and the abused Subject, for by the peremptory Order of Parliament (O monstrous thing) the said Proclamations of Grace, and other His Majesties Declarations were prohibited to be read; fearing that the strength and truth of them wold have had a vertue to unblind, or rather unbewitcht (for Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft) the poor besotted people: What deep Protestations and holy Vowes did he reiterate that the main of his designs, was to preserve the tru Protestant Religion, the known Lawes of the Land, and the just priviledges of Parliament? How often did he dehort and woo the City of London (his imperiall Chamber) from such violent cour∣ses, so that she may be justly upbraided with the same words, as the Prince of peace up∣braided Ierusalem withall: London, London,
How often wold I have gathered thee, as a en doth her chickens under her wings, yet thou wouldst not? How often did he descend to acknow∣ledg the manner of demanding the one and five Members in his publick Remonstran∣ces? and if ther was an errour in the pro∣ceedings, how oft did he desire his Great Councell to direct him in a course how to go on in the Empeachment? which they ne∣ver did, but wold reserve the priviledge to themselves to be judge and party. Peregrin. Can your Parliament protect high Trea∣son? I am sure the character of an Ambas∣sadour cannot, which the late French Am∣bassadour (who for his time play'd his Cards more cunning than ever Count Gondomar did) knew well; and therefore, as I heard som French men say, he got Letters of Re∣vocation before his designed time: but it seems strange to me, that the King who is the Protectour of the Law, and Fountain of Justice, cannot have the benefit of the Law himself, which the meanest of his vassals can claim by right of inheritance: 'Tis strange, I say, that the Law shold be a dead letter to him who is the Life of the
Law, but that for omission of some pun∣ctillio in the form of the Processe, the charge of high Treason shold be so slightly wav'd, specially Treason of so universall a concern∣ment, that it may be call'd a complication of many Treasons; for if in every petty State it be High Treason to treat only with any Forrein Power without the privity of the Prince, it must needs be Treason of a higher nature actually to bring them in; And hereof I could alleadge you many pregnant instances, ancient and modern, but that I do not desire to interrupt you in your rela∣tion. Patricius. The Parliament, as I told you before, armed apace, it was not fitting then His Ma∣jesty shold sit idle; therfore he summons those Nobles and others, who had an im∣mediate relation unto him by Office or Ser∣vice, to attend him at York, according to their particular obligation and oath: But it seems the Parliament assumed power to di∣spence with those oaths, and excuse their attendance, which dispensation prevail'd with som (tender) consciences; yet the Great Seal posted to Court, and after it most of the Nobles of the Land, with the flower
of the Gentry, and many of the prime Mem∣bers of the Commons House; so that were it not for the locall priviledge, the Parlia∣ment for number of Members, might be said to be ever since about the King: These Nobles and Gentlemen resenting His Ma∣jesties case, and what practices ther were on foot to alter the Government both of Church and State, not only advised His Majesty to a royall war for defence of his Crown and Dignity, but contributed very chearfully, and have stood constant to the work ever since. Peregrin. They have good reason for it, for the security of the Nobility and Gentry de∣pends upon the strength of the Crown, o∣therwise popular Government wold rush in like a torrent upon them. But surely those Nobles, and those Parliament Gentlemen and others, som of whom I understand, were reputed the wisest and best weigh'd men for experience and parts thorowout the whole Kingdom, and were cryed up in other Parliaments to be the most zealous Patriots for the propriety and freedom of the Subject, wold never have stuck so firm∣ly to His Majesty, had they not known the
bottom of his designs, that it was far from his thoughts to bring in the Pope or French Government; for therby they shold have betrayed their own posterity, and made their children slaves. Patricius. To my knowledge, these Nobles and Gentlemen are still the very same as they were in former Parliaments, wherin they were so cryed up for the truest lovers of their Country, and best Common-wealths∣men; yet now they are branded, and voted to be Seducers, and Traytors, because ac∣cording to their oaths and consciences, they adhere to the King their Master and Liege-Lord, for maintenance of that Religion they were baptized and bred in. Those most Or∣thodox and painfull Divines, which till this Parliament began were accounted the preci∣sest sort of Protestants, are now cryed down for Papists, though they continue still the very same men, both for opinions and preaching, and are no more Papists than I am a Pythagorean. In fine, a tru English Pro∣testant is put now in the same scale with a Papist, and made Synonyma's. And truly these unhappy Schismaticks could not de∣vise how to cast a greater infamy upon the
English Protestant than they have done of late by these monstrous imputations; they wold fasten upon him such opinions which never entred into his thoughts, they wold know ones heart better than himself, and so would be greater Kardiognosticks than God Almighty. But to draw to a conclusion; The Par∣liaments Army multiplyed apace in London, the Kings but slowly in the North, so that when he displayed his Royal Standard at Nottingham, his Forces were not any thing considerable, so that if the Parliaments Ge∣nerall (Essex) had then advanced towards him from Northampton, he had put him to a very great strait; they encreased somthing at Derby, and Stafford, but when he was come to Shrewsbury, the Welch-men came running down the mountains in such multi∣tudes, that their example did much animate the English; so that his army in lesse than a month that the Court continued in Shrews∣bury, came to near upon twenty thousand Horse and Foot; not long before, the Ne∣phew Princes came over, and the first en∣counter Prince Rupert had with the Parlia∣ments Forces was at Worcester, where he de∣feated the flower of their Cavalry, and gave
them a smart blow. At Shrewsbury His Ma∣jesty took a resolution to march with His whole Army towards London, but after se∣ven days march he understood the Parlia∣ments Forces were within six miles side-long of him, and so many miles he went out of His road to find them out, and face them: Up∣on Sunday morning he was himself be∣times upon Edge-Hill, wher the Enemies Colours plainly appear'd in vale before Kein∣ton; it was past two in the after-noon be∣fore all his Infantery could get to the bot∣tom, who upon sight of the Enemies Co∣lours ran as merrily down the Hill, as if they had gone to a Morris dance. So His Majesty himself being Generalissimo, gave command the great Ordnance shold flye for a defiance, so the battell began, which lasted above three hours, and as some French and Dutch Commanders (who were engag'd in the Fight) told me, they never remembred to have seen a more furious battail for the time in all the German wars. Prince Rupert pur∣sued the Enemies Horse like a whirl-wind near upon three miles, and had ther bin day enough, when he came back to the Infan∣terie, in all probability a totall defeat had bin given them: So that the same accident
may be said to fall out here, as happened in that famous battell at Lewis, in Henry the thirds time, where the Prince of Wales (af∣terwards Edward the first) was so eager, and went so far (by excesse of courage) from the body of the Army in pursuance of the Londoners, that it was the fatall cause of the losse of that mighty battail. His Maje∣sty (to his deserved and never-dying glory) comported himself like another Caesar all the while, by riding about and encouraging the Souldiers, by exposing his person often to the reach of a Musket-bullet, and lying in the field all that bleak night in his Coach. Notwithstanding that many lying Pam∣phlets were purposely printed here, to make the world believe that he had retir'd him∣self all the time of the fight; what partiall reports were made in the Guild-Hall to the Londoners, and by what persons, (W. and Strode) I am ashamed to tell you: But that His Majesty was victorious that day (a day which I never thought to have seen in Eng∣land) ther be many convincing arguments to prove it; for besides the great odds of men which fell on their side, and Cannons they lost, som of their Ordnance were nayl'd by the Kings Troops the next morning after
in the very face of their Army. Moreover, the King advanc'd forward the next day to his former road, and took Banbury presently after; but the Parliamenteers went backwards, and so from that day to this, His Majesty continueth Master of the field. 'Tis tru, that in som places, as at Farnham, Win∣chester, and Chichester, they have prevail'd since, but no considerable part of the Roy∣all Army was ther to make opposition; and I blush to tell you, how unworthily the Law of Armes was violated in all those pla∣ces. Peregrin. Good Lord, how can the souls of those men that were in the Parliaments Army at Keinton Battell, dispense with the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegeance, besides the Protestation you speak of, they had taken to preserve the Person, Honour, and Prero∣gative of the King, when they thus actually bandy against his Person, and appear in battel with all the engines of hostility against him? Patricius. I wold be loth to exchange consciences with them, and prevaricate so palpably with God Almighty; Touching the Cavaliers,
they may be said to comply with their du∣ties both towards God and their King accor∣ding to the Oaths you mention; More∣over, ther was a strong Act of Parliament (for their security) which was never as much as questioned or controverted, much lesse suspended or repeal'd: But always stood, and yet stands in as full validity and force, as it was the first day it was Enacted, and as much binding to an universall obedience, which Act runs thus:
13. Octobris Anno undecimo Hen∣rici Septimi, Anno Dom. 1496 IT is Ordained, Enacted, and Esta∣blished by the King Our Soverain Lord, by the Advice and Assent of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by Autho∣rity of the same, That from hence∣forth no manner of person or persons whatsoever he or they be, that attend upon the King and Soverain Lord of this Land for the time being in his person, and do him tru and faithfull service of Allegiance in the same, or be he in other places by his Com∣mandment,
in his wars within this Land or without: That for the said Deed, and tru duty of Allegiance, he or they be in no wise Convict or attaint of High Treason, nor of other offences for that cause, by Act of Par∣liament or otherwise by any processe of Law, whereby he or any of them, shall lose or forfeit Life, Lands, Te∣nements, Rents, Possessions, Heredi∣taments, Goods, Chattels, or any o∣ther things: But to be for that Deed and Service utterly discharged of any Vexation, Trouble or loss. And if a∣ny Act or Acts, or other processe of the Law hereafter, therupon for the same happen to be made contrary to this Ordinance, That then that Act or Acts, or other processe of the Law, whatsoever they shall be, stand and utterly void. Provided alwayes that no person or persons shall take any be∣nefit
or advantage by this Act, which shall hereafter decline their said Allegi∣ance. Peregrin. This is as plain and fair as can be for secu∣ring both the Person and Conscience of the Cavalier, but was ther ever any Act or Oath, or any thing like an Oath that ob∣lig'd Englishmen to be tru unto, or fight for the Parliament? Patricius. Never any, but these men by a new kind of Metaphysicks have found out a way to ab∣stract the Person of the King from his Office, to make his Soveraigntie a kind of Platonick Idea hovering in the aire, while they visibly attempt to assaile and destroy his Person and Progeny, by small and great shot, and seek him out amongst his life-Gard with fire and sword; yet they give out, they fight not only not against him, but for him, and that their army is more loyall unto him than his owne; who, they say, fight only for the name King, though they have his per∣son really amongst them, commanding and
directing: Thus they make Him a strange kind of Amphibium, they make in one instant a King and no King of the same Individu∣um; a power which the Casuists affirme God Almighty never assumed to himself, to doe a∣ny thing that implies a contradiction. Peregrin. Noble Sir, you make my heart to pant within me, by the Pathetick relation you have been pleas'd to make mee of these uth∣full times; But one thing seems to me to be no lesse then a miracle, how his Majestie hath beene able to subsist all this while, conside∣ring the infinite advantages the averse partie hath had of him; for they have all the tena∣ble places and townes of strength, both by land and sea; They have the Navie royall, they have all the Amunition and Armes of the Crown, they have all the Imposts and Customs, Poundage and Tonnage (which they levie contrary to their former Protesta∣tion before the Bill be pass'd) They have the Exchequer at their devotion, and all the Revenue of the King, Queen, and Prince, and lastly, they have the citie of London, which may be eall'd a Magazin of money and men, where there is a ready supplie and superflu∣itie of all things, that may seed, clothe, or
make men gay to put them in heart and re∣solution: Truely considering all these ad∣vantages, with divers others on their side, and the disadvantages on the Kings, it turnes me into a lump of astonishment, how his Maje∣stie could beare up all this while, and keep together so many Armies, and be still master of the Field. Patricius. I confesse Sir, it is a just subject for won∣derment, and we must ascribe it principally to God Almightie, who is the Protectour of his Anointed, for his hand hath manifestly appear'd in the conduct of his affaires; Hee hath been the Pilot, who hath sate at the helme ever snce this storme began, and will we hope continue to steer his course till he waft him to safe harbour againe; Adde here∣unto, that his Majesty for his own part, hath beene wonderfully stirring, and indefatigable both for his body and minde; And what no∣table things HER Majesty hath done, and what she hath suffered, is fitter for Chroni∣cle, then such a simple Discourse. Hereunto may be added besides, that his Majestie hath three parts of foure of the Peeres, and Prime Gentrie of the Kingdom firme unto him, and they will venture hard
before they will come under a popular go∣vernment and mechanicall corporations, or let in Knox or Calvin to undermine this Church, and bring in their bawdy stool of Repentance. Peregrin. Truely Sir, amongst other Countreys, I extreamly long'd to see England, and I am no sooner come, but I am surfeited of her already, I doubt the old Prophecie touching this Island is come now to be verified, That the Churchman was, the Lawyer is, and the Souldier shall be. I am afraid the English have seene their best dayes; for I find a ge∣nerall kind of infatuation, a totall Eclipse of reason amongst most of them; and com∣monly a generall infatuation precedes the per∣dition of a people; like a fish, that putrifieth first in the head; Therefore I will trusse up my baggage and over again, after I have en∣joyed you some dayes, and received your commands. Patricius. Dear Sir, If you seriously resolve to crosse the Seas againe so soon, I may chance beare you company, for as you have since the short time of your sojourn here judiciously obser∣ved a national defection of reason in the peo∣ple
of this Island, which makes her so active in drawing on her own ruine; so by longer experience, and by infallible Symptomes I find a strange kind of Vertigo to have seized upon her, which I feare will turne to the fal∣ling sicknesse, or such a frenzie that will make her to dash out her own braines: Nor are her miseries, I feare, come yet to the full; It is the method of the Almightie, when he pleases to punish a people, to begin with roddes, to goe on with scourges, and if they will not do, he hath Scorpions for them: Therefore, I will breath any where sooner then here, for what securitie or contentment can one receive in that Countrey, where Religion and Iustice, the two grand Dorique Columnes which support every State, are fallen down? which makes all conditions of men, all professions and trades to go here daylie to utter ruine. The Churchman grows every day more despicable, as if he had no propertie in any thing, nor is there any way left him to recover his Tithe, but by costly troublesome sutes. The Civilian, a brave learned profession, hath already made his last Will; And the Common Lawyers case is little better; The Courtier cannot get his Pension; The Gentleman cannot recover his
rents, but either they are sequestred by a high hand of unexampled power, or else the poor tenant is so heavily assess'd or plundred, that he is disabled to pay them in; All kind of Comerce both domestick and forrein visi∣bly decayes, and falls more and more, into the hands of strangers (to the no small dis∣honour of the wisedome of this Na∣tion) nor can the Tradesman recover his debts, Parliamentary Protections conti∣nue still in such numbers, so that it is a greater priviledge now to be a footman to the meanest of the Lower House, then to be of the Kings Bed chamber: Prenties run away from their masters, and against their fathers intent turn souldiers, and for mo∣ney, which is the soul of trade, I beleeve since the beginning of this Parliament, a∣bove one half of the treasure of the King∣dome is either conveyed to'ther side of the Sea, or buried under ground, whence it must be new digg'd up againe. Moreover, all things are here grown Arbitrary (yet that word took off the Earle of Straffords head) Religion, Law, and Allegiance is growne Arbitrary; nor dares the Iudge upon the Tri∣bunall (according to his oath) do justice, but he is over-awed by Ordinance; or els the
least intimation of the sense of the lower House is sufficient to enjoyne him the contrary, so that now, more then ever, it may be said here,—Terras Astraea reliquit.—peace also hath rov'd up and downe this Island, and cannot get a place to lay her head on; she hoped to have had entertain∣ment in York-shire by the agreement of the best Gentlemen in the Countrey; but an Ordinance of Parliament beat her out of doores; Then she thought to rest in Cheshire, and by a solemne Covenant she was promis'd to be preserv'd ther, the principal Agents of that Covenant having protested every one upon the word of a Gentleman, and as they did desire to prosper, both them∣selves, their tenants and friends,, shold strict∣ly observe it; but the like Ordinance of Par∣liament battered down that Agreement. Then she thought to take footing in the West, and first in Dorcetshire, then in Corn∣wall and Devonshire, and by the holy tie of the blessed Sacrament she was promised to be preserved ther; but another Ordinance of Parliament is pursuing her, to dispense with the Commissioners of the said Agree∣ment for their Oaths. Lastly, His Majesty is mainly endeavouring to bring her in again
thorowout the whole Land; but the furi∣ous, phrentique Schismaticks will have none of her; for as one of them (besides a thou∣sand instances more) preach'd in one of the most populous Congregations about the City, It were better that London streets ran with bloud, and that dead carkasses were piled up as high as the battlements of Pauls, than peace should be now brought in. And now that Peace is shut out, Learning is upon point of despair, her Colledges are become Courts of Gard, and Mars lieth in Mercuries bed. Honour also, with her Court, lieth in the dust; the Cobler may confront the Knight, the Boor the Baron, and ther is no judicial way of satisfaction; which makes Monarchy fear she hath no long time of abode here. Publick Faith also, though she had but newly set up for her self, is suddenly become Bankrupt, and how could she choose? for more of the Kingdoms treasure hath bin spent within these thirty moneths, than was spent in four-score yeares before; but she hopes to piece up her self again, by the ruines of the Church; but let her take heed of that, for those goods have bin fatall to many thousand families in this Kingdom: yet, she thinks much, that those publick summs
which were given to suppresse one rebelli∣on (in Ireland) shold be employed to main∣tain another rebellion (in England.) And lastly, methinks, I see Religion in torn rag∣ged weeds, and with slubber'd eyes sitting upon Weeping-Crosse, and wringing her hands, to see her chiefest Temple (Pauls Church) where God Almighty was us'd to be serv'd constantly thrice a day, and was the Rendez∣vouz, and as it were the Mother Church, standing open to receive all commers and strangers, to be now shut up, and made only a thorow-fare for Porters; to see those scaf∣folds, the expence of so many thousand pounds, to lie rotting; to see her chiefest lights like to be extinguished; to see her fa∣mous learned Divines dragg'd to prison, and utterly depriv'd of the benefit of the Com∣mon Law, their inheritance: Methinks, I say, I see Religion packing up, and preparing to leave this Island quite, crying out, that this is Countrey fitter for Atheists than Christians to live in; for God Almighty is here made the greatest Malignant, in regard his House is plunder'd more than any: Ther is no Court left to reform heresie, no Court to punish any Church Officer, and to make him attend his Cure, not Court to punish
Fornication, Adultery, or Incest: Methinks I hear Her cry out against these her Grand Re∣formers (or Refiners rather) that they have put division 'twixt all degrees of persons. They have put division 'twixt husband and wife, 'twixt mother and child: The son seeks his fathers bloud in open field, one brother seeks to cut the others throat; they have put division 'twixt master and servant, 'twixt Land- Lord and Tenant; nay, they have a long time put a sea of separation 'twixt King and Queen; and they labour more and more to put division 'twixt the Head and the Members, 'twixt His Majesty and his politi∣call Spouse, his Kingdom: And lastly, they have plung'd one of the flourishingst King∣doms of Europe in a war without end; for though a Peace may be plaister'd over for the time, I fear it will be but like a fire co∣ver'd with ashes, which will break out again, as long as these fiery Schismaticks have any strength in this Island; so that all the pre∣misses considered, if Turk or Tartar, or all the infernal spirits and Cacodaemons of hel had broken in amongst us, they could not have done poor England more mischief. Sir, I pray you excuse this homely imperfect rela∣tion, I have a thousand things more to
impart unto you when we may breathe freer air; for here we are come to that slavery, that one is in danger to have his very thoughts plundered; Therfore if you please to accept of my company, I will over with you by Gods help, so soon as it may stand with your conveniency, but you must not discover me to be an Englishman, abroad: for so I may be jeer'd at and kickt in the streets; I will go under another name, and am fix'd in this re∣solution, never to breathe English aire again, untill the King recovers his Crown, and the People the right use of their Pericraniums▪
THE SECOND PART OF A DISCOURSE 'TWIXT PATRICIUS AND PEREGRIN, TOUCHING The DISTEMPERS OF THE TIMES. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.
A DISCOURS, or PARLY, Continued betwixt Patricius and Peregrin, Upon their landing in France, touching the civil Wars of England and Ireland. Peregrin. GEntle Sir, you are happily ar∣rived on this shore; we are now upon firm ground, upon the fair Continent of France; we are not circumscrib'd, or coopt up within the narrow bounds of a rhumatick Island; we have all Europe before us. Truly I am not a little glad to have shaken hands with that tum∣bling Element the Sea; And for England, I never intend to see her again in the mind I am in, unlesse it be in a Map; nay, In statu quo nunc, while this Faction reigns, had I
left one eye behind me, I should hardly re∣turne thither to fetch it; therefore if I be missing at any time, never look for me there. There is an old Proverb, From a blacke Ger∣man, a white Italian, a red Frenchman, I may adde one member more, and, from a Round∣headed Englishman, The Lord deliver us. I have often Crossed these Seas, and I found my self alwaies pitifully sick, I did e∣ver and anon tell what Wood the Ship was made of; but in this passage I did not feele the least motion or distemper in my humors: for, indeed I had no time to taink on sick∣nesse, I was so wholly tsken up, and tran∣sported with such a pleasing conceit, to have left yonder miserable Island. Peregrin. Miserable Island indeed; for I thinke there was never such a tyrannie exercised in any Christian Countrey under Heaven; a tyrannie that extends not onely to the body, but to the braine also; not only to mens fortunes and estates, but it reaches to their very soules and consciences, by violented new coercive Oaths and Protestations, com∣pos'd by Lay-men, inconsistent with the li∣berty of Christians. Never was there a Nation carried away by such a strong spirit
of delusion; never was there a poor people so purblinded and Puppified, if I may say so, as I finde them to be; so that I am at a stand with my selfe, whether I shall pitie them more, or laugh at them. They not onely kisse the stone that hurts them, but the hands of them that hurle it; they are come to that passive stupidity, that they adore their very persecutors, who from polling fall now a shaving them, and will flay them at last if they continue this popular reigne. I cannot compare England, as the case stands with her, more properly, then to a poor beast, sicke of the staggers, who cannot be cur'd without an incision. The Astrono∣mers, I remember, affirme that the Moone (which predominates over all humid bodies) hath a more powerfull influence o're your British Seas then any other; so that accor∣ding to the observation of some Nevigators, they swell at a spring tide in some places, above threescore cubits high: I am of opi∣nion, that that inconstant humorous Planet, hath also an extraordinany dominion over the braines of the Inhabitants; for when they attempt any Innovation (whereunto all Insulary people are more subject then o∣ther Citizens of the world which are fixed
upon the Continent) they swell higher, their fancies worke stronglier, and so commit stranger extravagancies then any other: wit∣nesse these monstrous barbarismes and vio∣lencies, which have bin, and are daily offered to Religion and justce, (the two grand suppor∣ters of all States) yea, to humane Reason it self since the beginning of these tumults. And now, noble Sir, give me leave to render you my humble thanks for that true and solid information you pleased to give me in London of these commotions. During my short sojourne there, I ligh∣ted on divers odde Pamphlets upon the Seamstresses stalls, whom I wondred to see selling Paper sheets in lieu of Holland: on the one side I found the most impudent un∣truths (vouch'd by publike authority) the basest scurrilities, and poorest jingles of wit that ever I read in my life; on the other side I met with many pieces that had good stuff in them, but gave mee not (being a stranger) a full satisfaction, they look'd no further then the beginning of this Parlia∣ment, and the particular emergences there∣of: but you have, by your methodicall rela∣tion, so perfectly instructed and rectified my understanding, by bringing me to the very
source of these distempers, and led me all a∣long the side of the current by so streight a line, that I believe, whosoever will venture upon the most intricate task of penning the story of these vertiginous times, will finde himself not a little beholden to that Relati∣on, which indeed may be term'd a short Chro∣nicle rather then a Relation. Wee are come now under another clime, and here we may mingle words, and vent our conceptions more securely; it being, as matters stand in your Countrey, more safe to speake under the Lilly then the Rose; wee may here take in and put out freer ayre; I meane, we may discourse with more liberty: for, words are nought els but aire articulated, and coagulated as it were into letters and syllables. Patricius. Sir, I deserve not these high expressions of your favourable censure touching that poor piece; but this I will be bold to say, That whosoever doth read it impartially, will discover in the Author the Genius of an honest Patriot, and a Gentleman. And now methinks I look on you unfortunate I∣sland, as if one look upon a Ship toss'd up and down in distresse of wind and weather, by a furious tempest, which the more she
tugs and wrastles with the foamie waves of the angry Ocean, the more the fury of the storme encreaseth, and puts her in danger of shipwrack; and you must needs thinke, Sir, it would move compassion in any heart, to behold a poore Ship in such a desperate case, specially when all his kindred, friends and fortunes; yea his Religion, the most pre∣cious Treasure of all, are aboard of her, and upon point of sinking. Alas I can contri∣bute nothing now to my poor countrey but my prayers and teares, that it would please God to allay this tempest, and cast over board those that are the true causers of it, and bring the people to the right use of Reason againe. It was well observed by you, Sir, That there is a Nationall kinde of indisposition, and obliquity of mind that ra∣geth now amongst our people, and I feare it will be long ere they returne to their old English temper. to that rare loyalty and love which they were used to shew to their So∣veraigne: for all the Principles of Monar∣chie are quite lost amongst us, those ancient and sacret flowers of the English Diadem are trampled under foot; nay, matters are come to that horrid confusion, that not onely the Prerogative of the crown, but the founda∣mentall
Priviledge of the free-born subject is utterly overthrowne, by those whose Predecessors were used to be the main sup∣porters of it: so that our King is necessita∣ted to put himself in Armes for the preser∣vation not only of his own Regall rights, but of Magna Charta it self, which was neuer so invaded and violated in any age, by such causlesse tyrannicall imprisonments, by such unexampled destructive taxes, by stopping the ordinary processes in Law, and awing all the Courts of Justice, by unheard-of forced oaths and Associations, and a thousand other acts, which neither President, Book-case or Statute can warrant, whereof, if the King had done but the twentieth part, he had been cryed up to be the greatest Tyrant that ever was. Peregrin. Sir, I am an Alien, and so can speak with more freedom of your Countrey. The short time that I did eate my bread there, I felt the pulse of the people with as much judgement as I could; and I find, that this very word Parliament is become a kind of Idoll amongst them, they doe, as it were, pin their salvation upon't; it is held blasphe∣mie to speake against it. The old English
Maxime was, The King can do no wrong; another Nominative case is now stept in, That the Parliament can do no wrong, nor the King receive any: And whereas ther was used to be but one Defender of the Faith, ther are now started up amongst you, I can∣not tell how many hundreds of them. And as in the sacred profession of Priest-hood we hold, or at least wise shold hold, That after the Imposition of hands, the Minister is in∣spired with the Holy Ghost in an extraor∣dinary manner for the enabling of him to exercise that Divine Function, so the English are grown to such a fond conceit of their Parliament Members, that as soon as any is chosen by the confus'd cry of the Common people to sit within the walls of that House, an inerring spirit, a spirit of infallibility pre∣sently entereth into him (so that he is ther∣by become like the Pope, a Canon animatus) though som of them may haply be such flat and simple animals, that they are as fit to be Counsellours, as Caligula's Horse was to be Consull, as the Historian tells us. Patricius. Touching Parliament, ther breaths not a Subject under Englands Crown, who hath
a higher esteem of it then I, it makes that dainty mixture in our Government of Monar∣chy, Optimacie and Democracy, betwixt whom, though ther be a kind of co ordination of power during the sitting of Parliament, yet the two last, which are composed of Peers and People, have no power, but what is de∣rived from the first, which may be called the soul that animates them, and by whose au∣thority they meet, consult and depart: They come there to propose, not to impose Lawes; they come not to make Lawes by the sword; they must not be like Draco's Lawes, written in bloud. Their King calls them thither to be his Counsellors, not Con∣trollers; and the Office of Counsell is to ad∣vise, not to inforce; they come thither to in∣treat, not to treat with their Liege Lord; they come to throw their Petitions at his feet, that so they may find a way up to his hear. 'Tis tru, I have read of high things that our Parliament have done, but 'twas either during the nonage and minority of our Kings, when they were under protectorship, or when they were absent in a forrain war, or in time of confusion, when ther were com∣petitors of the bloud-royall for the Crown,
and when the number of both Houses was compleat and individed; but I never read of any Parliament that did arrogate to it self such a power Paramount, such a Superlative superintendence, as to check the Prerogative of their Soverain, to question his negative voice, to passe things, not only without, but expresly against his advice and royall com∣mand: I never heard of Parliament, that wold have their King, being come to the Meridian of his age, to transmit his intelle∣ctualls, and whole faculty of reason to them. I find som Parliaments have bin so modest and moderat (Now moderation is the Rudder that shold steer the course of all great Councells) that they have declined the agitation and cognizance of som state affaires, humbly transferring them to their Soverain and his privy Counsell: a Parliament man then, held it to be the adaequat object of his duty, to study the welfare, to redresse the grievances, and supply the defects of that particular place for which he served; The Members then us'd to move in their own (Inferior) sphere, and us'd not to be transported by a∣ny Eccentric motions. And so they thought to have complyed with the Obligation, and discharged the consciences of honest
Patriots, without soaring above their reach, and roving at random to treat of universals, much lesse to bring Religion to their bar, or prie into the Arcana Imperti, the cognizance of the one belonging to the King, and his intern Counsell of State: the other to Divines, who, according to the Etymologie of the word, use to be still conversant in the exercise of speculation of holy and heavenly things. Peregrin. I am clearly of your opinion in these two particulars; for, secrecy being the soul of po∣licy, matters of State shold be communica∣ted but to few; and touching Religion, I cannot see how it may quadrat with the cal∣ling, and be homogeneous to the profession of Lay-men, to determine matters of Divi∣nity; who, out of their incapacity and un∣aptnesse to the work, being not pares nego∣tio, and being carryed away by a wild kind of Conscience without Science, like a Ship without a Helm, fall upon dangerous quick∣sands; so that whilest they labour to mend her, they marr her, whilst they think to set∣tle her, they confound her, whilst they plot to prevent the growth of Popery, they pave the way to bring it in, by conniving at, and countenancing those monstrous Schismes
which I observed to have crept into your Church since the reign of this Parliament: so that one may justly say, These your Re∣formers are but the executioners of the old project of the Jesuits, the main part wher∣of was, and is still, to hurle the ball of dis∣cord, and hatch new opinions still 'twixt the Protestants, to make factions and scissures between them, and so render their religion more despicable and ridiculous. But methinks, matters are come to a strange pass with you in England, that the Iudges cannot be trusted with the Law, nor the Prelats with the Gospell; whereas from all times, out of their long experience and years, these two degrees of men were used to be reverenced for the chief Touch-men, and unquestionable Expositors of both, which another power seems now to arro∣gate to it self, as the inerring Oracle of both: but I pray God that these grand Refiners of Religion, prove not Quack-salvers at last; that these upstart Polititians prove not Im∣postors: for I have heard of some things they have done, that if Machiavell himself were alive, he wold be reputed a Saint in comparison of them. The Roman ten, and Athenian thirty, were Babies to these; nay,
the Spanish Inquisition, and the Bloet-Rade (that Councell of bloud) which the Duke of Alva erected in Flanders, when he swore, That he wold drown the Hollanders in their Butter-tubs, was nothing to this; when I consider the prodigious power they have as∣sumed to themselves, and do daily exercise over the bodies, the estates and souls of men. In your former Discourse you told me, that amongst multitudes of other mischiefs, whch this new Faction hath wrought, they have put division 'twixt all sorts and sexes, 'twixt all conditious, both of men and wo∣men; one thing more I may say, they have done in this kind: for, they have laboured to put division between the Persons of the holy Trinity, by making the first Person to be offended at that voluntary genuflection and reverence which hath bin from all times practised in the Christian Church to the name of the second Person; so that Ie∣su worship, as I have read in some of your profane Pamphlets, is grown now to be a word of reproach amongst you. But to the point; ther is one thing I can never cease to wonder at: that whereas at the beginning of this Parliament, ther were
as able and experienced, as stout and well spoken Gentlemen, as any in the whole Kingdom, that sate in the House, and made the far major part, I wonder I say, that they wold suffer this giddy-headed Faction to carry all before them in that violent man∣ner, that they did not crush this Cocatrice in the shell. Patricius. First, Sir, you know ther is nothing so agreeable to the nature of man, as novelty; and in the conduct of humane affaires, it is always seen, that when any new design or faction is a foot, the Projectors are com∣monly more pragmaticall and sedulous upon the work; they lie centinell to watch all ad∣vantages, the Sand of their brains is always running: This hath caused this upstart Fa∣ction, to stick still close together, and con∣tinue marvellously constant to their ends; they have bin used to tyre and out-fast, to weary and out-watch the moderate and well-minded Gentlemen; sometimes till after midnight, by clancular and nocturnall sittings; so that as His Majesty saies in one of his Declarations, most of their Votes may be said to be nought else, but Verdicts of a starv'd Iury.
Another reason is, That they countenan∣ced the flocking together of the promiscu∣ous rabble from London, notwithstanding the two severall motions the Lords made unto them, that they might be suppressed by Parliamentary Order: This riotous crue awed the wonted freedom of speech in both Houses, cryed up the names, and confront∣ed many of their Members: yet these new Polititians not only conniv'd at them, but call'd them their friends; and so they might well enough, or rather their Champions; for they had ordered the matter so, that they were sure to have them ready at their de∣votion, at the heaving of a finger: and from this tumultuous mongrell crue, they derived their first encouragements to do such high prodigious insolencies they have commit∣ted since. Adde hereunto, that they com∣plyed exceedingly besides with the Com∣mon Councell of the City, they used to at∣tend them early and late to knock heads together; and if any new thing was to passe in the House, they wold first wait on them, to know their pleasure, and afterwards it shold be propounded and put to Vote in the House: And how derogatory it is to the high Law-making-councell, to make their
chiefest Members wait from time to time on the Magistrates of the City, who in former times were used to attend them upon all occasions in Westminster, I am ashamed to think on; nor am I lesse ashamed to remem∣ber those base Artifices and indirect courses that were practis'd at the election of this pretended Major; here they tack'd about to a second choice; after the first was legal∣ly made, and how the Common-Councell was pack'd up of the arrandest Schismaticks up and down the City. And to that mutinous wealth-swoln City, and the said unbridled pack of Oppidans (seconded afterwards by the Countrey clownes) who offered such outrages to Gods House, the Kings house, and the Parliament house, may be ascribed all miseries, and the miscarriage of things: for they caused His Majesty to forsake his own standing palace, to absent himself from his Parliament, and make that unpleasing pogresse up and down his Kingdom ever since, which put all Counsells at a stand, and to be involv'd in a confusion. Peregrin. But let me tell you that your Britannick Sun, though he be now ore-set with these unlucky clouds, engendred of the vapours
of distempered brains, and the rotten hearts of many of his own meniall servants, who have proved like the Sons of Serviah unto him, ingratefull monsters, yet is he still in his own Orb, and will, when this foul wea∣ther's passed, and the aire cleared a little by thunder, shine more gloriously and power∣fully then before, it being a maxime of State, That Rebellion suppressed, makes a Prince the stronger; Now Rebellion durst never yet look a Prince long in the face, for the Majesty of Gods anointed, useth to dart such fulgent piercing beams, that dazle the eyes of disloyalty, and strikes her stark blind at last. And truly, as you say, I am also clearly of opinion, that these ingratefull Londoners, as they were the comencers, so have they been the continuers and contrivers of this ugly Rebellion ever since; They seem to have utterly forgotten who hath given them the sword, and by, and from whom they hold their Charter; Their Corporations are now grown body politicks, & so as many petty Republikes amongst them, so that they begin to smell rank of a Hans∣town. Poor simple Annimals, how they suf∣fer their pockets to be pick'd, their purses to be cut; how they part with their vitall spirits every week; how desperately they
post on to poverty, and their own ruine, suf∣fering themselves in lieu of Scarlet-gownes, to be governed by a rude company of Red∣coats, who 'twixt plundering, assessements, and visits, will quickly make an end of them. I fear ther is som formidable judgment of re∣gall revenge hangs over that City; for the anger of a King is like the roaring of a Ly∣on; and I never read yet of any City that contested with her Soverain, but she smart∣ed soundly for it at last. The present case of London bears a great deal of proportion with that of Monpellier here in France, in Charls the seventh's time; for when that town had refused the publishing of many of the Kings Edicts and Declarations, murthered som of his Ministers and Servants, abused the Church, and committed other high acts of insolency; the Duke of Berry was sent to reduce the Town to obedience; the Duke pressed them with so hard a siege, that at last the best Citizens came forth in proces∣sion, bare-headed, & bare-footed, with white wands in their hands, and halters about their necks to deliver the keys of all the gates to the Duke, but this wold not serve the turn, for two hundred of them were condemned to the gallies, two hundred of them were
hang'd, and two hundred beheaded, the King saying, he offered those as victimes for the lives of his servants whom they had mur∣thered with the false sword of Justice. But, Sir, I much marvell how your Church-government, which from all times hath been cryed up to be so exact, is so sud∣denly tumbled into this confusion? how your Prelates are fallen under so darke a cloud, considering that divers of them were renowned through all the Reform'd Chur∣ches in Christendome for their rare learning and pietie? At the Synod at Dort, you know some of them assisted, and no exception at all taken at their degree and dignity, but took precedence accordingly, how came it to passe, that they are now fallen under this Eclypse, as so be so persecuted, to be push'd out of the House of Peers, and hurried into prison? I pray you be pleased to tell me. Patricius. Sir, I remember to have read in the Irish Story, That when the Earl of Kildare in Hen∣ry the eighth's time, was brought before the Lord Deputy for burning Cassiles Church, he answered, My Lord, I would never have burnt the Church, unlesse I had thought the Biship had been in it; for 'twas not the Church, but the
Bishop I aim'd at. One may say so of the Anglican Church at this present, that these fiery Zelots, these vaporing Sciolists of the times are so furiously enraged against this holy Primative order; some out of Envie, some out of Malice, some out of Ignorance, that one may say, our Church had not been thus set on fire, unlesse the Bishops had been in't. I grant there was never yet any Pro∣fession made up of men, but there were some bad; we are not Angels upon earth there was a Iudas amongst the first dozen of Chri∣stians, though Apostles, and they by our Sa∣viours owne election: Amongst our Prelates peradventure (for I know of no accusation fram'd against them yet) some might be faulty, and wanting moderation, being not contented to walk upon the battlements of the Church, but they must put themselves pon stilts; but if a golden chaine hath hap∣pily a copper link two or three, will you therefore breake and throw away the whole chaine. If a few Shomakers (I confesse the comparison is too homely, but I had it of a Scots man) sell Calfes skin for Neats leather, must the Gentle-Craft be utterly extinguish▪d, must we go bare foot therefore? Let the persons suffer in the Name of God, and not the holy Order of Episcopacy
But good Lord, how pittifully were those poor Prelats handled? what a Tartarian kind of tyranny it was, to drag twice into prison twelve grave reverend Bishops, causâ ad∣huc inaudita, and afterwards not to be able to frame as much as an accusation of misdemea∣nor against them, much lesse of Treason, whereof they were first impeach'd with such high clamors: But I conceive it was of pur∣pose, to set them out of the way, that the new Faction might passe things better a∣mongst the Peers. And it seemes they brought their work about; for whilest they were thus reclused and absent, they may be sayed to be thrust out of doores, and ejected out of their owne proper ancient inheritance, And the Tower wherein they were cast might be called Limbo patrum all the while. Peregrin. But would not all this, with those un∣parallell'd Bills of Grace you mentioned in your first Discourse, which had formerly passed, suffice to beget a good understanding, and make them confide in their King? Patricius. No, but the passing of these Bills of grace, were term'd Acts of Duty in his Majesty; they went so far in their demands that 'twas
not sufficient for him to give up his Tower,  Fleet-Royall, his Magazines, his Ports, Castl and Servants, but he must deliver up his swor into their hands, all the Souldiery & Military forces of the Land; nay, he must give up his very Understanding unto them; he must re∣signe his own Reason, and with an implicit Faith or blind Obedience, he must believe all they did was to make him glorious; and if at a∣ny time he admonished them, o prescribed wayes for them to proceed and expedit matters, or if he advised them in any thing, they took it in a kind of indignation, and 'twas presently cryed up to be Breach of Pri∣viledge. Peregrin. Breach of Priviledge forsooth, There is no way in my conceit, to make a King more inglorious, both at home and abroad, then to disarme him; and to take from him the command and disposing of the Militia throughout his Kingdome, is directly to dis∣arm him, & wrest the Sword out of his hand: and how then can he be termed A Defen∣dor? how can he defend either himself, or others? 'tis the onely way to expose him to scorn and derision; truly, as I conceive, that demand of the Militia was a thing not only
unfit for them to ask, but for him to grant. But, Sir, what shold be the reson which mov'd them to make that insolent propo∣sall? Patricius. They cry'd out that the Kingdom was upon point of being ruin'd; that it was in the very jawes of destruction; that there were forreign and in-land plots against it: all which are prov'd long since to be nothing else but meere Chymera's; yet people for the most part continue still so grossely besotted, that they cannot perceive to this day, that these forg'd feares, these Utopian plots, those publick Idea's were fram'd of purpose, that they might take all the martiall power into their hands; that so they might without controulment cast the government of Church and state into what mold they plea∣sed, and ingrosse the chiefest offices to them∣selves: And from these imaginary invisible dangers proceeded these visible calamities, and grinding palpable pressures which hath accompanied this odious Warre ever since. Peregrin. Herein methinks, your statists have shewne themselves politique enough, but
not so prudent & honest; for Prudence & Policy, though they often agree in the end, yet they differ in election of the meanes to compasse their ends: The one serves himself of truth, strength of Reason, integrity, and gallant∣nesse in their proceedings; the other of ficti∣ons, fraudulence, lies, and other sinister meanes; the work of the one is lasting and permanent, the others worke moulders away, and ends in infamy at last; for fraud and frost alwaies end foule. But how did they requite that most rare and high unex∣ampled trust his Majesty reposed in them, when he before passed that fatall Act of con∣tinuance, a greater trust then ever English King put in Parliament? How did they per∣forme their solemn promise and deepe Pro∣testations, to make him the most glorious (at home and abroad) the richest and best belovedst King that ever raigned in that Island. Patricius. Herein I must confesse, they held very ill correspondence with him, for the more he trusted them, the more diffident they grew of him; and truly, Sir, herein white differs not so much from black, as their actions have been disconsonant to their words: Touching
the first promise, to make him glorious; if to suffer a neighbouring Nation (the Scot) to demand and obtain what they pleased of him; if to break capitulations of peace with a great forrein Prince (the French King) by the renvoy of the Capuchins, and divers o∣ther Acts; if to bring the dregs and riff∣raffe of the City to domineere before his Court-gate, notwithstanding his Proclama∣tions of repressing them; if to confront him and seek his life by fire and sword in o∣pen field, by open desiance, and putting him upon a defensive war; if to vote his Queen a Traytresse, to shoot at her, to way∣lay her, to destroy her, if to hinder the rea∣ding of his Proclamations, and the sleight∣ing of his Declarations (enclosed in Letters sign'd and seal'd with his own hand) for fear they shold bring the people to their wits a∣gain; if to call them fetters of gold, divellish devises, fraught with doctrines of division, reall mistakes, absurd suppositions, though ther never dropt from Princes pen, more full, more rationall and strong sinewy ex∣pressions; if to suffer every shallow-brain'd Scolist to preach, every Pamphletter to print, every rotten-hearted man or woman to prate what they please of him and his Queen▪
if to sleight his often acknowledgment, con∣dissentions, retractions, pronunciations of Peace, and proffers of Pardon; if to endea∣vour to bring him to a kind of servile sub∣mission; if to bar him of the attendance of his Domestiques, to abuse and imprison his messengers, to hang his servants for obeying his Commission; if to prefer the safety and repute of five ordinary men, before the ho∣nour of their King, and being actually im∣peach'd of Treason, to bring them in a kind of triumph to his House; if for subjects to Article, Treat and Capitulate with him; if to tamper with his Conscience, and make him forget the solemn sacramentall oath he took at his Coronation; if to devest him of all regall rights, to take from him the ele∣ction of his servants and officers, and bring him back to a kind of minority; if this be to make a King glorious, our King is made glorious enough. Touching the second promise to make him the richest King that ever was; if to denude him of his native rights, to declare that he hath no property in any thing but by way of trust, not so much property as an E∣lective King; if to take away his customs of inheritance; if to take from him his Ex∣chequer
and Mint, if to thrust him out of his own Towns, to suffer a lowsie Citizen to lie in his beds within his Royall Castle of Windsor, when he himself would have come thither to lodg; if to enforce him to a defensive war, and cause him to engage his Jewells and Plate, and so plunge him in a bottomlesse gulph of debt for his necessary defence; if to anticipate his revenue royall, and reduce him to such exigents that he hath scarce the subsistence of an ordinary Gentle∣man; if this be to make a rich King, then is our King made sufficiently rich. Concerning their third promise, to make him the best belovedst King that ever was; if to cast all the aspersions that possibly could be devised upon his Government by publique elaborat remonstrances; if to suffer and give Texts to the strongest lung'd Pulpiteers to poyson the hearts of his subjects, to intoxi∣cat their brains with fumes of forg'd jealou∣sies, to possesse them with an opinion, that he is a Papist in his heart, and consequently hath a design to introduce Popery; if to sleight his words, his promises, his Asseverations, Oaths and Protestations, when he calls heaven and earth to witnesse, when he desires no blessing otherwise to fall upon himself, his
wife and children, with other pathetick deep-fetcht expressions, that wold have made the meanest of those millions of Chri∣stians which are his vassals, to be believed; if to protect Delinquents, and proclaim'd Traytors against him; if to suscitate, authorise, and encourage all sorts of subjects to heave up their hands against him, and levy armes to emancepate themselves from that naturall allegiance, loyalty, and subjection, wherein, they and their fore-fathers were ever tyed to his Royall Progenitors; if to make them swear and damn themselves into a rebelli∣on; if this be to make a King beloved, then this Parliament hath made King Charles the best beloved King that ever was in Eng∣land. Peregrin. I cannot compare this Rebellion in Eng∣land, more properly then to that in this Kingdom, in King Iohn's time, which in our French Chronicle beares to this day the infa∣mous name of Iaquerie de Beauvoisin; The Peasans then out of a surfeit of plenty, had grown up to that height of insolency, that they confronted the Noblesse and Gentry▪ they gathered in multitudes, and put themselves in armes to suppresse, or rather extinguish
them; and this popular tumult never ceased, till Charles le Sage debell'd it; and it made the Kings of France more puissant ever since, for it much increased their Finances, in regard that those extraordinary taxes which the people imposed upon themselves for the support of the war, hath continued e∣ver since a firm revenue to the Crown; which makes me think of a facecious speech of the late Henry the Great, to them of Or∣leans: for wheras a new imposition was laid upon the Townsmen during the league by Monsieur de la Chastre, who was a great stickler in those wars; they petitioned Hen∣ry the fourth, that he wold be pleased to take off that taxe, the King asked them, Who had laid that taxe upon them? they said Monsieur de la Chastre, during the time of the League, the King replyed, Puis que Monsieur de la Chatre vous à liguè qu'il vous destigue, since Monsieur de la Chastre hath leagu'd you, let Monsieur de la Chastre unleague you, and so the said taxe continueth to this day. I have observed in your Chronicles that it hath bin the fate of your English Kings to be baffled often by petty companions; as Iack Straw, Wat Tyler, Cade, Warbecke and Symnel. A Waspe may somtimes do a shrewd
turn to the Eagle, as you said before; your Island hath bin fruitfull for Rebellions, for I think ther hapned near upon a hundred since the last Conquest, the City of Lon∣don, as I remember, in your Story hath re∣belled seven times at least, and forfeited her Charter I know not how often, but she bled soundly for it at last, and commonly, the better your Princes were, the worse your people have been; As the case stands, I see no way for the King to establish a setled peace, but by making a fifth Conquest of you; and for London, ther must be a way found to prick that tympany of pride wher∣with she swells so much. Patricius. 'Tis true, ther has bin from time to time many odd Insurrections in England, but our King gathered a greater strength out of them afterwards, the inconstant people are alwayes accessary to their own miseries: Kings Pre∣rogatives are like the Ocean, which as the Civilians tell us, if he lose in one plae, he gets ground in another. Cares and Crosses ride behind Kings, Clowds hang over them. They may be eclypsed a while, but they will shine afterwards with a stronger lustre. Our gracious Soverain hath passed a kind of
Ordeal, a fiery triall; he while now hath bin matriculated and serv'd part of an Apprenti∣ship in the School of Affliction; I hope God will please shortly to cancell the Indenture, and restore him to a sweeter liberty then e∣ver. This Discourse was stopp'd in the Press by the tyranny of the Times, and not suf∣fer'd to see open light till now.
A SOBER and SEASONABLE MEMORANDUM SENT TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE PHILIP late Earl of Pem∣brock, and Montgomery, &c. To mind Him of the particular Sacred Ties (besides the Common Oath of Alleageance and Supremacy) wereby he was bound to adhere to the King his Liege Lord and Master. Presented unto Him in the hottest brunt of the late Civill Wars. Iuramentum ligamen Conscientiae maximum. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.
To the Right Honourable, PHILIP Earl of Pembrock, and Montgomery, Knight of the Bath; Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter; Gentle∣man of His Majesties Bed∣chamber, And one of His most Honorable privy Counsell, &c.
My Lord, THis Letter requires no Apology, much lesse any pardon, but may expect rather a good reception and thanks, when your Lord∣ship hath seriously perused the contents, and ruminated well upon the mat∣ter it treats of by weighing it in your second and third thoughts which usually carry with them a greater advantage of wisdom: It concerns not your body, or temporall estate, but things reflecting upon the noblest part of you, your soul, which being a beam of Immortality, and a Type of the Almighty, is incomparably more precious, and rende∣reth all other earthly things to be but bables and transitory trifles. Now, the strongest tye, the solemnest engagement and stipula∣tion that can be betwixt the soul and her Creator, is an Oath. I do not understand common tumultuary rash oaths, proceeding from an ill habit, or heat of passion upon
sudden contingencies, for such oaths bind one to nought else but to repentance: No, I mean serious and legall oaths, taken with a calm prepared spirit, either for the asser∣ting of truth, and conviction of falshood, or for fidelitie in the execution of some Office or binding to civill obedience and Loyaltie, which is one of the essentiall parts of a Christian; Such publick oaths legally made with the Royall assent of the Soveraigne from whom they receive both legalitie and life (else they are invalid and unwarrantable) as they are religious acts in their own nature, so is the taking and observance of them part of Gods honor, and there can be no∣thing more derogatory to the high Majesty and holinesse of his name, nothing more dan∣gerous, destructive and damnable to hu∣mane souls then the infringment and eluding of them, or omission in the performance of them. Which makes the Turks, of whom Christians in this particular may learn a ten∣der peece of humanity, to be so cautious, that they seldom or never administer an oath to Greek, Jew, or any other Nation, and the reason is, that if the Party sworn doth take that Oath upon hopes of some advantage, or for evading of danger and
punishment, and afterwards rescinds it, they think themselves to be involved in the Per∣jury, and so accessary to his damnation: Our Civill Law hath a Canon consonant to this, which is, Mortale peccatum est ei praestare juramentum, quem scio verisimiliter violatu∣rum; 'Tis a mortall sin to administer an Oath to him who I probably know will break it; To this may allude another wholesome saying, A false Oath is damnable, a true Oath dangerous, none at all the safest. How much then have they to answer for, who of late yeares have fram'd such formidable coercive generall Oaths to serve them for engins of State to lay battery to the Consciences and Soules of poor men, and those without the assent of their Soveraign, and opposit point blank to former Oaths they themselves had taken: these kind of Oaths the City of London hath swallowed lately in grosse, and the Country in detaile, which makes me confidently be∣leeve that if ever that saying of the holy Prophet, The Land mournes for Oaths, was ap∣pliable to any part of the habitable earth, it may be now applied to this reprobate Iland. But now I come to the maine of my pur∣pose, and to those Oaths your Lordship hath taken before this distracted time, which the
world knowes, and your conscience can testifie, were divers; They were all of them solemn, and some of them Sa∣cramentall Oaths (and indeed, every So∣lemn Oath among the Antients was held a Sa∣crament:) They all implyed, and imposed an indispensible fidelity, Truth and loyalty from you to your Soveraign Prince, your Liege Lord and Master the King: I will make some instances: Your Lordship took an Oath when Knight of the Bath to love your Soveraign above all earthly Creatures, and for His Right and dignity to live and die &c. By the Oath of Supremacy you swear to beare faith and true allegeance to the Kings Highnesse, and to your power to defend all u∣risdictions, Priviledges, Preheminences and Authorities belonging to his Highnesse &c. Your Lordship took an Oath when Pri∣vie Counsellor, to be a true and faithfull Ser∣vant unto Him, and if you knew or understood of any manner of thing to be attempted, done, or spoken against His Majesties Person, Ho∣nour, Crown, or Dignity, you swore to let, and withstand the same to the uttermost of your power, and either cause it to be revealed to himself, or to others of His Privy Counsell; The Oaths
you took when Bedchamber man, and L. Chamberlain bind you as strictly to His Person. Your Lordship may also call to memorie when you were installed Knight of the Gar∣ter, (whereof you are now the oldest living except K▪ of Denmark) you solemnly swore to defend the Honour and Quarrels, the Rights and Lordship of your▪ Soveraigne: Now the Record tells us that the chiefest ground of instituting the said order by that heroick Prince Edward the Third was, that he might have choice gallant men, who by Oath and Honour should adhere unto him in all dangers, and difficulties, and that by way of reciprocation Hee should protect and defend them, Which made Alfonso Duke of Calabria so much importune Henry the Eight to install him one of the Knights of the Garter, that he might engage King Harry to protect him against Charles the Eighth, who threatned then the conquest of Naples. How your Lordship hath acquitted your self of the performance of these Oaths, your conscience (that bosome record) can make the best affidavit; Some of them oblige you o live and dye with King Charles, but what
Oaths or any thing like an Oath binds you to live and die with the House of Commons, as your Lordship often gives out you will, I am yet to learne: Unlesse that House which hath not power as much as to administer an Oath (much lesse to make one) can absolve you from your former Oaths, or haply by their omnipotence dispence with you for the observance of them. Touching the Politicall capacitie of the King, I feare that will be a weak plea for your Lordship before the Tri∣bunall of heaven, and they who▪ whisper such Chimeras into your ears, abuse you in grosse; but put case there were such a thing as politicall capacitie distinct from the personal, which to a true rationall man is one of the grossest Buls that can be, yet these fore∣mentioned Oaths relate most of them meer∣ly unto the Kings Person, the individuall Person of King Charles, as you are His Domestick Counsellor, and cubicular Ser∣vant. My Lord, I take leave to tell your Lord∣ship (and the Spectator sees sometimes more then the Gamester) that the world ex∣treamely marvels at you more then others, and it makes those who wish you best to be transformed to wonder, that your Lordship
shold be the first of your Race who deser∣ted the Crown, which one of your Progeni∣tors said, he would still follow though it were thrown upon an hedg: Had your Princely Brother (William Earl of Pembrock) bin living he wold have bin sooner torn by wild horses than have banded against it, or abandoned the King his Master, and fallen to such grosse Idolatry as to worship the Beast with many heads. The world also stands astonished that you shold confederate to bring into the bowels of the Land, and make Elogiums in some of your Speeches of that hungry people which have bin from all times so crosse and fatall to the English Nation, and particularly to your own ho∣nour: Many thousands do wonder that your Lordship shold be brought to persecute with so much animosity and hatred that reverend Order in Gods Church (Episcopacy) which is contemporary with Christianity it self, and wherunto you had once designed, and devoted one of your dearest Sons so so∣lemnly. My Lord, if this Monster of Reformati∣on (which is like an infernall Spirit clad in white, and hath a cloven head as well as feet) prevailes, you shall find the same de∣stiny
will attend poor England, as did Bohe∣mia which was one of the flourishingst King∣doms upon that part of the earth, which happen'd thus: The Common people ther repind at the Hierarchy and riches of the Church, therupon a Parliament was pack'd where Bishops were abolished, what follow∣ed? The Nobles and Gentry went down next, and afterwards the Crown it self, and so it became a popular confus'd Anarchicall State, and a Stage of bloud a long time, so that at last, when this Magot had done working in the brains of the foolish peeple, they were glad to have recourse to Monar∣chy again after a world of calamities; though it degenerated from a successive Kingdom to an Elective. Methinks, my Lord, under fa∣vour that those notorious visible judgements which have fallen upon these Refiners of reform'd Religion shold unbeguile your Lordship, and open your eyes: For the hand of heaven never appeared so clearly in any humane actions: Your Lordship may well remember what became of the Ho∣thams, and Sir Alexander Cary, who were the two fatall wretches that began the War first, one in the North, the other in the South, Plymouth and Hull. Your Lordship
may be also pleased to remember what be∣came of Brooks the Lord, and Hampden, the first whereof was dispatched by a deaf and dumb man out of an ancient Church (at Litchfield) which he was battering, and that suddenly also, for he fell down stone dead in the twinkling of an eye; Now, one of the greatest cavils he had against our Litur∣gy was a clause of a Prayer ther against sud∣den death; Besides, the fag end of his Grace in that journey was, that if the design was not pleasing to God, he might perish in the action: For the other (Hampden) he be∣sprinkled with his bloud, and received his death upon the same clod of earth in Buck∣ingham-shire where he had first assembled the poor Country people like so many Geese to drive them gaggling in a mutiny to London with the Protestation in their Caps, which hath bin since torn in flitters, and is now grown obsolet and quite out of use. Touching Pym and Stroud, those two worthy Champions of the Utopian cause, the first being opened, his stomack and guts were found to be full of pellets of bloud, the other had little or no brain in his skull be∣ing dead, and lesse when he was living: Touching those who carryed the first scan∣dalous
Remonstrance (that work of night and the verdict of a starv'd jury) to welcome the King from Scotland, they have bin since (your Lordship knows well) the chief of the Eleven Members impeached by the House. And now they are a kind of Runnagates be∣yond the Seas, scorn'd by all mankind, and baffled every where, yea, even by the Boors of Holland, and not daring to peep in any populous Town but by owle-light. Moreover, I believe your Lordship hath good cause to remember that the same kind of riotous Rascals, which rabbled the K. out of Town, did drive away the Speaker in like manner with many of their Memberships (a∣mongst whom your Lordship was fairly on his way,) to seek shelter of their Janiza∣ries the Redcoats: Your Lordship must needs find what deadly fewds fal daily 'twix the Presbyterian and the Independent, the two fiery brands that have put this poor Isle so long in combustion. But 'tis worthy your Lordships speciall notice how your dear Bre∣thren the Scots (whom your Lordship so highly magnified in some of your publick Speeches) who were at first brought in for Hirelings against the King for them, offer themselves now to come in against them for
the King: Your Lordship cannot be igno∣rant of the sundry clashes that have bin 'twixt the City and their Memberships, and 'twixt their Memberships and their men of War or Military Officers, who have often wav'd and disobeyed their commands: How this tatterdimallian Army hath reduc'd this cow'd City, the cheated Country, and their once all-commanding Masters, to a perfect passe of slavery, to a tru Asinin condition; They crow over all the ancient Nobility and Gentry of the Kindom, though ther be not found amongst them all but two Knights; and 'tis well known ther be hun∣dreds of privat Gentlemen in the Kingdom, the poorest of whom, is able to buy this whole Host with the Generall himself and all the Commanders: But 'tis not the first time, that the Kings and Nobility of Eng∣land have bin baffled by petty companions: I have read of Iack Straw, Wat Tyler, and Ket the Tanner, with divers others that did so, but being suppressed it tended to the advantage of the King at last; and what a world of examples are ther in our story, that those Noblemen who banded against the Crown, the revenge of heaven ever found them out early or late at last. These, with a black cloud of reciprocall
judgments more, which have come home to these Reformers very doors, shew that the hand of divine justice is in't, and the holy Prophet tells us, When Gods judgments are upon earth, then the inhabitants shall learn ju∣stice. Touching your Lordship in particular, you have not, under favour, escap'd without some already, and I wish more may not fol∣low; your Lordship may remember you lost one Son at Bridgenorth, your dear Daughter at Oxford, your Son-in-Law at Newbury, your Daughter-in-Law at the Charter-house of an infamous disease, how sick your Eldest son hath bin; how part of your house was burnt in the Country, with others which I will not now mention. I will conclude this point with an obser∣vation of the most monstrous number of Witches that have swarm'd since these Wars against the King, more (I dare say) then have bin in this Island since the Devil tempted Eve; for in two Counties only, viz. Suffolk and Essex, ther have bin near up∣on three hundred arraign'd, and eightscore executed (as I have it from the Clerks of the Peace of those Counties;) what a bar∣barous devilish office one had, under colour
of examination, to torment poor silly wo∣men with watchings, pinchings and other artifices to find them for Witches: How o∣thers call'd spirits by a new invention of villany were conniv'd at for seizing upon young children, and  them on ship∣board, where having their  they were so transform'd that their  could not know them, and so were carryed over for new schismaticall Plantations to New-England and other Seminaries of Rebellion. My Lord, ther is no villany that can enter into the imagination of man hath bin left here uncommitted; no crime from the highest Treason to the meanest Trespasse, but these Reformers are guilty of. What horrid acts of prophanes have bin perpetra∣ted up and down! the Monuments of the dead have bin rifled! Horses have bin wate∣red at the Church Font, and fed upon the holy Table! Widows, Orphans, and Hospi∣tals have bin commonly robb'd, and Gods House hath bin plunder'd more then any! with what infandous blasphemies have Pul∣pits rung! one crying out, that this Parliament was as necessary for our Reformation, as the comming of Christ was for our Redempion: Another belching out, that if God Almighty
did not prosper this Cause, 'twere fitting he shold change places with the Devil: Another, that the worst thing our Savoour did, was the making of the Dominical prayer, and saving the Thief upon the Crosse. O immortal God, is it pos∣sible that England shold produce such Mon∣sters, or rather such infernal fiends shap'd with humane bodies! yet your Lordship sides with these men, though they be ene∣mies to the Cross, to the Church, and to the very name of Iesus Christ; I'le instance on∣ly in two who were esteem'd the Oracles of this holy Reformation, Petrs, and Saltmarsh; The first is known by thousands to be an infamous, jugling and scandalous villaine, a∣mong other feats, he got the Mother and Daughter with Child, as it was offered to be publickly proved; I could speak much of the other, but being dead, let it suffice that he dyed mad and desperate, yet these were accounted the two Apostles of the times. My Lord, 'tis high time for you to recol∣lect your self, to enter into the private clo∣set of your thoughts, and summon them all to counsel upon your pillow; consider well the slavish condition your dear Country is in, weigh well the sad case your liege Lord and Master is in, how he is bereav'd of his Queen,
His Children, His Servants, His Liberty, His Chaplains, and of every thing in which there is any comfort; observe well, how neverthelesse, God Almighty works in Him by inspiring Him with equality and calmnesse of mind, with patience, prudence and constancy, How Hee makes His very Crosses to stoop unto Him, when His Sub∣jects will not: Consider the monstrousnesse of the Propositions that are tendred him, wherein no lesse then Crown, Scepter, and Sword, which are things in-alienable from Majesty, are in effect demanded, nay, they would have him transmit, and resign his very intellectuals unto them, not only so, but they would have him make a sacrifice of his soul, by forcing him to violate that solemne sa∣cramentall Oath hee took at his Coronation when hee was no Minor, but come to a full maturity of reason and judgement: make it your own case, My Lord, and that's the best way to judge of His: Think upon the multiplicity of solemne astringing Oathes your Lordship hath taken, most whereof di∣rectly and solely enjoyne faith and loyalty to his Person; oh my Lord! wrong not your soule so much, in comparison of whom your body is but a rag of rottennesse.
Consider that acts of loyalty to the Crown are the fairest columns to bear up a Noblemans name to future ages, and regi∣ster it in the temple of immortality. Re∣concile your self therefore speedily unto your liege Lord and Master, think upon the infinit private obligations you have had both to Sire and Son: The Father kiss'd you of∣ten, kisse you now the Sun lest he be too angry; And Kings, you will find, my Lord, are like the Sun in the heavens, which may be clouded for a time, yet he is still in his sphear, and will break out againe and shine as gloriously as ever; Let me tell your Lordship that the people begin to grow extream weary of their Physitians, they find the remedy to be far worse then their former disease; nay they stick not to call some of them meer Quack∣salvers rather then Physitians; Some goe further, & say they are no more a Parliament then a Pye-powder Court at Bartholmew-Fair, ther being all the essentiall parts of a true Parliament wanting in this, as fairnesse of elections, freedome of speech, fulnesse of Members, nor have they any head at all; be∣sides, they have broken all the fundamental rules, and Priviledges of Parliament, and dishonoured that high Court more then a∣ny
thing else: They have ravish'd Magna Char∣ta which they are sworn to maintain, taken away our birth-right therby, and transgressed all the laws of heaven and earth: Lastly, they have most perjuri∣ously betrayed the trust the King reposed in them, and no lesse the trust their Country re∣posed in them, so that if reason and law were now in date, by the breach of their Privi∣ledges, and by betraying the said double trust that is put in them, they have dissolved themselves ipso facto I cannot tell how ma∣ny thousand times, notwithstanding that monstrous grant of the Kings, that fatall act of continuance: And truly, my Lord, I am not to this day satisfied of the legality (though I am satisfied of the forciblenesse of that Act) whether it was in his Majesties power to passe it or no; for the law ever presupposeth these clauses in all concessions of Grace, in all Patents, Charters, and Grants whatsoever the King passeth, Salvo jure regio, salvo jure coronae. To conclude, as I presume to give your Lordship these humble cautions and advice in particular, so I offer it to all other of your rank, office, order and Relations, who have souls to save, and who by solemn indispen∣sable
Oaths have ingaged themseves to be tru and loyall to the Person of King Charls. Touching his political capacity, it is a fancy which hath bin exploded in all other Parlia∣ments except in that mad infamous Parlia∣ment wher it was first hatched; That which bears upon Record the name of Insanum Par∣liamentum to all posterity, but many Acts have passed since that, it shold be high and horrible Treason to separat or distinguish the Person of the King from His Power; I believe, as I said before, this distinction will not serve their turn at the dreadful Bar of divine ju∣stice in the other world: indeed that Rule of the Pagans makes for them, Si Iusjuran∣dum violandum est, Tyrannis causâ violandum est, If an Oath be any way violable, 'tis to get a Kingdom: We find by woful experience that according to this maxime they have made themselves all Kings by violation of so ma∣ny Oaths; They have monopoliz'd the whole power and wealth of the Kingdom in their own hands; they cut, shuffle, deal, and turn up what trump they please, being Judges and parties in every thing. My Lord, he who presents these humble advertisments to your Lordship, is one who is inclin'd to the Parliament of Engl. in as high a
degree of affection as possibly a free-born Subject can be; One besides, who wisheth your Lordships good, with the preservation of your safety and honour more really then he whom you intrust with your secretest affaires, or the White Iew of the Upper House, who hath infused such pernicious principles into you; moreover, one who hath some drops of bloud running in his veins, which may claim kindred with your Lordship: and lastly, he is one who would kiss your feet, in lieu of your hands, if your Lordship wold be so sensible of the most desperat case of your poor Coun∣try, as to employ the interests, the opinion and power you have to restore the King your Master by English waies, rather then a hungry forrein people, who are like to bring nothing but destruction in the van, confusion in the rear, and rapine in the middle, shold have the honour of so glorious a work. So humbly hoping your Lordship will not take with the left hand, what I offer with the right, I rest, From the Prison of the Fleet 3. Sep∣tembris 1644. Your Lordships truly devoted Servant. I. H.
HIS Late MAJESTIES Royal DECLARATION, OR MANIFESTO TO ALL FORREIN PRINCES AND STATES, Touching his constancy in the Protestant Religion. Being traduced abroad by some Ma∣licious and lying Agents, That He was wavering therin, and upon the high road of returning to Rome. Printed in the Year, 1661.
TO THE Unbiass'd REDER. IT may be said that mischief in one particular hath somthing of Vertue in it, which is, That the Contrivers and Instruments thereof are still stirring and watchfull. They are commonly more pragmaticall and fuller of Devices then those sober-minded men, who while they go on still in the plaine road of Reason, having the King, and knowne Lawes to justifie and protect them, hold themselfs secure enough, and so think no hurt; Iudas eyes were o∣pen to betray his Master, while the rest of his fellow-servants were quietly asleep. The Members at Westminster were men of the first gang, for their Mischievous braines were alwayes at work how to com∣passe their ends; And one of their prime policies in order thereunto was to cast as∣spersions
on their King, thereby to alienat the affections and fidelity of his peeple from him notwithstanding that besides their pub∣ick Declarations they made new Oaths and protestations, whereby they swore to make Him the best belov'd King that e∣ver was;) Nor did this Diabolicall malice terminat only within the bounds of his own Dominions, but it extended to infect other Princes and States of the Reformed Chur∣ches abroad to make Him suspected in his Religion, & that he was branling in his belief, and upon the high way to Rome; To which purpose they sent missives and clandestine Emissaries to divers places beyond the Seas, whereof forren Authors make mention in their writings. At that time when this was in the height of action, the passage from London to Oxford, where the King kept then his Court, was so narrowly blockd up, that a fly could scarce passe; some Ladies of honor being search'd in an unseemly and barbarous manner; whereupon the penner of the following Declaration, finding his Royal master to be so grosly traduced, made his Duty to go be∣yond all presumptions, by causing the sayd Declaration to be printed and publish'd in
Latin, French and English, whereof great numbers were sent beyond the seas to France, Holland, Germany, Suisserland, Den∣mark, Swethland, and to the English planta∣tions abroad, to vindicat his Majesty in this point, which produc'd very happy and advan∣tagious effects for Salmtisius, and other for∣rin writers of great esteem speake of it in their printed works. The Declaration was as followeth.
CAROLUS, Singulari Omnipotentis Dei providentia An∣gliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Rex, Fidei Defensor, &c. Universis et singulis qui praesens hoc scriptum ceu pro∣testationem inspexerint, potissimum Re∣formatae Religionis cultoribus cujuscun{que} sint gentis, gradus, aut conditionis, salu∣tem, &c. CUM ad aures nostras non ita pridem fama pervene∣rit, sinistros quosdam rumores, literasque poli∣tica vel perniciosa potiùs quorundam industriâ sparsas esse, & nonnullis protestantium ecclesiis in exteris partibus emissas, nobis esse ani∣mum & consilium ab illa Orthodoxa
Religione quam ab incunabulis im∣bibimus, & ad hoc usque momentum per integrum vitae nostrae curriculum amplexi sumus recedendi; & Papis∣mum in haec Regna iterum introdu∣cendi, Quae conjectura, ceu nefanda potius calumnia nullo prorsus nixa vel imaginabili fundamento horrendos hosce tumultus, & rabiem plusquàm belluinam in Anglia suscitavit sub pre∣textu cujusdam (chimericae) Refor∣mationis regimini, legibusque hujus Dominii non solum incongruae, sed incompatibilis: VOLUMUS, uttoti Christiano Orbi innotescat, ne mini∣mam quidem animum nostrum inci∣disse cogitatiunculam hoc aggredien∣di, aut transversum unguem ab illa Re∣ligione discedendi quam cum corona, septroque hujus regni solenni, & sa∣cramentali juramento tenemur profi∣teri, protegere & propugnare. Nectan∣tum
constantissima nostra praxis, & quotidiana in exercitiis praefaae Re∣ligionis praesentia, cum crebris in facie nostrorum agminum asseverationibus, publicisque procerum hujus Regni te∣stimoniis, & sedula in regiam nostram sobolem educando circumspectione (omissis plurimis aliis argumentis) lu∣culentissimè hoc demonstrat, sed eti∣am faelicissimum illud matrimonium quod inter nostram primogenitam, & illustrissimum principem  sponte contraximus, idem fortissimè attestatur: Quo nuptiali faedere insuper constat, nobis non esse propositum il∣lam profiteri solummodo, sed expan∣dere, & corroborare quantum in no∣bis situm est. Hanc sacrosanctam Anglicanae Christi Ecclesiae Religionem, tot Theologorum convocationibus san∣citam, tot comitiorum edictis confir∣matam,
tot Regiis Diplomatibus sta∣bilitam, una cum regimine Ecclesiasti∣co, & Liturgia ei annexa, quam litur∣giam, regimenque celebriores prote∣stantium Authores tam Germani, quam Galli, tam Dani quam Helvetici, tam Batavi, quam Bohemi multis elogiis nec sine quadam invidia in suis publi∣cis scripis comproban & applaudunt, ut in transactionibus Dordrechtanae Sy∣nodus, cui nonnulli nostrorum praesu∣lum, quorum Dignitati debia prestita fuit reverentia, interfuerunt, apparet Istam, inquimus Religionem, quam Regius noster pater (beatissimae me∣moriae) in illa celeberrima fidei suae Confessione omnibus Christianis prin∣cipibus (ut & haec praesens nostra pro∣testatio exhibita) publicè asserit: Istam, istam Religionem solenniter protesta∣mur, Nos integram, sartam-tectam, & inviolabilem conservaturos, & pro vi∣rili
nostro (divino adjuvante Numi∣ne) usque ad extremam vitae nostrae pe∣riodum protecturos, & omnibus no∣stris Ecclesiasticis pro muneris nostri, & supradicti sacrosancti juramenti ra∣tione doceri, & praedicari curaturos. Quapropter injungimus & in mandatis damus Omnibus ministris nostris in exteris partibus tam Legatis, quam Residentibus, Agentibusque & nunci∣is, reliquisque nostris subditis ubicun∣que Orbis Christiani terrarum aut cu∣riositatis aut comercii gracia degenti∣bus, hanc solennem & sinceram no∣stram protestationem, quandocunque sese obtulerit loci & temporis oportu∣nitas, communicare, asserere, asseve∣rare. Dat. in Academia et Civitate nostra Oxoniensi pridie Idus Maii, 1644.
CHARLES by the special Pro∣vidence of Almighty God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, &c. To all who profess the tru Reformed Pro∣testant Religion, of what Na∣tion, degree, and condition so∣ever they be to whom this present Declaration shall come, Greeting. WHeras We are given to understand, that many false rumors, and scan∣dalous letters are spread up and
down amongst the Reforme Churches in forein parts by the Pollitick, or rather the pernitious industry of som ill-affected per∣sons, that we have an inclination to recede from that Orthodox Reli∣gion, which we were born, bapti∣zed, and bred in, & which We have firmly professed and practised throughout the whol course of our life to this moment, and that We intend to give way to the introdu∣ction, and publick exercise of Pope∣ry again in Our Dominions: Which conjecture or rather most detestable calumny, being grounded upon no imaginable foundation, hath raised
these horrid tumults, and more then barbarous wars throughout this flourishing Island, under pretext of a kind of Reformation, which wold not only prove incongruous, but incompatible with the funda∣mental Laws and Government of this Kingdom, We do desire that the whol Christian world shold take notice and rest assured, that We never entertained in Our imagina∣tion the least thought to attempt such a thing, or to depart a jot from that holy Religion, which when We received the Crown and Scepter of this Kingdom, VVe took a most so∣lemn Sacramental Oath to profess
and protect. Nor doth Our most constant practise and quotidian visible presence in the exercise of this sole Religion, with so many Asseverations in the head of Our Armies, and the publick attestation of Our Barons, with the circum∣spection used in the education of our Royall Off-spring, besides di∣vers other undeniable Arguments, only demonstrate this; But also that happy Alliance of Marriage, VVe contracted 'twixt Our eldest Daughter, and the Illustrious Prince of Orenge, most clearly confirmes the reality of Our in∣tentions herein; by which Nup∣tial
ingagement it appears further, that Our endeavours are not only to make a bare profession thereof in Our own Dominions, but to in∣large and corroborate it abroad as much as lieth in Our Power: This most holy Religion of the Anglican Church, ordained by so many Convocations of learned Divines, confirmed by so many Acts of National Parliaments, and strengthned by so many Royal Proclamations, together with the Ecclesiastick discipline, and Litur∣gy therunto appertaining, which Liturgy and discipline, the most eminent of Protestant Authors, as
well Germans as French; as well Danes as Swedes and Swittzens; as well Belgians as Bohemians, do with many Elogies (and not with∣out a kind of Envy) approve and applaud in their publick Writings, particularly in the transactions of the Synod of Dort, wherin besides other of Our Divines (who after∣wards were Prelates) one of our Bishops assisted, to whose dignity all due respects and precedency was given: This Religion We say, which Our Royal Father of bles∣sed memory doth publickly assert in His famous Confession addres'd, as we also do this our Protestation,
to all Christian Princes; This, this most holy Religion, with the Hierarchy and Liturgy therof, We solemnly protest, that by the help of Almighty God, we will en∣deavour to Our utmost power, and last period of our life, to keep entire and inviolable, and will be care∣ful, according to Our duty to Hea∣ven, and the tenor of the aforesaid most sacred Oath at Our Corona∣tion, that all Our Ecclesiasticks in their several degrees and incum∣bences shall preach and practise the same. VVherfore VVe enjoyn and command all Our Ministers of State beyond the Seas, aswell Am∣bassadors
as Residents, Agents, and Messengers, And VVe desire all the rest of Our loving subjects that sojourn either for curiosity or commerce in any forein parts, to communicate, uphold and assert this Our solemn and sincere prote∣station when opportunity of time and place shall be offered.
CHARLES, par la Providence de Dieu Roy de la grand' Bretagne, de France, et d' Irlande, Defenseur de la Foy, &c. A tous ceux qui ceste presente Declaration verront, particulierement a Ceux de la Religion Reformee de quelque Nation, degreou condition qu'ils soient, Salut. AYant receu advis de bonne main que plusieurs faux rapports & lettres sont esparses parmi les Eglises Reformees de là la mer, par la politique, ou plustost la per∣nicieuse industrie de personnes mal affection∣nes a nostre government; que nous auons dessein a receder de celle Religion que Nous auons professè & pratiquè tout le temps de nostre vie iusques a present; & de vouloir introduire la papautè derechef en nos Dominions, Laquelle conjecture, ou ca∣lumnie plustost, appuyee sur nul fundement imaginable, a suscitè ces horribles tumultes
& allumè le feu d' une tressanglante guerre en tous les quatre coins de ceste fleurissante Monarchie, soubs pretexte d' une (chymeri∣que) Reformation, la quelle seroit incompa∣tible avec le governement & les loix fonde∣mentales de ce Royaume. Nous Desions, quil soit notoire a tout le monde, que la moindre pensee de ce faire n a pas entree en nostre imagination, de depar∣tir ancunement de cell' Orthodoxe Religion, qu' auec la Couronne & le sceptre de ce Royaume Nous sommes tenus par un ser∣ment solennel & sacramentaire a proteger & defendre. Ce qu' appert non seulement par nostre quotidienne presence es Exercies de la dite Religion, avec, tan d' asseverations a la teste de nos Armees, & la publicque At∣testation de nos Barons, avec le soin que nous tenons en la nourrituredes princes & prin∣cesses nos ensans, Mais le tres-heureux ma∣riage que nous avons conclu entre la nostre plus aisnee, & le tres-illustrie prince d' O∣renge en est encore un tres-evident tesmoig∣nage, par la quell' alliance il appert aussy, que nostre desir est de n' en faire pas vne nue pro∣fession seulement dicelle, mais de la vouloir estendre & corroberer autant qu' il nous est possible: Cest' Orthodoxe Religion de
leglise Anglicane Ordonnee par tant de con∣ventione de Teologues, confirmee par tant de arrests d' Parlement, & fortifie par tant d' Edicts royaux auec la discipline & la Lytur∣gi a elle appartenant, laquelle discipline & Lyturgie les plus celebres Autheurs Prote∣stants, tant Francois, qu' Allemands; tant Seudois que Suisses, tant Belgiens que Bohe∣miens approuent entierement & non sans quelqu envie en leur escrits particulierement en la Synode de Dort, ou un de nos Euesques assistoit, & la Reverence & precedence deue a sa dignite Ecclesistique luy fut exactement rendue: Ceste tres-sainte Religion que no∣stre feu pere de res-heureuse memoire ad∣uoue en sa celebre Confession de la Foy ad∣dressee come nous faisons ceste Declaration a tous Princes Chrestiens; Nous Protestons que moyennant la grace de Dieu, nous ta∣scherone de conseruer ceste Religion invio∣lable, & en son entier selon la mesure de pu∣issance que Dieu amis entre nos mains; Et nous requerons & commandons a tous nos ministres d' estat tant Ambassadeurs, que Re∣sidens, Agens ou messagers, & a tous autres nos subjects qui fontleurseiour es paysestran∣gers de communiquer, maintenir & adou∣uer cestenostre solennelle Protestation toutes fois & quantes que l' ocasion se presentera.
APOLOGS, OR FABLES MYTHOLOGIZ'D. Out of whose Moralls the State and History of the late unhap∣py Distractions in Great Britain and Ireland may be Extracted; Some of which Apologs have prov'd PROPHETICAL. —Nil est nisi Fabula Mundus. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.
To my Honored and known friend Sir I. C. Knight. SIR, AMongst many other Bar∣barismes which like an impetuous Torrent have lately rush'd in upon us, The interception and o∣pening of Letters is none of the least, For it hath quite bereft all ingenious Spirits of that correspondency and sweet communication of fancy, which hath bin alwaies esteemed the best fuel of affection, and the very marrow of friendship. And truly, in my judge∣ment, this custom may be termed not only a Barbarisme, but the baest kind
of Burglary that can be, 'tis a plunde∣ring of the very brain, as is spoken in another place. We are reduced here to that servile condition, or rather to such a height of slavery, that we have nothing left which may entitle us free Rationall creatures; the thought it self cannot say 'tis free, much less the tongue or pen. Which makes me impart unto You the traverses of these turbulent times, under the following fables. I know you are an exquisite Astronomer. I know the deep inspection you have in all parts of Philosophy, I know you are a good Herald, and I have found in your Li∣brary sundry books of Architecture, and Comments upon Vitruvius. The unfolding of these Apologues will put you to it in all these, and will re∣quire▪ your second, if not your third thoughts, and when you have concoct∣ed
them well, I believe, (else I am much deceived in your Genius) they will af∣ford you som entertainment, and do the errand upon which they are sent, which is, to communicate unto you the most material passages of this long'd-for Parlement, and of these sad confusions which have so unhing'd, distorted, transvers'd, tumbled and di∣slocated all things, that England may be termed now, in comparison of what it was, no other then an Anagram of a Kingdom. One thing I promise you, in the perusal of these Parables, that you shall find no gingles in them, or any thing sordid or scurrilous, the com∣mon dialect and disease of these times. So I leave you to the gard and gui∣dance, Of God and Vertu who do still advance Their Favorits, maugre the frownes of Chance. Your constant servant, I. H.
The great CONJUNCTION, OR, Parlement of STARS. UPon a time, the Stars complain∣ed to Apollo, that he displayed his beams too much upon some malignant Planets; That the Moone had too great a share of his influence, and that he was carryed away too much by her motion: They complained also, that the constellation of Libra (which holds the ballance of Justice) had but a dim light, and that the Astrean Court was grown altogether destructive, with divers other grievances. Apollo hereupon, com∣manded Mercury to summon a generall Sy∣nod, where some out of every Asterisme throughout the whole Firmament were to meet; Apollo told them, I am placed here by the finger of the Almighty, to be Monarch of the skie, to be the Measurer of Time, and
I goe upon his errand round about the worl every foure and twenty houres: I am also the Fountaine of Heate and Light, which, though I use to dispence and diffuse in equall proportions through the whole Universe; yet there is difference 'twixt objects, a Castle hath more of my light then a Cottage, and the Cedar hath more of me then the Shrub, according to the common axiom, Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recip∣entis. But touching the Moon, (the second great Luminary) I would have you know, that she is dearest unto mee, therefore let none repine that I cherish her with my beams, and confer more light on her then any other. Touching the malignant Planets, or any o∣ther Star, of what magnitude soever, that moves not in a regular motion, or hath run any excentrick exorbitant course, or that would have made me to move out of the Zodiak, I put them over unto you, that upon due legall examination and proof, they may be unspher'd or extinguished. But I would have this done with moderation; I would have you to keep as neer as you can between the Tropiques and temperate Zones: I would have things reduced to their true Principles, I wold have things reformed, not ruin'd; I
would have the spirit of malice and lying, the spirit of partiality and injustice, the spirit of tyranny and rigour, the base spirit of feare and jealousie to be farre from this glorious Syderean Synod; I would have all private interests reflecting upon revenge or profit, to be utterly banished hence: More∣over, I would not have you to make grie∣vances, where no grievances are, or dangers where no dangers are. I would have no cre∣ation of dangers; I would have you to hus∣band time as parsimoniously as you can, lest by keeping too long together, and amusing the world with such tedious hopes of redress of grievances, you prove your self the great∣est grievance at last, and so from Starrs be∣come Comets: Lastly, I would have you be cautious how you tamper with my Sove∣raign power, and chop Logicke with mee in that point; you know what became of Him who once presumed to meddle with my Chariot. Hereupon the whole Host of Heaven being constellated thus into one great Body, fell into a serious deliberation of things, and Apollo himself continued his pre∣sence, and sate often amongst them in his full lustre, but in the meane time, whilest they were in the midst of their consultations, ma∣ny
odde Aspects, Oppositions and Conjuncti∣ons hapned between them: for some of the Sporades, but specially those mongrel small vulgar stars, which make up the Galaxia (the milkie way in Heaven) gather in a tu∣multuous disorderly manner about the body of Apollo, and commit many strange inso∣lencies, which caused Apollo (taking young Phosphorus the Morning-Star with him) to retire himself, and in a just indignation to withdraw his Light from the Synod: so all began to be involv'd in a strange kind of confusion and obscurity; they groaped in the dark, not knowing which way to move, or what course to take, all things went Can∣cer-like retrograde, because the Sun detain∣ed his wonted light and irradiations from them. MORALL. Such as the Sun is in the Firmament, a Monarch is in his Kingdom: for, as the Wi∣sest of men saith, In the light of the Kings Countenance ther is life; and I believe that to be the Morall of this Astrean Fable.
. OR, The Great Councell of BIRDS. UPon a time the Birds met in Coun∣cell, for redresse of som extravagan∣cies that had flown unto the volatill Empire; Nor was it the first time that Birds met thus; for the Phrygian Fabler tells us of divers meetings of theirs: And after him we read that Apollonius Thyaneus, under∣took the interpretation of their language, and to be their Drogoman. They thus assembled in one Great Covie by the call of the Eagle their unquestioned hereditary King, and by vertue of his Royal Authority, complaints were brought, that divers Cormorants and Harpies, with other Birds of prey, had got in amongst them, who did much annoy and invade the publick li∣berty: sundry other Birds were questioned, which caused some to take a timelyFinch, &c. flight into another aire. As they were thus consulting for advance∣ment of the common good, manyMechanicks▪ Mariners. Rooks, Horn-Owles and Sea-Gulls
flock'd together, and luttered about the place they were assembled in, where they kept a hideous noise, and committed many outrages, and nothing cold satisfie them, but the Griffons head, which was therfore chopt off, and offered up as a sacri∣fice Stra. to make them leave their chattering, and to appease their fury for the time. They fell foul afterwards upon the Pies, who were used to be much reveren∣ced,Bishops. and to sit upon the highest pearch in that great Assembly: they called them I do∣latrous and inauspitious Birds, they hated their mix'd colour, repined at their long train, they tore their white feathers, and were ready to peck out their very eyes: they did what they could to put them in Owles feathers (as the poor Sheep was in the Woolfs skin) to make them the more hated, and to be star'd and hooted at whersoever they passed. The Pies being thus scar'd, presented a Petition to the roy∣all Eagle, and to this his great Coun∣sell, that they might be secured to repaire safely thither to sit and consult, according to the ancient Lawes of the Volatill Empire continued so many ages without controll∣ment or question: in which Petition they
inserted a Protest or Caveat, that no pub∣lique act shold passe in the interim. This Supplication, both for matter and form, was excepted against, and cryed up to be high Treason, specially that indefinite Protest they had made, that no Act whatsoever shold be of any validity without them, which was alledged to derogate from the High Law-making power of that Great Counsell, and tended to retard and disturb the great Affaires which were then in agita∣tion: so the poor Pies, as if by that Petition they had like the Black-bird voided Lime to catch themselves, (according to the Pro∣verb, Turdus cacat sibi malum) were sudden∣ly hurryed away into a Cage, and after ten long Moneths canvassing of the point, they were unpearch'd, and rendered for ever un∣capable to be Members of that Court, they were struck dumb and voice-less, and sud∣denly as it were blown up away thence, though without any force of powder, as once was plotted aginst them. But this was done when a thin number of the adverse Birds had kept still together, and stuck close against them, and also after that the Bill con∣cerning them had bin once ejected, which they humbly conceived by the ancient order
of that Court could not be re-admitted in the same Session. They Petitioned from the place they were cooped in, that for hea∣vens sake, for the honour of that noble Counsell, for Truth and Justice sake, they eing as free-born Denisons of the aiery Re∣gion, as any other Volatills whatsoever, their charge might be perfected, that so they might be brought to a legall triall, and not forced to languish in such captivity. They pleaded to have done nothing but what they had precedents for: And touching the Caveat they had inserted, it was a thing un∣usuall in every inferiour Court of Judica∣ture, and had they forborn to have done it, they had betrayed their own nest, and done wrong to their successors. It was affirmed they had bin Members of that Body politi∣que, long before those lower pearch'd Birds, who now wold cast them out; and that they had bin their best friends to introduce them to have any thing do do in that generall Counsell: they prayed they might not be so cruelly used, as the Solan goose, andSco. Redshanke had used them, who were not content to brail and clip their wings only, but to ear them so, that they shold never grow again; to handle them so unmercifully,
was not the way to make their adversaries Birds of Paradice: in fine, they advised them to remember what the sick Kite's Mo∣ther answered him, when he desired her to pray to the Gods for him, How canst thou, said she, expect any good from the Gods, whose Temples thou hast so violated? At last, upon the importunity and pitifulness of their Pe∣titions, the accusation of Treason, which kept such a noise at first, being declined a∣gainst them, they were released in the morning, but cooped up again before night: and after the revolution of four full Moons, they were restored again to a conditionall liberty, under which they remain till this day. Ther wants not som, who affirm, that in that Great Counsell of Birds, ther were som Decoys (and 'tis well known where Decoys were first bred) who called in, not only these mongrill obstreperous Birds from a∣broad to commit such outrages as were spoken of before, but drew after them also many of the greatest Birds, who sate in that Assembly, to follow them whither they listed: Others, who were of a more gene∣rous extraction, disdained to be such Buz∣zards, as to be carryed away hood-wincked
in that manner, to be Birds of their feather. Thus a visible faction was hatched in this great Counsell, as if the said Decoyes had disgorged and let fall som grains of Hemlock seeds amongst them to distemper their brains. Or, as if som Spinturnix, that fatall incendiary Bird, or som ill-boding Scritch-Owle, which as stories tell us appeared once at Rome, in a famous, though unfortunate great Counsell (when ther was a schism in the Popedom) had appeared likewise here. Ther wanted not also amongst them som Amphibious Birds, as the Barnacle, which is neither Fish nor Fowle; and the cunning Bat, who sometimes professeth himself a Bird, sometimes a Mouse. I will not say ther were any Paphlagonian Birds amongst them, who are known to have double hearts. But 'tis certain, that in this confusion ther were som malevolent Birds, and many of them so young, that they were scarce fledg'd, who like the Waspe in the Fable, conspired to fire the Eagles nest, (and a Wasp may somtimes do mischief to an Eagle as a Mouse to an Elephant.) Moreover som of these light brained Birds flew so high, that they seemed to arrogate to themselves, and exercise royall power, but foolishly; for we
know what became of the Crow upon the Ram's back, when she thought to imitate the Eagle: And as it was observed that they were most eager to attempt those high insolensies against Jove's Bird, who had bin stark naked, and as bare as Cootes, unlesse he had feathered them; so that the little Ant was more grateful to Esops Bird; then those Birds were to the Eagle their liege Lord and Master. But the high-born Bird with the two golden wings, the noble Faul∣cons, the Martlets, the Ravens,M. Hert. E. South. E. Westm. E. Worce. E. Dover. Wales. Digbies. the Swan, the Chough, and all the ancient Birds of the Mountains remained faithful and firm to the Eagle, and scorned to be carryed away by such Decoyes; As also the generous Ostriches, who unlesse they had had an extraordinary stomach, could not have digested such iron pills as were of∣fered them. Amongst other great Birds which banded against the Eagle, the flying Dragons, Green and White,E. Pemb. E Waw. were busie, specially the White; And for the Green, considering he was an ancient Bird of the Mountains, and that his Progenitors had bin so renowned for their rare loyaly to the Crown, every one won∣dered
that he shold be drawn so far by the forefaid Decoyes, as to be the first of his race that shold clap his wings against his So∣verain Liege Lord. The aforesaid destractions continued still, and increased more and more in that gene∣ral convolation of Birds; therfore the Tur∣tle wold stay ther no longer, ther was so much gall amongst them: the Pelecan flew away, he saw Piety so vilified; the Dove was weary of their company, she found no sim∣plicity and plain dealing amongst them: And the Kings▪ Fisher, the Halcyon (the Em∣blem of Peace) quite forsookArondelle. them, he found so mnch jarring, dissentions, and bandings on all sides; the Swallow also, who had so ancient and honourable a rank amongst them, got into another aire, he fore-saw the weather was like to so be foul: And lastly, Philomela, the QueenHer Majesty. of Volatills, who was partner of the Eagle's nest, abandoned them quite, and put a Sea 'twixt her and them; nay, the Eagle him∣self withdrew his royal presence from them; so the Decoyes aforesaid carryed all before them, and comported themselves by their Orders in that hight, as if like the Lapwing, every one had a Crown on his head; they so
inchanted in a manner, all the common sort of Oppidan, rurall, and Sea-birds, and infu∣sed such a credulity into them, that they believed them to have an inerring spirit, and what came from them, was as tru as the Pentateuch: Moreover, it was shrewdly su∣spected, that ther was a pernicious plot a∣mongst them to let in the Stork, who is ne∣ver seen to stay long in any Monarchy. MORALL. Moderation is that Goden Rule wher∣by all Great Counsells shold square their deliberations, and nothing can tend more to their Honour or dishonour, in point of Wisdom: Moreover, in a Successive here∣ditary Monarchy, when subjects assume Regall Power, when they bar the Holy Church of her Rights, & of that Reverence which is due to her chief Professors, it is the most compendious way to bring all things to confusion, and consequently to an inevitable ruine, or som fatal Change. And this I hold to be the chiefest Morall of this Apologue of Birds.
, The gathering together, or Parlement of FLOWERS. UPon a time, The Flowers assembled, and met in one generall Counsell, by the authority and summons of the Soveraign Rose, their undoubted naturall King, who had taken the Lilly for his royall spouse. The dew of heaven fell plentifully upon this happy conjunction, which made them to Bourgeon, to propagate and prosper exceedingly, in so much, that the sweet fragrant odor which they did cast, diffused it self over all the earth. To this meeting came the Violet, Gilliflower, the Rosemary, the Tulyp, Lavender and Thyme, the Cinquefoyle (though of a forren growth) had anM. Hamilt. honourable rank amongst them, and as some observed, got too much credit with the royal Rose. The Flowers of the field were admit∣ted also to this great Counsell: the Couslip, the Honysukle and Daisie had their Delegates there present, to consult of a Reformation of certain abuses which had taken rooting in the Common wealth of Flowers, and being
all under the Rose, they had priviledge to speak all things with freedome; Complaints were made that much Cockle and Darnell, with other noxious Herbs and tares were crept in amongst them, that the Poppie did pullulat too much, with divers other grie∣vances: The successe of this Senat, this great Bed or Posie of living Flowers, was like to prove very prosperous, but that the herb Briony, Wormwood, Wolfbane, Rue, and Me∣lampod (the emblems of Sedition, Malice, Feare, Ambition and Iealousie) thrust in a∣mongst them, and much distempered their proceedings: These brought in with them the Bur, which exceedingly retarded andScot. intangled all businesses; and it was thought that the Thistle was too medling amongst them, which made matters grow to that a∣crimony and confusion, as if the herb Mor∣sus diaboli had got in amongst them. A∣mongst many other good-morrows, they propounded to the Rose, that he should part with his prickles, and transmit his strength that way to be disposed of by them; the Royall Rose liked not this bold request of theirs, though couched in very smooth language, but answered, I have hitherto con∣descended to every thing you have pro∣pounded,
much more then▪ any of my Pre∣decessors ever did; but touching these pric∣kles, which God and nature hath given mee, and are inherent in me and my stock from the beginning, though they be but excressen∣cies, yet you know they fortifie and arm me, Armat Spina Rosam. And by them I protect you and your rights from violence, and what protection I pray can there be without strength? therefore I will by no means part with them to enfeeble my regall Power, but will retain them still, and bequeath them to my Poste∣rity, which I would be loth to betray in this point; nor doe I much value what that silly infected Animall, the King of Bees tells me sometimes, when humming up and downe my leaves, he would buzze this fond belief into me, how it added much to his Majestie, that nature gives him no sting, as all other Bees have, because he should rely altogether upon the love and loyalty of his subjects. No; I will take warning by the Eagle, the King of Volatills, and by the Lyon, King of Quadrupedals, who (as the Prince ofPlut. Moralists reports) when by fayre insinuations the one had parted with his tallons, the other with his teeth and ongles, wherein their might, and consequently their Majesty consisted,
grew afterwards contemptible to all crea∣tures, and quite lost that natural allegeance and awe which was duc unto the one from all birds, and to the other, from all beasts of field and forrest. MORALL. Every naturall borne Monarch, hath an inherent inalienable strength in himself, which is the common Militia of his King∣dome; for, though the peoples love (which oftentimes is got by an Apple, and lost by a Peare) be a good Cittadell, yet there must be a concurrence of some visible set∣led force besides, which no earthly power may dispose of without his royall com∣mands: and for him to transmit this strength to any other, is the only way to render him inglorious and despicable, both at home and abroad; And thus you have the spirit of these Flowers, and Morall of the Fable. The Assembly of Architects. THere was an ancient goodly Palace, composed of divers pieces, and partiti∣on'd into sundry Chambers, Halls and Courts,
which were supported by mixt Pillars, part∣ly Corinthian, partly Ionique, but principal∣ly by the Dorique the King of Columnes, as having the firmest Pedestall: Some tooke exceptions, and alledged, that some of the said Courts were too high, and some of the Chambers in this Structure were too wide. The Lord of this Palace call'd together the best Masons and Architects, to advise with him (not without him) for mending of those faults, the better contrivance of the roomes, and to reduce the Building to a just propor∣tion. They solemnly met, and falling to consultation hereof, they found that the Chamber which was spangled with Stars, and where his privat Counsell of State did use to sit, were too wide; they thought that the Court erected on the North-side, and that learned Court where Ecclesiasticall matters were scanned, was too high; These, with that peculiar Court which was erected for the support of Honour, they went about in lieu of rectifying, to ruinat and raze to the very ground; and some of these Masons (for in∣deed they were rather Masons then true Architects) were so precise and over criticall, that they seem'd to find fault with the po∣sition of the Chappell that belong'd to
this Palace, because, forsooth, it stood East and west, which situation, only in regard it was ancient, they held to be a superstitious posture; They seem'd to repine at the de∣cencie, riches and ornament of it, with divers other frivolous exceptions. The Lord of the Palace said little to that, but touching the errors and disproportions in the foresaid Courts and Chambers of publick justice, he was very willing they should be amended, and reduced to a true dimension and symmetrie; and that all other roomes should be searched and swept cleane: but he would be loth to see those ancient pieces quite demolish'd, for that would hazard the fall of the maine Fabrique, his princely hereditary patrimony (descended upon him from so many wise Oe∣conomists and royall Progenitors) in regard of the uncture and contignation those parts had with the whole frame. To mend a thing by demolishing it, is as curing a sick body by knocking him in the head: he told them it was easier far to pull down, then build up; one may batter to pieces in one houre, that which cannot be built in an age: That ever∣lasting Villaine, who burnt the Ephesian Tem∣ple, destroyed, as it were in a trice, what was a rearing up ten long Olympiads: He
wish'd them further to be very cautious how they medled with th the Angulars and Basis of that Royal Structure; for so they might prove as wise as those Architects, who took out som of the foundation stones, to re∣pair the roof. Lastly, he told them, that if they intended to pull down any part of his own standing Palace, they shold be well advised before hand of the fashion wherof that new Fabrick shold be, which they purposed to rear up in the room of the old. MORAL Innovations are of dangerous conse∣quence in all things, specially in a setled well temper'd ancient State; therfore ther shold be great heed taken, before a∣ny ancient Court of Judicature, erected as a Pillar to support Justice by the wisdom of our Progenitors, be quite put down; for it may shake the whole Fram of Govern∣ment, and introduce a change; and chan∣ges in Government are commonly fatall, for seldom comes a better. And this I hold to be the aim of this Apologue.
The Insurrection of the Winds. IT fortuned, that the Winds banded a∣gainst Eolus: And Boreas (the North∣wind) began to bluster first, and wold blow wher he listed, he grew so boisterous, that he is call'd Scopa viarum, the high-way Bee∣som, he seem'd to sweep all before him Southward, insomuch, that uniting all his strength into one body, he made towards Eolus in a hostile armed manner, and so ob∣tained of him what he desired. After his example (and an odde example it was) the West-wind, his fellow subject roseThe Scot. The Irish. up, alledging, that though he blew from the left-side of Heaven, yet he deserved to be as much favoured as Bo∣reas, in regard he drove a far richer trade, and blew upon a more fertile Countrey, which brought in much more benefit to the rest of Eolus his Dominions; therfore he would have his liberties also assur'd him, which he alledged were altogether as ancient as the others: This made him puff with such an impetuous violence, that his blasts brought with them (God wot) divers showres of bloud, and whole Cataracts of
calamities: Now, as it is observed in the course of naturall things, that one mischief seldom marcheth alone, but ushers in ano∣ther, and hath alwaies its concomitants, so these North and Western gusts, as one wave useth to drive on another, made all the winds in the compasse, both collaterall and cardinall to rise up and rebell against Eolus, even under that very Clime, and in those Horizons, where he kept his principall resi∣dence and royal Court. And this popular wind (for 'twas no other, take it allEngland. joyntly in one puff) did rage with that vehemency, that it turn'd every wher in∣to fearful flames of fire (issuing out of a kind of Ignis fatuus, which by its repercussions, and furious arietations, did a world of mischief, as if it had bin that incendiary Prester wind, or rather an Haraucana, that Indian gust, which alwaies brings the Devil along with it as those Savages believe) had blown here, For, surely God was not in this wind. Yet som were so simple, to think that this wind pro∣ceeded from divine inspirations; nay, they came to that height of prophaneness, as to father it upon the Holy Ghost, though no∣thing could be more different to his sweet motions, nothing so directly opposit to his
soft gentle breeses and eventilatios; for no holy consecrated thing could stand before this Diabolical wind, down went all Crosses it met withall; it batter'd down Church and Chappel windowes (and I fear the walls and steeples will next to wrack.) It was so violent, that it overturn'd all stone Tables that stood East-ward; it blew away all the decent Vests and Ornaments of the Church; the Bishops Mitre (an Order contemporary with Christianity it self) did quake like an Aspen leaf before it; nay, it shrewdly shook the very Imperial Scepter, and Crown which stood on Eolus his head, so that he was like to become Ludibrium Ventorum. But the highest Deity of Heaven, He who walketh upon the wings of the wind, and makes weight for them, and gathereth them in his fist when he pleaseth, hating such an odious rebel∣lion, rebuked these tumultuous winds, he caused a contagious aire, to rush in and min∣gle with them, and infect them with new ds∣eases; besides whispers of jealousies, doubts and diffidence blew and buzz'd more and more amongst them, so that they could not trust one another; insomuch, that it made them to fall into confusion amongst them∣selves, which is the common fate of all Re∣bellions.
So Eolus recovered his Monar∣chy, and as they say, ther is no wind but blows som body good; so this turn'd much to the advantage of Eolus, for he grew ever after more firm and better establish'd in his regall power, because he put a competent guard in those Climes whence all these boistrous winds burst forth, and so secur'd himself ever after, that they could not blow where they listed. Popular Insurrections being debell'd, turn to the advantage, and render the Ruling Prince more secure afterwards, or a broken bone being well set, growes stronger oftentimes: And so you have the Principal Morall of this Parable in brief. POST-SCRIPT. SIr, I long to receive your opinion of these rambling pieces of fancy, you may, peradventure, have more, when the times are open: surely the wind will not hold stil in this unlucky hole, for it is too violent to last: It begins (thanks be to God) to sift already, and amongst those multitudes, who expect the change, I am one that ly∣eth
at the Cape of good Hope, though a long time under hatches (in the Fleet.) How∣soever, though all the winds in the com∣pass shold bluster upon me; nay, though a Haraucana should rage, I am arm'd and resolv'd to bear the brunt, to welcome the Will of God, and possesse my soul with patience. If you desire a further intimation of things, I refer you to a Discourse of mine call'd The Tru Informer, who will give you no vulgar satisfaction. So I am Yours, as at first, inalterable. I. H.
OF The LAND of IRE: OR, A DISCOURS OF THAT HORRID INSURRECTION AND MASSACRES Which happen'd lately In IRELAND; By Mercurius Hibernicus: Who discovers unto the World the Tru Causers and Incendiaries therof. In Vindication Of His Majesty, who is most maliciously Traduc'd to be Accessary therunto; Which is as damnable a Lie as possibly could be hatched in Hell; which is the Staple of Lies. A Lie stands upon one legg,—Truth upon two.
Mercurius Hibernicus, His Advertisement to the well-temper'd READER. THere is a mongrell race of Mercuries lately sprung up, but I claim no acquaintance with them, much less any Kindred. They have commonly but one weeks time for their conception and birth; and then are they but like those Ephemeran creatures, which Pliny speaks of, that are born in the morning, grow up till noon, and perish the same night: I hope to be longer liv'd then so, because I was longer a getting, ther was more time and matter went to my Generation. Ther is a Tale how the tru Mercury indeed, descended from Heven once in a disguise, to see how he was esteem'd on earth; and entring one day into a
Painters-shop, he found ther divers Pictures of Apollo, Iupiter, Mars, with others; and spying his own hanging in a corner hard-by, he asked what the price of that Pourtrait might be? The Painter answered, that if he bought any of the rest, he wold give him that into the bargain for nothing: Mercury here∣upon shaking his white Caducean, flung out in indignation, and flew up to He∣ven. Shold Mercury chance to descend now from his sphear, I think he wold be much more offended to find himself personated by every petty impertinent Pamphleter; yet I believe he would not think it ill that Aulicus assumes his shape, nor that the Harp, who owes her first invention to him, should be made now his crest.
To my honourable Friend Mr. E. P. SIR, IF You please to cast your eyes upon the fol∣lowing Discours, I believe it will afford you som satisfaction, and enlighten you more in the Irish affaires. The allegeance I owe to Truth, was the Midwife that brought it forth, and I make bold to make choice of you for my Gossip, because I am From the prison of the Fleet 3. Nonas April is 1643. Your true servant, I. H.
Mercurius Hibernicus. THere is not any thing since these ugly warrs begun, whereof there hath been more advan∣tage made to traduce and ble∣mish His Majesties actions, or to alienate and imbitter the affections of his people towards Him, to incite them to armes, and enharden them in the quarrell, than of the Irish affaires; whether one cast his eyes upon the beginning and procee∣dure of that warre (which some by a most monstrous impudence would patronize up∣on their Majesties) or upon the late Cessa∣tion, and the transport of Auxiliaries since from thence. There are some that in broken peeces have written of all three: but not in one entire discourse, as this is, nor hath any hitherto hit upon those rea∣sons and inferences that shall be displayed herein. But he who adventures to judge of af∣faires
of State, specially of traverses of warre, as of Pacifications, of Truces, Sus∣pensions of Armes, Parlies, and such like, must well observe the quality of the times, the successe and circumstance of matters past, the posture and pressure of things present (and upon the Place) the induce∣ment or enforcement of causes, the gaining of time, the necessity of preventing greater mischiefes (whereunto true policy Prome∣theus like hath alwaies an eye) with other advantages. The late Cessation of Armes in Ireland was an affaire of this nature; a true Act of State, and of as high a conse∣quence as could be: Which Cessation is now become the Common Subject of every mans discourse, or rather the discourse of every common Subject all the three King∣domes over: And not onely the subject of their discourse, but of their censure also; nor of their censure onely, but of their re∣proach and obloquy. For the World is come now to that passe, that the Foot must judge the Head, the very Cobler must pry into the Cabinet Counsels of his King; nay the Distaffe is ready ever and anon to arraign the Scepter; Spinstresses are become States∣women, and every peasan turned politician;
such a fond irregular humour reignes gene∣rally of late yeers amongst the English Na∣tion. Now the Designe of this small discourse, though the Subject require a farre greater volume, is, to vindicate His Majesties most pious intentions in condescending to this late suspension of Arms in His Kingdome of Ireland, and to make it appeare to any rationall ingenious capacity, (not pre-oc∣cupied or purblinded with passion) that there was more of honour and necessity, more of prudence and piety in the said Cessation, than there was either in the Pa∣cification or Peace that was made with the Scot. But to proceed herein the more methodi∣cally, I will lay downe, first, The reall and true radicall causes of the late two-yeers Irish Insurrection. Secondly, the course His Majesty used to suppresse it. Lastly, those indispensable impulsive reasons and invincible necessity which en∣forced His Majesty to condescend to a Ces∣sation. Touching the grounds of the said Insur∣rection, we may remember when His Ma∣jesty
out of a pious designe (as His late Majesty also had) to settle an Uniformitie of serving God in all his three Kingdomes, sent our Liturgie to his Subjects of Scot∣land; some of that Nation made such an advantage hereof, that though it was a thing only recommended, not commanded or pres∣sed upon them, and so cald in suddenly a∣gaine by a most gracious Proclamation, accompanied with a generall pardon: Yet they would not rest there, but they would take the opportunity hereby to demolish Bishops, and the whole Hierarchy of the Church (which was no grievance at all till then) To which end, they put themselves in actuall Armes, and obtained at last what they listed; which they had not dared to have done, had they not been sure to have as good friends in England as they had in Scotland (as Lesly himself confessed to Sir William Berkley at Newcastle) for some of the chiefest Inconformists here, had not onely intelligence with them, but had been of their Cabinet-counsels in moulding the Plot: though some would cast this war up∣on the French Cardinall, to vindicate the invasion we made upon his Masters domini∣ons in the Isle of Rets; as also for some ad∣vantage
the English use to do the Spniard in transporting his Treasure to Dunkerk, with other offices. Others wold cast it up∣on the Iesuit, that he shold project it first, to orce His Mjesty to have recourse to his Roman Catholick Subjects for aid, that so they might, by such Supererogatory service ingratiate themselves the more into his fa∣vour. The Irish hearing how well their next Neighbous had sped by way of Arms, it fil∣led them full of thoughts and apprehensions of fear and jealousie, that the Scot wold prove more powerful hereby, and consequently more able to do them hurt, and to attemp waies to restrain them of that connivency, which they were allowed in point of Reli∣gion: Now ther is no Nation upon earth that the Irish hate in that perfection, and with a greater Antipathy, than the Scot, or from whom they conceive greater danger: For wheras they have an old pro∣phesie amongst them, which one shall hear up and down in every mouth, That the day will come when the Irish shall weep upon English mens graves: They fear that this prophesie will be verified and fulfilled in the Scot above any other Nation.
Moreover, the Irish entred into conside∣ration, that They also had sundry grievan∣ces and grounds of complaint, both touch∣ing their estates and consciences, which they pretended to be far greater than those of the Scots. For they fell to think, that if the Scot was suffered to introduce a new Reli∣gion, it was reason they shold not be so pinched in the exercise of their old, which they glory never to have altered. And for temporall matters (wherin the Scot had no grievance at all to speak of) the new plan∣tations which had bin lately afoot, to be made in Conaught and other places; the con∣cealed lands and defective titles which were daily found out; the new customs which were imposed, and the incapacity they had to any preferment or Office in Church and State (with other things) they conceived these to be grievances of a far greater na∣ture, and that deserved redresse much more than any the Scot had. To this end, they sent over Commissioners to attend this Par∣liament in England, with certain Propositi∣ons, but those Commissioners were dismis∣sed hence with a short and unsavoury an∣swer, which bred worse bloud in the Nati∣on than was formerly gathered; and this,
with that leading case of the Scot, may be said to be the first incitements that made them rise. In the couse of humane actions, we dai∣ly find it to be a tru rule, Exempla movent, Examples move, and make strong impressi∣ons upon the fancy; precepts are not so powerful as precedents. The said example of Scotland, wrought wonderfully upon the imagination of the Irish, and filled them (as I touched before) with thoughts of emula∣tion, that They deserved altogether to have as good usage as the Scot, their Coun∣try being far more beneficial, and conse∣quenly, more importing the English Nati∣on. But these were but confused imper∣fect notions, which began to receive more vigour and form after the death of the Earl of Strafford, who kept them under so exact an obedience, though som censure him to have screwed up the strings of the Harp too high; insomuch that the taking off of the Earl of Straffords head, may be said to be the second incitement to the heads of that insur∣rection to stir. Adde hereunto, that the Irish under∣standing with what acrimony the Roman Catholicks in England were proceeded a∣gainst
since the sitting of our Parliament, and what further designes were afoot a∣gainst them, and not onely against them, but for ranversing the Protestant Religion it self, as it is now practised (which som shallow-braind  do throw into the same scales with Ppery.) They thought it was high time for them to forecast what shold become of Them, and how they shold e  in point of conscience, when a new Deputy of the Parliaments election (approbation at least) shold come over. Therfore they fell to consult of som means of timely prevention: And this was another moive (and it was a shewd one) which psht on the Irish to take up Arms. Lastly, that Army of 8000. men, which the Earl of Strafford had raised to be tran∣sported to England for suppressing the Scot, being by the advice of our Parliament here, disbanded; the Country was annoyed by som  those stragling Souldiers, as not one in twenty of the Irish, will from the sword to the spade, or from the Pike to the plough again. Therfore the two Marquesses that were Ambassadors here then for Spaine, having propounded to have som numbers of those disbanded forces, for the service of
their Master; His Majesty by the mature advice of his privy Counsell, to occur the mischiefs that might arise to his Kingdom of Ireland by those loose casheer'd Souldiers, yielded to the Ambassadors motion, who sent notice hereof to Spain accordingly, and so provided shipping for their transport, and impressed money to advance the business; but as they were in the heat of that ▪ His Majesty being then in Scotland▪  ws a sudden stop made of those promised troops, who had depended long upon the Spaniards service, as the Spaniard  doe on theirs. And this was the last, though no the least fatal cause of that horrid insurrecti∣on: All which particulars well considered, it had bin no hard matter to have bin a Pro∣phet, and standing upon the top of Holy-Head, to have foreseen those black clouds engendering in the Irish aire, which broe out afterwards into such fearful tempests of bloud. Out of these premises, it is easie for any common understanding, not transported with passion and private interest, to draw this conclusion. That They who complyed with the Scot in his insurrection; They who dismissed the Irish Commissioners with such
a short unpolitick answer, They who took off the Earl of Straffords head, and delayed af∣terwards the dispatching of the Earl of Lei∣cester, They who hindered those disbanded troops in Ireland to go for Spain, may be justly said to have bin the tru causes of the late insurrection of the Irish; and consequent∣ly, it is easie to know upon the account of whose souls must be laid the bloud of those hundred and odde thousands poor Christi∣ans, who perished in that war; so that had it bin possible to have brought over their bodies unputrified to England, and to have cast them at the doores, and in the presence of som men I believe they wold have gushed out afresh into bloud, for discovery of the tru murtherers. The grounds of this insurrection being thus discovered, let us examine what means His Majesty used for the suppression of it. He made his addresses presently to his great Counsel, the English Parliament then assem∣bled, which Queen Elizabeth and her proge∣nitors did seldom use to do, but only to their Privy Counsel in such cases, who had the discussing and transacting of all foreign affaires; for in mannaging matters of State, specially those of war, which must be car∣ryed
with all the secrecy that may be, Trop grand nombre, est encombre, as the French∣man saith, too great a number of Counsel∣lours may be an incumber, and expose their results and resolutions to discovery and o∣ther disadvantages, wheras in military pro∣ceedings the work shold be afoot before the Counsels be blazed abroad. Well, His Majesty transmitted this business to the Parliament of England, who totally under∣taking it, and wedding as it were the quar∣lel (as I remember they did that of the Pa∣latinate a little before by solemn vote; the like was done by the Parliament of Scotland also, by a publick joynt Declaration, which in regard ther came nothing of it, tended lit∣tle to the honour of either Nation abroad) His Majesty gave his royal assent to any Propositions or acts for raising of men, mo∣ney and arms to perform the work. But hereby no man is so simple as to think His Majesty shold absolutely give over his own personal care and protection of that his Kingdom, it being a Rule, That a King can no more desert the protection of his own people, then they their subjection to him. In all his Declarations ther was nothing that he en∣dear'd and inculcated more often, and with
greater aggravation and earnestness unto them, then the care of his poor Subjects their fellow-Protestants in Ireland: Nay, he resented their condition so far, and took the business so to heart, that he offered to passe over in person for their relief: And who can deny but this was a magnanimous and King∣like resolution? Which the Scots by publick act of Counsel, did highly approve of, and de∣clared it to be an argument of care and cou∣rage in his Majesty. And questionless it had done infinite good in the opinion of them that have felt the pulse of the Irish people, who are daily ore-heard to groan, how they have bin any time these 400. years under the English Crown, and yet never saw but two of their Kings all the while upon Irish ground, though ther be but a salt  of a few hours sail to pass over. And much more welcom shold His Majesty, now regnant, be amongst them, who by general tradition, They confess and hold to come on the paternal side from  (by legal and lineal descent) who was an Irish Prince, and after King of Scotland, wheras the title of all our former Kings and Queens was stumbled at alwaies by the vul∣gar. His Majesty finding that this royall proffer of engaging his own person, was re∣jected
with a kind of scorn, coucht in smooth language, though the main businesse con∣cerned himself nearest, and indeed solely himself, that Kingdom being his own he∣reditary Right. Understanding also, what base sinister use ther was made of this insur∣rection by som trayterous malevolent per∣sons, who, to cast aspersions upon His Ma∣jesty, and to poyson the hearts of his people, besides publick infamous reports, counter∣feited certain Commissions in His Majesties name to authorize the businesse, as if he were privy to it, though I dare pawn my soul His (or Her) Majesty knew no more of it then the great Mogor did. Finding also that the Commissioners imployed hence for the managing and composing matters in that Kingdom, though nominated by the Parlia∣ment, and by their recommendation autho∣rized by His Majesty, did not observe their instructions, and yet were conniv'd at. Un∣derstanding also, what an inhumane design ther was between them and the Scot, in lieu of suppressing an insurrection to eradicat and extinguish a whole nation to make booty of their lands (which hopes the London Ad∣venturers did hugge, and began to divide the Bears-skin before he was taken, as His Ma∣jesty
told them▪ an attempt the Spaniard nor any other Christian State ever intended a∣gainst the worst of Savages; The conceit wherof inused such a desperate courage, eagerness and valour into the Irish, that it made them turn necessity into a kind of vertu. Moreover, His Majesty taking notice that those royal Subsidies, with other vast con∣tributions wherunto he had given way, with the sums of particular Adventurers (amongst whom som Aliens (Hollanders) were taken in, besides the Scot to share the Country) were misapplyed, being visibly imployed, ra∣ther to feed an English Rebellion, then to suppress an Irish: Nay, understanding that those charitable collections which were made for the reliefe of those distressed Pro∣testants, who being stripped of all their live∣lihood in Ireland, were forced to fly over to England, were converted to other uses, and the Charity not dispensed according to the Givers intention. Hearing also that those 5000. men which had been levyed and as∣signed to goe under the Lord Wharton, the Lord of Kerry, Sir Faithfull Fortescue and o∣thers were diverted from going to the west of Ireland, and imployed to make up the Earl of Essex Army: And having notice be∣sides
that the Earl of Warwicke had stayd certaine ships going thither with supplies, and that there was an attempt to send for o∣ver to England some of those Scottish For∣ces which were in Ulster, without his privi∣ty. Lastly, His Majesty finding himself un∣fitted, and indeed disabled to reach those his distressed Subjects, his owne royal armie all his navall strength, revenues and magazines being out of his hands; and having as hard a game to play still with the Scot, and as per∣nicious a fire to quench in England, as any of his Progenitors ever had: Receiving intelli∣gence also daily from his Protestant Nobili∣ty and Gentry thence, in what a desperate case the whole Kingdome stood, together with the report of the Committee that at∣tended His Majesty from them expresly for that service, who amongst other deplorable passages in their petition, represented, That all means by which comfort and life should be conveyed unto that gasping Kingdome, seemed to be totally obstructed, and that unlesse  reliefe were afforded, His loyall Subject there must yeeld their fortunes for a prey,  for a sacrifice, and their Religion for a  to the mercilesse Rebels. His Majesty (as it was high time for )
taking into his Princely thoughts those wo∣full complainrs and cryes of his poore Sub∣jects, condescended at last to appoint some persons of honour to heare what the Irish could say for themselves, as they had often petitioned; and God forbid but the King of Ireland should receive his Subjects petitions, as well as the King of Scotland. But His Majesty being unsatisfied with what they propounded then, the Lord Marquess of Ormond marched with considerable Forces against them, and though he came off with honour, yet no reliefe at all comming thi∣ther for many moneths after from the Par∣liament here, who had undertaken the bu∣sinesse, and had received all the summes and subsidies, with other unknown contri∣butions to that end, matters grew daily worse and worse. To sum up all, His Majesty receiving express and positive ad∣vice from his Lord Justices and Counsell of State ther, that the whole Kingdom was upon point of utter perdition, which was co∣intimated the same time to the Parliament here, by a special letter to the Speaker; I say His Majesty finding that he had neither pow∣er of himself, it being transmitted to others; and that those Trustees did misapply that
power and trust he had invested in them (for the time) to make good their undertaking for preservation of that his fruitfull King∣dome; being impelled by all these forcible reasons, His Majesty sent a commission to the Lord Marquesse of Ormond his Lievtenant Generall (a most known sincere Protestant) to hearken to a treaty according to their pe∣tition; and if any thing was amisse in that treaty in poynt of honour (as it shall appeare by comparing it with others, there was none) we know whom to thank. For out of these premises also, doth result this second conclusion, That they who misapplied those moneys, and mis imployed those men which were levyed with His Majesties royall assent for the reduction of Ireland: They who set a∣foot that most sanguinary design of extir∣pating, at least of enslaving a whole ancient Nation, who were planted there by the hand of Providence from the beginning: They who hindred His Majesties transfretation thither to take cognizance of his own affairs, and expose the countenance of his own roy∣all person for composing of things: They, They may be said to be the true causes of that unavoydable necessity and as the hea∣then Poetsings, The Gods, themselvs cannot resist
Necessity) which enforced His Majesty to capitulat with the Irish, and assent to a Ces∣sation. It was the saying of one of the bravest Roman Emperours, and it was often used by Henry the Great of France, Her Majesties Father, That he had rather save the life of one loyall Subject then kill a hundred Enemies: It may well be thought that one of the pre∣valentst inducements that moved His Maje∣sty (besides those formerly mentioned) to condescend to this Irish Cessation, was a sense he had of the effusion of his own poor Sub∣jects blood, the hazard of the utter extirpa∣tion of the Protestants there, and a totall irrecoverable losse of that Kingdome, as was advertised both in the petition of the Prote∣stants themselves, the relation of the Com∣mittee imployd thither to that purpose, and the expresse letters of the Lords Justices and Counsell there. To prove now, that this Cessation of arms in Ireland was more honourable and fuller of Piety, Prudence and Necessity, then either the Pacification or Peace with the Scot. I hope, these few ensuing arguments (above divers others which cannot be inserted here, in regard of the force inten∣ded
brevity of this Discourse) will serve the turne. 1. In primis, When the Pacification was made with Scotland His Majesty was there personally present, attended on by the floure of His English Nobility, Gentry and Ser∣vants, and the enemy was hard by ready to face Him. At the concluding of the Irish Cessation, His Majesty was not there perso∣nally present, but it was agitated and agreed on by his Commissioner, and it hath been held alwaies less dishonourable for a King to capitulate in this kind with his own Subjects by his Deputy, then in his own person, for the further off he is, the lesse reflects upon him. 2. Upon the Pacification and Peace with Scotland, there was an Amnestia, a generall pardon, and an abolition of all by-passed of∣fences published, there were honours and offices conferred upon the chiefest sticklers in the War. At the Cessation in Ireland there was no such thing. 3. When the Pacification and Peace was made with the Scots, there was mony given unto Them, as it is too well knowne. But upon the setling of this Cessation, the Irish received none but gave His Majesty a con∣siderable
summe as an argument of their submission and gratitude, besides the main∣tainance of some of his Garrisons in the in∣terim; and so much partly in point of honour. 4. At the concluding of the Pacification and Peace with Scotland, there was a vigorous, fresh, unfoiled English Army a foot, and in perfect equipage; there wanted neither Am∣munition, Armes, Money, Cloaths, Victuals or any thing that might put heart into the Souldier and elevat his spirits. But the Protestant Army in Ireland had not any of all these in any competent proportion, but were ready to perish, though there had been no other enemy then hunger and cold: And this implies a farre greater necessity for the said Cessation. 5. In Ireland there was imminent danger of an instant losse of the whole Kingdome, and consequently, the utter subversion of the Protestant Religion there, as was certified both to King and Parliament by sundry let∣ters and petitions which stand upon record: There was no such danger in the affairs of Scotland, either in respect of Religion or Kingdome; therefore there was more piety shown in preserving the one, and
prudence in preserving the other in Ireland, by plucking both (as it were) out of the very jawes of destruction by the said Cessa∣tion. We know that in the Medley of mundane casualties, of two evils, the least is to be chosen, and a small inconvenience is to be born withall, to prevent a greater. If one make research into the French Sto∣ry, he will find, that many kinds of Pacifica∣tions and Suspensions of Armes were cove∣nanted 'twixt that King and som of his Subjects, trenching far more upon regall dignity then this in Ireland. The Spaniard was forced to declare the Hollanders Free∣states, before they could be brought to treat of a truce: And now the Catalans scrue him up almost to as high conditions. But what need I rove abroad so far? It is well known, nor is it out of the memory of man (in Queen Elizabeths raign) that in Ireland it self ther have bin Cessations, all circum∣stances well weighed, more prejudiciall to Majesty then this. But that which I hear murmured at most as the effect of this Cessation, is the transport of som of those Souldiers to England for re∣cruting His Majesties Armies, notwithstand∣ing
that the greatest number of them be per∣fect and rigid Protestants, and were those whom our Parliament it self imployed a∣gainst the Irish. But put case they were all Papists, must His Majesty therfore be held a Favourer of Popery? The late King of France might have bin said as well to have bin a Favourer of Hugonotts, because in all his wars he imployed Them most of any in places of greatest trust against the House of Austria; wheras all the World knows, that he perfectly hated them in the generall, and one of the reaches of policy he had, was to spend and waste them in the wars. Was it ever known but a Soveraign Prince might use the bodies and strength of his own natu∣rall-born Subjects, and Liege men for his own defence? When His person hath been sought and aimed at in open field by small and great shot, and all other Engines of hostility and violence: When he is in danger to be surprized or besieg'd in that place wher he keeps his Court: When all the flowers of his Crown his royal prerogatives which are descended upon him from so many suc∣cessive progenitors) are like to be plucked off and trampled under foot: When ther is a visible plot to alter and overturn that Re∣ligion
he was born, baptized, and bred in: When he is in daner to be forced to in∣fringe that solemn Sacramental Oath he took at his Coronation to maintain the said Religion, with the Rights and Rites of the holy Anglican Church, which som brain-sick Schismaticks wold transform to a Kirk and her Discipline, to som chimerical form of government they know not what. Francis the first and other Christian Princes, made use of the Turk upon lesse occasions; and if one may make use of a Horse, or any other bruit animal, or any inanimat Engine or In∣strument for his own defence against man, much more may man be used against man, much more may one rational Creature be used against another though for destructive ends in a good cause, specially when they are commanded by a Soveraign head, which is the main thing that goes to justifie a war. Now touching the Roman Catholicks, whe∣ther English, Welsh, Irish, or Scottish, which repaire to his Majesties Armies either for service or security. He looks not upon them s Papists, but as his Subjects, not upon their Religion, but their allegiance, and in that uality he entertains them: Nor can the Pa∣ist be denyed the Character of a good Sub∣ject,
all the while he conforms himself to the Lawes in generall, and to those lawes also that are particularly enacted against him, and so keeps himself within the bounds of his civil obedience: As long as he con∣tinues so, he may challenge protection from his Prince by way of right, and if his Prince by som accident be not in case to protect him, he is to give him leave to defend him∣self the best he can, for the law of nature al∣lowes every one to defend himself, and ther is no positive law of man can annul the law of nature. Now if the Subject may thus claim protection from his Prince, it follow∣eth, the Prince by way of reciprocation may require assistance, service and supplies from the Subject upon all publick occasions, as to suppress at this time a new race of Recusants, which have done more hurt then ever the old did, and are like to prove more dangerous to his Crown and regal Authority then any foreign enemy. But whosoever will truly observe the ge∣nius, and trace the actions of this fatal Fa∣ction which now swayes with that boundless, exorbitant, arbitrary and Antinomian power, will find, that it is one of their prime pieces of policy, to traduce and falsifie any thing that
is not conducible to their own ends: Yet what comes from them must be so magiste∣rial, it must be so unquestionably and incon∣troulably tru & lawful, that it must be belie∣ved by an implicite faith, as proceeding from an in-erring Oracle (as if these Zealots were above the common condition of mankind, to whom errour is as hereditary as any other infirmity) though the thing it self encroach never so grosly both upon the common li∣berty, the states and souls of men. But if any thing bear the stamp of royal Authority, be it never so just and tending to peace and the publick good, yea, though it be indifferent to either side, it is presently counterman∣ded, cryed down, and stifled; or it is calum∣niated and aspersed with obloquies, false glosses and misprisions; and this is become now the common Theam wherwith their Pulpits ring Which makes me think, that these upstart politicians have not long to reign; for, as the common Proverb saith, Fraud and Frost end foul and are short-lived, so that policy, those Counsels which are grounded upon scandals, reproaches and lies, will quickly moulder and totter away, and bring their Authors at last to deserved infamy and shame, and make
them find a Tomb in their own ruines. Adde hereunto as further badges of their nature, that black irreconcilable malice and desire of revenge which rageth in them, the avers∣ness they have to any sweetness of Confor∣mity and Union, the violent thirst they have of bloud, which makes me think on that di∣sique of Prudentius, who seemed to be a Prophet as well as Poet (a tru Vates) in dis∣playing the humors of these fiery Dogma∣tists, this all-confounding faction which now hath the vogue, to the punishment, I will not say yet, the perdition of this poor Island. Sic mres produnt animum, & mihi credite, junctus Semper cum falso est dogmate Coedis amor. Thus in English. Manners betray the mind, and credit me, Ther's alwayes thirst of bloud with Heresie.
THE SWAY OF THE SWORD; OR A DISCOURS OF THE MILITIA Train'd-Bands, OR COMMON SOLDIERY OF THE LAND; PROVING, That the Power and Com∣mand therof in chief belongs to the Ruling Prince, and to no other. Sine Gladio nulla Defensio.
The Author's Apology. TIs confefs'd that the sub∣ject of this Discours were more proper to One of the long-Robe, which I am not, I am no Lawyer otherwise then what nature hath made me, so e∣very man, as he is born the child of Reason, is a Lawyer, and a Logitian also who was the first kind of Lawyer: This discoursive faculty of Reason comes with us into the world accom∣panied with certain general notions and principles to distinguish Right from Wrong, and Falshood from Truth: But touching this following Discourse, because it relates somthing to Law, the Author wold not have adven∣tured
to have exposed it to the world, if, besides those common innate noti∣ons of Reason, and some private Notes of his own, he had not inform'd and ascertain'd his judgment by conference with som professed Lawyers, and those the Eminentest in the Land, touching the truth of what it Treats of; therfore he dares humbly aver that it contains nothing but what is conso∣nant to the fundamentall and fixed Constitutions, to the known clear Lawes of this Kingdom. From the prison of the Flcet 3. Nonas Mail 1645. I. H.
Touching the POLEMICAL SVVORD, And command in chief of The MILITIA, &c. GOVERNMENT is an Or∣dinance of God for Mans good; the kinds of Government are ordinances of men for Gods Glory: Now, among all Woldly affairs there is not any thing so difficult, and fuller of incertitudes as the Art of Ruling man, For those nimble spirits (as it is spoken elswhere) who from Apprentices have been made Freemen of the Trade, and at last thought themselves Masters, having spent their Youth, their Manhood, and a long time of old age therein, yet when they came to leave the World they professed themselves still to be but Novices in the
Trade. There is a known way to break, guide, and keep in awe all other Animals, though never so savage and strong; but there is no such certaine way to govern multitudes of men, in regard of such tur∣bulences of spirit and diversity of opinions that proceed from the Rational Faculty, which other cretures that are contented on∣ly with sense, are not subject unto; and this the Philosopher holds to be one of the inconveniences that attend humane rea∣son, and why it is given man as a part of his punishment. Now, why the Government over men is o difficult, there may be two main reasons alledg'd, The first is the various events, and World of inexpected contingencies that attend humane negotiations, specially mat∣ters of State, which, as all other sublunary things, are subject to alterations, miscarria∣ges, and change, this makes the mindes of men▪ and consequently the moulds of policy so often to alter, scarce one amongst twenty is the same man as he was twenty yeares ago in point of judgement, which turns and changeth according to the successe and circumstances of things, The wisedome of one day is the foolishnesse of another,
Posterior Dies est prioris Magister, the Day fol∣lowing becomes the former dayes Teacher. The Second Reason is, the discrepant, and wavering fancies of mens braines, spe∣cially of the common peeple, who (if not re∣strained) are subject to so many crotchets and chymeras, with extravagant wanton de∣sires, and gaping after innovations. Insu∣lary peeple are observed to be more trans∣ported with this instability then those of the Continent, and the Inhabitants of this Ile more then others, being a well-fed spriteful peeple; In so much, that it is grown a Pro∣verb abroad, that The Englishman doth not know when he is well: Now the true Polititi∣an doth use to fit his Government to the fancy of the peeple, the ruler must do as the rider, some peeple are to be rid with strong bitts and curbs, and martingalls, as the Na∣pollitan, and French our next neighbour, which is the cause that a kind of slavery is entail'd upon him, for the French Peasant is born with chains; Other Nations may be rid with a gentle small bridle, as the Venetian and the Hollander, who hath not such boil∣ing spirits as others; A bridle doth serve also the Spaniard, who is the gretest ex∣ample of stability, and exact obedience
to authority, of any peeple; for though Spain be the hottest Countrey in Christen∣dom, yet it is not so subject to Feavers as others are, I mean to fits of intestin commo∣tions: And this was never so much tryed as of late yeers; for though the present King hath such known frailies, though he hath bin so infortunat, as to have many Coun∣treys quite revolted, and rent away from him; though the ragingst Plague that ever was in Spain under any King, happen'd of late yeers, which sweep'd away such a world of peeple; though his Taxes be higher then ever were any, though he hath call'd in and engrossed all the common coyn of the Countrey, and delivered but the one halfe back again, reserving the other half for Himself; though there's no legall Instru∣ment, no Bond, Bill, or Specialty can be writ but upon his seal'd paper, with sundry other exactions, yet his subjects are still as obedient, and awful unto him, they are as conformable and quiet, as if he were the most vertuous, and victorious Prince that ever was; and this they do principally for their own advantage, for if ther were ano∣ther Governour set up, it would inevita∣bly hurle the whole Countrey into combu∣stion
and tumults; besides, they are taught, that as in choice of Wives, so the Rule holds in Governments, Seldome comes a better. Touching the Originals of Government and ruling power, questionless the first a∣mong Mankind was that Naturall power of the Father over his Children, and that Despotical domestique surintendence of a Master of a house over his Family; But the World multiplying to such a Masse of pee∣ple, they found that a confused equality, and a loose unbridled way of living like rute animals to be so inconvenient, that they chose one person to protect and govern; not so much out of love to the erson, as for their own conveniency and advantage, that they might live more re∣gularly, and be secur'd from rapine, and op∣ression; As also that justice might be ad∣ministted; and every one enjoy his own without fear, and danger: such Govern∣urs had a power invested accordingly in hem, also as to appoint subservient, able Mi∣isters under them to help to bear the urden. Concerning the kinds of Government, ll Polititians agree that Monarchall is the
best and noblest sort of sway, having the neerest analogy with that of Heaven, viz. A supreme power in one single person; God Almighty is the God of Unity, as well as of Entity, and all things that have an Entity do naturally propend to Unity; Unity is as necessary for a well-being, as Entity is for a Being, for nothing conduceth more to order, tranquillity, and quietude, nor is any strength so operative as the united; The fist is stronger then the hand, though it be nothing but the hand, viz. The fingers united by contraction; The Republick of Venice which is accounted the most Eagle-ey'd and lastingst State in the World, fo she hath continued a pure Virgin, and shin'd within her watry Orb nere upon thirteen Ages, is the fittest to give the World ad∣vice herein, for if ever any have brought policy to be a Science which consists of cer∣titudes, this State is Shee, who is grown a dexterous in ruling men as in rowing of  Gally. But whereas the vulgar opinion is that the common peeple there have a shar in the Government, 'tis nothing so, for he Great Counsel which is the maine hing whereon the Republick turns, is compose onely of Gentlemen who are capable b
their birth to sit there, having passed twen∣ty five years of age; To which purpose they must bring a publick Testimonial that they are descended of a Patrician or noble Family. But to return to the main matter, this sage Republick who may prescribe rules of Policy to all Mankind, having tryed at first to Govern by Consuls and Tribunes for som years, she found it at last a great in∣convenience, or deformity rather, to have two heads upon one body; Therefore She did set up one Soveraign Prince; and in the Records of Venice the resons are yet extant which induc'd her thereunto, whereof one of the remarkablest was this; We have obser∣ved that in this vast University of the World all Bodies according to their several Natures have multiplicity of Motions, yet they receive vertue and vigour but from one, which is the Sun; All causes derive their Originals from one supreme cause; we see that in one Creture there are many differing Members, and Facul∣ties which have various functions, yet they are all guided by one soul, &c. The Island of Great Britain hath bin al∣waies a Royal Isle from her first creation, and Infancy; She may be said to have worn a Crown in her Cradle; and though She had
so many revolutions, and changes of Masters, yet She continued still Royal; nor is there any species of Government that suits bet∣ter, either with the quality of the Countrey, and Genius of the Inhabitants, or relates more directly to all the ancient Lawes, Con∣stitutions, and Customs of the Land, then Monarchal; which any one that is conver∣sant in the Old Records can justifie; Britan∣nia ab initio mundi semper Regia, & regimen illius simile illi caelorum. Concerning the many sorts of Trust which were put in the Supreme Governor of this Land (for ther must be an implicite and unavoidable necessary Trust reposed in eve∣ry Soveraign Magistrate) the power of the Sword was the chiefest; and it was agreeable to Holy Scripture he shold have it, where we know 'tis said, The King beareth not the Sword in vain; The Lawes of England did ever al∣low it to be the inalienable prerogative of the Soveraign Prince, nor was it ever known (humbly under favour) that any other pow∣er whatsoever managing conjunctly or sing∣ly, did ever pretend to the power of the publick Sword, or have the Militia invested in them, but this ever remained intire and untransferrible in the person of the Ruler in
chief, whose chiefest instrument to govern by is the Sword, without which Crownes, Scepters, Globes and Maces are but bables. It is that Instrument which causeth tru obe∣dience, makes him a Dread Soveraign, and to be feared at home and abroad; Now 'tis a Maxime in policy, that ther can be no tru obedience without Fear; The Crown and Scepter draw only a loose kind of voluntary love, and opinion from the people, but 'tis the sword that draws Reverence and awe, which two are the chiefest ingredients of Al∣legeance, it being a principle, that the best Government is made of Fear and Love, viz. when by Fear Love is drawn as threed through the eye of a Needle; The surest Obedience, and Loyalty is caused thus, for Fear being the wakefullest of our passions works more powerfully in us and predomi∣nates over all the rest; primus in orbe Deus fecit Timor. To raise up a Soveraign Ma∣gistrate without giving him the power of the sword, is to set one up to rule a metall'd Horse without a Bridle; A chief Ruler without a Sword, may be said to be like that Logg of Wood which Iupiter threw down among the Froggs to be their King, as it is in the Fable. Moreover, One of the chief∣est
glories of a Nation is to have their Su∣preme Governor to be esteem'd, and re∣douted abroad as well as at Home. And what Forren Nation will do either of these to the King of England if he be Armless, and without a Sword? who will give any respect o precedence to his Ambassadors, and Ministers of State? The Sword also is the prime Instrument of publick protection, therefore that King who hath not the power of the Sword, must have another Title gi∣ven Him, the Protector of his peeple. Now, in a Successive hereditary King∣dom, as England is known, and acknowledg∣ed to be by all Parties now in opposition, There are three things which are inalienable from the Person of the King: They are, 1. The Crowne. 2. The Scepter. 3. The Sword. The one, He is to carry on His Head, the other in His Hand, and the third at His Side; and they may be termed all three the en∣signes or peculiar instruments of a King: by the first, He Reignes, by the second He makes Lawes, by the third He Defends
them: and the two first are but bables without the last, as was formerly spo∣ken. 1. Touching the Crown or royal Diadem of England, ther is none, whether Presbyte∣rian, Independent, Protestant, or others now in action, but confess that it descends by a right hereditary Line, (though through di∣vers Races, and som of them Conquerours) upon the Head of Charles the first now Reg∣nant: 'tis His own by inherent birth-right and nature, by Gods Law, and the Law of the Land, and these Parliament-men at their first sitting did agnize subjection unto Him accordingly, and recognize Him for their Soveraign Liege Lord: Nay, the Ro∣man Catholick denies not this, for though there were Bulls sent to dispense with the English Subjects for their allegiance to Queen Elizabeth, yet the Pope did this a∣gainst Her as he took Her for a Heretick, not an Usurpresse, though he knew well enough that She had bin declared Illegitimate by the Act of an English Parliament. This Imperial Crown of England is ador∣ned and deckd with many fair Flowers, which are called, royal Prerogatives; and they are of such a transcendent nature, that
they are unforfeitable, individual, and un∣transferrable to any other: The King can only summon and dissolve Parliaments: The King can only Pardon (for when He is Crowned, He is sworn to rule in Mercy as well as in Justice:) The King can only Coyn Money, and enhance or decry the value of it: The power of electing Officers of State, of Justices of Peace and Assize is in the King; He can only grant soveraign Com∣missions: The King can only wage War, and make Out-landish Leagues: The King may make all the Courts of Justice ambu∣latory with His Person, as they were used of old▪ 'tis tru, the Court of Common Pleas must be sedentary in som certain place for such a time; but that expired, 'tis remove∣able at His pleasure: The King can only employ Ambassadours and Treat with for∣raign States, &c. These, with other royal Prerogatives which I shall touch hereafter, are those rare and wholsom flowers where∣with the Crown of England is embellished, nor can they stick any where else but in the Crown, and all confess the Crown is as much the King's, as any private man's Cap is his own. 2. The second regall Instrument is the
Scepter, which may be called an inseparable companion, or a necessary appendix to the Crown; this invests the King with the sole Authority of making Lawes, for before His confirmation all results and determinations of Parliament are but Bills or  they are but abortive things, and meer Embryos; nay, they have no life at all in them till the King puts breath and vigour into them: and the ancient custome was for the King to touch them with His Scepter, then they are Lawes, and have a vertue in them to impose an obligation of universall obedience upon all sorts of people, It being an undeniable maxime, That nothing can be generally binding without the King's royall assent, nor doth the Law of England take no∣tice of any thing without it: This being done they are ever after styl'd the Kings Lawes, and the Judges are said to deliver the King's judgments, which agrees with the holy text, The King by judgment shall stablish the Land: nay, the Law presumes the King to be al∣waies the sole Judge Paramount, and Lord chief Justice of England, for he whom He pleaseth to depute for His chiefest Justice, is but styl'd Lord chief Iustice of the Rings ench, not Lord chief Justice of England,
which title is peculiar to the King Himself, and observable it is, that whereas He grants Commissions and Patents to the Lord Chancellour (who is no other then Keeper of His Conscience) and to all other Judges, He names the Chief Justice of his own Bench by a short Writ only containing two or three lines: which run thus, Regina Iohanni Pop∣ham militi salutem, Sciatis quod constitutmus vos justiciarium nostrum Capitalem ad placita coram nobis terminandum durante beneplacito nostro; Teste &c. Now, though the King be liable to the Laws, and is contented to be within their verge, because they are chief∣ly His own productions, yet He is still their Protector, Moderator, and Soveraigne, which attributes are incommunicable to any other conjunctly or separately. Thus the King with His Scepter, and by the mature advice of His two Houses of Parl. which are His highest Councel and Court, hath the sole power of making Laws; other Courts of judicature doe but expound them and distribute them by His appoint∣ment, they have but Iuris dati dictionem or declarationem, and herein, I meane for the Ex∣position of the Lawes the twelve Iudges are to be believed before the whole Kingdom be∣sides.
They are as the Areopagites in A∣thens, the chief Presidents in France and Spaine in an extraordinary Iunta, as the Cape-Syndiques in the Rota's of Rome, and the Re∣publique of Venice, whose judgments in point of interpreting Lawes are incontroulable, and preferred before the opinion of the whole Senate whence they received their be∣ing; and who hath still power to repeal them, though not to expound them. In France they have a Law maxime, Arrest donné en Rebbe rouge est irrevocable, which is, a Scarlet Sentence is irrevocable, meaning when all the Judges are met in their Robes, and the Client against whom the Cause goes, may chafe and chomp upon the bit, and say what he will for the space of twenty foure howers against his Judges, but if ever after he traduces them, he is punishable: It is no otherwise here where every ignorant peevish Client, every puny Barister, specially if he become a Member of the House will be ready to ar∣raign and vie knowledge with all the reve∣rend Judges in the Land, whose judgement in points of Law shold be onely tripodicall and sterling: so that he may be truly call'd a just King, and to rule according to Law, who rules according to the opinion of his
Judges; therefore, under favour, I do not see how his Majesty for his part could be call'd injust when he leavied the Ship∣money, considering he had the Judges for it. I now take the Sword in hand, which is the third Instrument of a King, (and which this short discours chiefly points at) it is as well as the two first incommunicable and inalie∣nable from his Person; nothing concernes his honor more both at home and abroad; the Crown and the Scepter are but unweildy and impotent naked indefensible things without it. There's none so simple as to think there's meant hereby an ordinary sin∣gle sword, such as ev'ry one carrieth by his side, or som imaginary thing or chymera of a sword; No, 'tis the polemicall publique sword of the whole Kingdom, 'tis an ag∣gregative compound sword, and 'tis moul∣ded of bell-metall; for 'tis made up of all the ammunition and armes small and great, of all the military strengths both by Land and Sea, of all the Forts, Castles and tenable places within and round about the whole Ile: The Kings of Engl. have had this sword by vertue of their royall signory from all times, the Laws have girded it to their sides, they
have employed it for repeling all foren force, for revenging all forren wrongs or affronts, for quelling all intestine tumults, and for protecting the weal of the whole body po∣liticke at home: The peeple were never ca∣pable of this sword, the fundamentall con∣stitutions of this Kingdom deny it them; 'tis all one to put the sword in a mad mans hand, as in the peeples; or for them to have a disposing power in whose hands it shall be. Such was the case once of the French sword, in that notorious insurrection call'd to this day La Iaqueris de Beauvoisin, when the Pesants and Mechanicks had a design to wrest it out of the Kings hand, and to de∣presse all the Peers and Gentry of the King∣dom; and the businesse had gone so far that the peasans might have prevail'd, had not the Prelats stuck close to the Nobility; But afterwards poor hare▪brain'd things they de∣sire the King upon bended knees to take it againe; Such popular puffs have blowen often in Poland, Naples and other places, where while they sought and fought for li∣berty by retrenching the regall power, they fool'd themselfs into a slavery unawares, and found the rule right, that excesse of free∣dom turns to thraldom, and ushers in all con∣fusions.
If one shold go back to the no∣nage of the world, when Governers and Ru∣lers began first, one will find the peeple de∣sir'd to live under Kings for their own ad∣vantage, that they might be restrain'd from wild exorbitant liberty, and kept in unity; Now unity is as requisit for the wel-being of all naturall things, as entity is for their be∣ing, and 'tis a receiv'd maxime in policy, that nothing preserves Unity more exactly then Royal Government: besides, 'tis known to be the noblest sort of sway; In so much that by the Law of Nations, if Subjects of equal degrees, and under differing Princes shold meet, the Subjects of a King shold take pre∣cedency of those under any Republique. But to take up the Sword again. I say that the Sword of public Power and Authority is fit only to hang at the Kings side, and so in∣deed shold the Great Seal hang only at his girdle, because 'tis the Key of the King∣dom: which makes me think of what I read of Charlemain, how he had the imperial Seal emboss'd alwaies upon the pommell of his Sword, and his reason was, that he was rea∣dy to maintain whatsoever he signed, and sealed. The Civilians, who are not in all points so
great friends to Monarchy as the Common Law of England is, say, there are six Iura Regalia, six Regal Rights, viz. 1. Potestas Iudicatoria, 2. Potestas vitae & necis, 3. Ar∣mamenta, 4. Bona adespota, 5. Census, 6. Monetarum valor: to wit, Power of Iudica∣ture, Power of Life and Death, all kind of ar∣ming, masterless goods, Sissements, and the value of money. Among these Regalia's, we find that Ar∣ming, which in effect is nought else but the Kings Sword, is among the chiefest; and 'tis as proper and peculiar to his person, as either Crown or Scepter. By these two he drawes a loose voluntary love and opinion only from his Subjects, but by the Sword he draws reverence and awe, which are the chiefest ingredients of allegiance, it being a maxime, That the best mixture of Govern∣ment is made of fear and love. With this Sword he conferrs honor, he dubbs Knights, he creates Magistrates, the Lord Deputy of Ireland, the Lord Mayor of London with all other Corporations have their Swords from him, and when he entereth any place cor∣porate, we know the first thing that is pre∣sented him is the Sword: With this Sword he shields and preserves all his people that
every one may sit quietly under his own Vine, sleep securely in his own House, and enjoy sweetly the fruits of his labours. Nor doth the point of this Sword reach only to every corner of his own dominions, but it extends beyond the seas to gard his Subjects from oppression, and denial of justice, as well as to vindicate the publick wrongs, make good the interests of his Crown, and to assist his confederates; This is the Sword that Edward the third tied the Flower deluces unto (which stick still unto it,) when having sent to France to demand that Crown by maternal right, the Counsell ther sent him word that the Crown of France was not tied to a distaff, to which scoffing answer he replied, that then he wold tie it to his sword, and he was as good as his word. Nor is this publick sword concredited or intrusted by the peeple in a fiduciary conditionall way to the King, but it is properly and peculiarly belonging unto him, as an inseparable con∣comitant, perpetual Usher and attendant to his Crown. The King, we know, useth to maintain all garrisons upon his own charge, not the peeples; he fortifies upon his own charge, not the peeples: And though I will not averr, that the King may impresse any
of his Subjects, unlesse it be upon an actuall vasion by Sea, or a sudden irruption into his Kingdom by Land, as the Scots have often done, yet at any time the King may raise Volunteers, and those who have received his money, the Law makes it felony, if they forsake his service. Thus we see there's nothing that condu∣ceth more to the glory, and indeed the very essence of a King then the Sword, which is the Armes and Military strength of his Kingdom; wherfore under favour, ther can∣not be a greater point of dishonour to a King then to be disarmed, then to have his Sword taken from him, or dispos'd of and intrust∣ed to any but those whom he shall appoint; for as à minori ad majus the Argument often holds, if a private Gentleman chance to be disarm'd upon a quarrell, 'tis held the utmost of disgraces, much greater and more public is the dishonor that falls upon a King, if af∣ter som traverses of difference 'twixt him and his Subjects, they shold offer to disarm him, or demand his Sword of him: when the Eagle parted with his talons, and the Lion with his teeth and ongles, the Apolog tells us how contemptible afterwards the one grew to be among Birds, the other a∣mong
Birds, the other among Beasts. For a King to part with the Sword politic is to render himself such a ridiculous King, as that logg of wood was which Iupiter let down a∣mong the froggs for their King at the im∣portunity of their croaking; 'tis to make him a King of clouts, or as the Spaniard hath it, Rey de Havas, a Bean King, such as we use to choose in sport at Twelf∣night. But my hopes are, that the two present Houses of Parliament (for now they may be call'd so, because they begin to parley with their King,) will be more tender of the ho∣nour of their Soveraign Liege Lord, which, together with all his Rights and Dignities, by severall solemn Oaths, aud by their own binding instruments of Protestation and Co∣venant, (not yet revok'd) they are sworne to maintaine, and that they will demand no∣thing of him which may favour of Aspertè or force, but what may hold water hereafter: But now, touching the Militia or Sword of the Kingdom, I think, under favour, the King cannot transfer it to any other; for that were to desert the protection of his peo∣ple, which is point blank against his Coro∣nation Oath and his Office: What forren
Prince or State will send either Ambassador, Resident or Agent to him, when they under∣stand his Sword is taken from him? What reformed forein Church will acknowledg Him Defendor of the Faith, when they hear of this? Nay, they who wish England no good will, will go near to paint him out, as not long since another King was, with a fair velvet Scabbard, a specious golden hilt and chape, but the blade within was of wood. I hope that they who sway now, will make better use of their successes: Many of them know 'tis as difficult a thing to use a victory well, as to get one; ther is as much prudence requir'd in the one, as prowesse in the other; they will be wiser sure then turn it to the dishonor of their King: it being a certain rule, that the glory of a Nation all the world over depends upon the glory of their King, and if he be any way obscur'd, the whole Kingdom is under an eclipse. I have observed, that among other cha∣racters of gallantry, which forein Writers ap∣propriat to the English Nation, one is, that they use to be most zealous to preserve the Honor of their King; I trust that they who are now up will return to the steps of their Progenitors, both in this particular and divers
other; that their successes may serve to sweeten and moderat things, and suppress the popular Sword which still rages; And it had bin heartily wished that a suspension of Arms had preceded this Treaty, which useth to be the ordinary fore-runner, and a neces∣sary antecedent to all Treaties; for while acts of hostility continue, som ill-favour'd newes may intervene which may imbitter and ▪ nor can it be expected that the proceedings will go on with that candor and confidence, while the old rancor is still in action▪ 'tis impossible a sore shold heal till the inflamation be taken away; To cast water into a wound instead of oyle is not the way to cure it: or to cast oyle upon a fire in∣stead of water is not the way to quench it; poor England hath had a consuming fire within her bowels many years, she is also mortally wounded in all her members, that she is still in a high Fever, which hath made her rave and speak idle a long time; and 'tis like to turn to a Hectic, if not timely preven∣ted. I pray God she may have no occasion to make use of the same complaint as Alex∣ander the Great made when he was expiring his last, Perii turba Medicorum: too many Phy∣sitians have undon me.
To conclude in a word, ther is but one on∣ly way, under favor, to put a period to all these fearful confusions; it is, to put the great Master-wheel in order, and in its due place again, and then all the inferior wheels will move regularly; let the King be re∣stor'd, and ev'ry one will come to his own, all interests will be satisfied, all things quick∣ly rectified; till this be done, 'tis as absurd to attempt the setling of peace, as if one shold go about to set a Watch by the gnomen of an horizontall Diall when the Sun is in a cloud. I. H.
AN ITALIAN PROSPECTIVE, Through which GREAT BRITAIN (Without any MULTIPLYING ART) May cleerly See Her present DANGER, And foresee Her future DESTRUCTION, If not timely prevented. Perditio tua ex Te Anglia.
Paraenesis Angliae. O England (specially thou besotted City of London) if Thou be'st not quite past cure, or grown careless and desperat of thy self, if the least spark of Grace, or ray of Reson be yet re∣maining in Thee, be warn'd, be warn'd by this stranger, who ha∣ving felt thy pulse, and cast thy water very exactly, discovers in Thee symptoms of inevitable Ruine if thou holdst on this cours. Divers of thy own children of∣tentimes admonish'd Thee with
tears in their eyes, and terror in their hearts, to recollect thy self, and return to thy old road of o∣bedience to thy Soverain Prince, But They have bin little regarded, Let a Foreiners advice then take place, and make som impressions in Thee to prevent thy utter destruction. From the prison of the Fleet 2. Aug. 1647. I. H.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Deplorable, and Desperat condition THAT ENGLAND stands in, Sent from LONDON, Anno 1647. To the LORD FRANCISCO BARBERINI, Cardinal of the most holy Apostolick See, and Protector of the English Nation, at his Palaces in Rome. MY last to your Eminence was but short, in regard I had been but a short time in this Countrey, I have now made a longer so∣journ here, and taken a lei∣surely information of all mat∣ters; therefore I shall give your Eminence
an account proportionably: For by conver∣sation with the most indifferent, and intelli∣genc'd men, and by communication with the Ambassadors here resident, I have taken some paines to pump out the truth of things, and penetrat the Interest of all parties. And truly, I find, that That angry star, which hath lowr'd so long upon Europe in generall, hath been as predominant, and cast as direfull aspects upon this poor Iland, as it hath done upon any other part: Truly, my Lord, in all probability this peeple have pass'd the Meridian of their happinesse, and begin to decline extreamly, as well in Repute abroad, as also in the common notions of Religion, and indeed in the ordinary faculty of Reason: I think verily the Ill Spirit never reign'd so much in any corner of the earth by those inhumane aud horrid things that I have observ'd among them. Nor is it a pet∣ty Spirit, but one of the greatest Cacod∣mons that thus drives them on, and makes them so active in the pursuance of their own perdition. To deduce matters from their Originall, Your Eminency may please to understand, that this King at his accesse to the Crown had
deep debts to pay, both of His Fathers, and his own, he was left ingaged in a fresh warre with Spain; and had another present∣ly after which France, and both at one time, but he came off well enough of those: Af∣terwards never any Countrey flourished in that envied happinesse, and wanton kind of prosperity; This City of London was grown to be the greatest Mart, and mistress of trade, of any in the world; Insomuch, as I have been certainly inform'd, the King might have spent meerly upon His customes 4000 crowns a day: Moreover, she had a vast bank of money being made the scale of con∣veying the King of Spains treasure to Flan∣ders: Insomuch that in a few yeers she had above ten millions of his moneys brought hither, which she might have remitted in specie or in marchandize, and for which this King had five in the hundred for coynage: Yet could he not get beforehand with the world, having a sister with so many Ne∣phews and neeces, having a Queen with di∣verse children of His own, (at least 16 of the Blood-Royall) to maintaine, with divers profuse Courtiers besides, which made Him more parsimonious then ordinary. The Warres then growing more active 'twixt
Spaine and France, as also 'twixt Holland and Spaine both by Land and Sea, and divers great Fleets of Men of War as well French (who were growne powerfull that way) as Dunkerkers, Spaniards Hollanders, and Ham∣burgers, appearing daily in His narrow Seas, and sayling close by His Chambers, the world wondred this King had no greater strength at Sea, in case that any of the fore∣said Nations should doe him an affront, as some of them had already done, by denying to dash their Colours to his Ships: Insomuch that in Holland and other places he was pasquill'd at, and pourtrayed lying in his cra∣dle lullaby'd and rock'd asleep by the Spani∣ard: Hereupon being by advertisements from his Agents abroad, and frequent ad∣vice of His Privie Councell at home, made sensible of the danger, and a kind of dishon∣our he was faln into, and having intelligence that the French Cardinall began to question his title to the Dominion of the narrow Seas, considering He employed no visible power to preserve it, He began to consult of meanes to set forth a royall Fleet: but in regard the Purse of the Crowne was lightly ballasted, and that he had no mind to summon the three Estates, because of some indignities
he had received in former Parliaments by the Puritan party (a race of people averse to all Kingly Government, unlesse they may pare it as they please) his then Atturney Ge∣nerall (Noy) a great cryed-up-Lawyer, put it in his Head to impose an old Tax called Ship-mony upon the Subject, which the said Lawyer did warrant upon his life to be Le∣gall, for he could produce divers Records how many of his Progenitors had done the like: The King not satisfied with his single o∣pinion, refer'd it to his learn'd Council, & they unanimously averred it to be agreeable to the Law of the Land; yet this would not fully sa∣tisfie the King, but He would have the Opini∣on of His twelve Judges, and they also affir∣med by their single vouches the said Tax to be warrantable; Hereupon it was imposed and leavied, but some refusing to pay it, there was a suite commenc'd, during which all the Judges were to re-deliver their opinions joyntly, and the businesse being maturely debated and canvased in open Court divers months, and all arguments produc'd pro & con, nine of the said twelve Judges conclu∣ded it legal. Thereupon the King continued the imposition of the said Tax, and never was mony imployed so much for the Hon∣our and advantage of a Countrey, for he sent
out every Summer a royall fleet to scowre and secure the Seas; he caused a Galeon to be built, the greatest and gallantest that e∣ver spread saile: Nor did he purse up, and dispose of one peny of this money to any o∣ther use, but added much of his own Reve∣nues yeerly thereunto: So the world abroad cried up the King of England to be awake againe; Trade did wonderfully encrease, both Domestic and forrein in all the three Kingdomes; Ireland was reduced to an abso∣lute Settlement, the Arrears of the Crown payed, and a considerable Revenue came thence cleerly to the Exchequer of England every year, the salaries of all Officers, with the pay of the standing Army here, and all other Charges being defrayed by Ireland her self, which was never done before. Yet for all this height of pappinesse, and the glorious fruites of the said Ship-money, (which was but a kind of petty insensible Tax, & a thing of nothing to what hath hapened since) there were some foolish peeple in this Land which murmured at it, and cryed nothing else but a Parliament, a Parliament; and they have had a Parliament since with a vengeance. But before this occasion, it was obser∣ved, that the seeds of disobedience, and a
spirit of insurrection was a long time engen∣dring in the hearts of som of this peace∣pampred People, which is conceived to proceed from their conversation and com∣merce with three sorts of men, viz. the Scot, the Hollander and the French Huguenot. Now an advantage happened that much condu∣ced to necessitate the convoking of a Parlia∣ment, which was an ill-favoured traverse that fell out in Scotland; For the King inten∣ding an Uniformity of Divine worship in all His three Kingdoms, sent thither the Litur∣gy of this Church, but it found cold and course entertainment ther, for the whole Nation, men, women and children rise up a gainst them: Here upon the King absolute∣ly revoked it by Proclamation, wherein He declared 'twas never His purpose to press the practise therof upon the Consciences of any; therfore commanded that all things shold be in statu quo prius, but this wold not serve the turn, the Scot took advantge here∣by to destroy Hierarchy, and pull down the Bishops to get their demeans: To which purpose they came with an Army in open Field against their own Native King, who not disgesting this indignity, Mustred ano∣ther English Army; which being upon the
confines of both Kingdoms, a kind of Pa∣cification was plaistred over for the pre∣sent. The King returning to London, and con∣sulting His second thoughts, resented that insolency of the Scots more then formerly: Hereupon He summons a Parliament, and desires aid to Vindicat that Affront of the Scot. The Scot had strong Intelligence with the Puritan Faction in the English Parliament, who seemed to abet his quarrel, rather then to be sensible of any national dishonour re∣ceived from him; which caused that short∣lived Parliament to dissolve in discontent, and the King was forced to find other means to raise and support an Army by privat Loanes of His nobler sort of Subjects and Servants: The Scot having punctual Ad∣vertisements of every thing that passed; yea, in the Kings Cabinet Councel was not idle all this while, but rallies what was left of the former Army (which by the Articles of Pacification (a little before) should have bin absolutely dismissed) and boldly invades England, which he durst never have done, if he had not well known that this Puritan party which was now grown very powerful here, and indeed had invited him to this ex∣pedition,
wold stand to him. This forein Army being by the pernicious close machi∣nations of som mongrel Englishmen afore∣mentioned, entred into the Bowels of the Country, the King was forced to call this present Parliament, with whom he comply∣ed in every thing, so far as to sacrifice un∣to them both Iudge, Bishop, Councellor and Courtier; yea, He yielded to the tumbling down of many tribunals of Justice, which were an advantage to his Prerogative; He assented that the Prelates, who were the most Ancient and Prime Members of the upper House, and had priority of all others, since the first constitution of Parliament in the enrollment of all Acts, He assented I say that these, who were the greatest prop of His Crown shold be quite outed from among the Peers; He granted them also a Trienniall Parliament, and after that, this Perpetuall; which words, to the appre∣hension of any rational man, carry with them a grosse absurdity in the very sense of the thing: And touching this last Grant, I had it from a good hand, that the Queen was a friend to this Parliament, and your Emi∣nence knows how they have requited Her since, but the main open Councellor to this fatall Act was a Scot.
Now the reason which they alledged for this everlasting Parliament was one of the baldest that ever I heard of, it was, that they might have time enough to pay the Scots Army, wheras in one morning they might have dispatched that, by passing so many Subsidies for that use, and upon the credit of those, they might have raised what money they wold. The Parliament finding the King so ply∣able, and His pulse to beat so gently, like ill-natur'd men they fall from inches to ells in seeking their advantages: They grew so peremptory as to demand all the Military strength of the Kingdom, the Tower of London, with the whole Royal Navy, which they found in an excellent equipage, gra∣mercy ship-money; so that the benefit of ship-money, which they so clamoured at, turned most to their advantage of any thing afterwards. The Scot being Fidler-like returned to his Country with meat, drink, and money, the King went a while after to keep a Parlia∣ment ther, wherein he filled every blank, they did but ask and have, for He granted them what possibly they could propound, both for their Kirk and State, many re∣ceived
Honour, and they divided Bishops Lands amongst them: for all which unpa∣rallel'd Concessions of Princely grace, they caused an Act already in force to be publish∣ed, viz. that it shold be damnable Treason in the highest degree that could be, for any of the Scots Nation conjunctly or singly to levy armes, or any Military Forces, upon a∣ny pretext whatsoever, without His Maje∣sties royal Commission; and this they cau∣sed to be don by way of gratitude, but how they perform'd it afterwards the world knowes too well. The King returning to London, in lieu of a welcom to his two Houses of Parliament (to whom also before his departure he had pas∣sed more Acts of Grace then all his Proge∣nitors, take them all in a lump) they had patch'd up a kind of Remonstrance, which was voted in dead of the night, wherein they expos'd to the world the least moat in for∣mer government, and aggravated to the ve∣ry height every grievance, notwithstanding that the King had redressed all before; and this Remonstrance, which breath'd nothing but a base kind of malice, they presented as a nosegay to their Soveraign Prince, to con∣gratulat his safe return from a forein Coun∣trey;
which Remonstrance they caus'd to be printed and publish'd before he could give any answer thereunto. The King finding such a virulent spirit still raign in the House, and knowing who were chiefly possess'd with it (viz. Those whom he had impeach'd be∣fore, but saw he could get no justice against them) in such an extremity, he did an act like a generous Prince, for taking the Pals∣grave with him, he took the first Coach he met withall at his Court-gate, and went to his House of Commons in person, to de∣mand five Members, which he wold prove to be Traitors in the highest degree  to be the Authors of all these distempers, protest∣ing upon the word of a King, that they shold have as fair & legal a tryal as ever men had; in the interim he only desir'd that their persons might be secur'd. The walls of both Houses, and the very stones in Lon∣don street did seem to ring of this high ca∣riage of the Kings, and the sound went thence to the Country, whence the silly Plebeians came presently in whole herds to this City, who strutting up and down the streets, had nothing in their mouths, but that the Priviledg of Parlement, the priviledg of Parlement was broken, though it be the
known clear Law of the Land, that the Parlement cannot supersede or shelter any Treason. The King finding how violently the pulse of the grosly seduced people did beat, and ther having bin formerly divers riotous crues of base Mechaniques and Mariners, who had affronted both his own Court, and the two Houses besides, which the Commons, to their eternal reproach, conniv'd at, notwith∣standing that divers motions were made by the Lords to suppresse them, the King also having privat intelligence that ther was a mischievous plot to surprize his person, re∣mov'd his Court to the Countrey. The King departing, or rather being dri∣ven away thus from his two Houses, by this mutinous City, he might well at his going away have ubraided her in the same words as H. the 3. did upbraid Paris, who being by such another tumultuous rabble driven out of her in the time of the Ligue, as he was lo∣sing sight of her, he turn'd his face back, and said, Farewel ingratefull City, I will never see thee again till I make my way into thee through thy Walls: Yet though the King absented himself in person thus from the two Houses, he sent them frequent messages, that they
wold draw into Acts what he had already assented unto, and if any thing was left yet undon by him, he wold do it; therfore he will'd them to leave off those groundless feares and jealousies wherwith they had a∣mus'd both City and Country; and he was ready to return at all times to his Palace in Westminster, provided that his person might be secur'd from the former barbarisms and outrages: But in lieu of a dutiful compli∣ance with their Prince, the thoughts of the two Houses ran upon nothing but war: The King then retiring into the North, and thinking with a few of his servants only to go visit a Town of his (Hull) he was denyed entrance by a fatal unlucky wretch (Hotham) who afterwards was shamefully executed with his Eldest Son, by command of his new Masters of the Parlement: The King being thus shut out of his own Town (which open'd the first dore to a bloudy war) put forth a Declaration, wherin he warn'd all his people that they shold look to their proprieties, for if He was thus barr'd of his own, how could any privat Subject be sure to be Master of any thing he had, and herein he was as much Prophet as Prince; For the Parlement-men afterwards made themselfs Land-Lords of
the whole Kingdom, it hath bin usual for them to thrust any out of his freehold, to take his bed from under him, and his shirt from off his very back. The King being kept thus out of one of his Townes, might suspect that he might be driven out of ano∣ther, therfore 'twas time for him to look to the preservation of his Person, and the Country came in voluntarily unto him by thousands to that purpose, but he made choice of a few only to be his gard, as the Parlementeers had done a good while be∣fore for themselfs: But now they went o∣therwise to work, for they fell a levying, listing and arming men by whole Regiments and Brigades till they had a very considera∣ble Army afoot, before the King had one Musqueteer or Trooper on his side; yet these men are so notoriously impudent, as to make the King the first Aggressor of the war, and to lay upon Him all the bloud that was split to this day, wherein the Devil himself cannot be more shamelesse. The Parliamenteers having an army of foot and horse thus in perfect Equipage, 'twas high time for the King to look to himself, there∣fore he was forced to display his royal Stan∣dard, and draw his sword quite out: Thus a
cruel and most cruentous civil war began which lasted near upon four years without intermission, wherein there happen'd more batta les, sieges and skirmishes, then passed in the Nether-lands in fourscore years, and herein the Englishmen may be said to get som credit abroad in the world, that they have the same bloud running in their veines (though not the same braines in their sculls) which their Ancestors had, who were ob∣served to be the activest people in the field, impatient of delay, and most desirous of battaile then any Nation. But it was one of the greatest miracles that ever happen'd in this Land, how the King was able to subsist so long against the Parlamenteers, considering the multiplicity of infinite advantages they had of him by water and land: for they had the Scot, the Sea and the City on their side; touching the first, he rushed in as an Auxiliary with above 20000. Horse and Foot compleatly fur∣nish▪d both with small and great ammuniti∣on and Arms, well cloth'd and money'd: For the second, they had all the Kings ships well appointed, which are held to be the greatest security of the Island both for de∣fence and offence, for every one of them
is accounted one of the moving Castles of the Kingdom: besides, they had all the other standing stone-Castles, Forts, and tenable places to boot: Concerning the last, (viz. the City) therein they had all the wealth, bravery, and prime ammunition of England, this being the only Magazin of men and mo∣ney: Now if the K. had had but one of these on his side, he had in all probability crush'd them to nothing: yet did he bear up strange∣ly against them a long time, and might have done longer, had he kept the campane, and not spent the spirits of his men before Townes; had he not made a disadvantagi∣ous election of som Commanders in chief, and lastly, had he not had close Traitors within dores, as well as open Rebels without; for his very Cabinet Councel, and Bed-Chamber were not free of such vermin, and herein the Parlementeers spent unknown sums and were very prodigal of the King∣doms money. The King, after many traverses of war, being reduced to a great strait by crosse suc∣cesses and Counsels, rather then to fall in∣to the hands of the Parlementeers, withdrew himself in a Serving-mans disguise to the Scots army, as his last randevous, and this
plot was manag'd by the French Agent then residing here; A man wold think that that Nation wold have deem'd it an eternal ho∣nour unto them to have their own King and Countrey-man throw himself thus into their armes, and to repose such a singular trust in them upon such an Extremity: but they corresponded not so well with him as he expected, for though at first when the Parlamenteers sollicited their dear Brethren for a delivery of the Kings person unto them, their note was then, if any forein petty Prince had so put himself upon them, they could not with honour deliver him, much less their own native King; yet they made a sacrifice of him at last for 800000. Crownes; wherupon Bellieure the French Ambassador being convoyed by a Troop of horse from the King towards London, to such a stand, in lieu of larges to the souldiers, he drew out an half Crown piece, and ask'd them how many pence that was, they an∣swered 30. He replyed, for so much did Iu∣das betray his Master, and so he depart∣ed. And now, that in the cours of this Histo∣rical Narration, I have touch'd upon France, your Eminence may please to understand,
that nothing almost could tend more to the advantage of that K. then these commotions in England, considering that he was embark'd in an actuall war with the House of Austria and that this Iland did do Spain some good offices; among other, by transport of his treasure to Dunkerk in English bottomes, whereunto this King gave way, and some∣times in his own Galeons, which sav'd the Spaniard neer upon 20. in the hundred, then if he had sent it by way of Genoa; so that som think, though France made semblance to resent the sad condition of her Neigh∣bour, and thereupon sent the Prince of Har∣cour, and the foresaid Monsieur Bellieure to compose matters, yet she never really in∣tended it, as being against her present inte∣rest and engagements: yet the world thinks it much that she shold publiquely receive an Agent from these Parlamenteeres, and that the French Nobility who were us'd to be the gallantest men in the world to vindicate the quarrels of distressed Ladies, are not more sensible of the outrages that have bin of∣fer'd a daughter of France, specially of Henry the greats. But to resume the threed of my Narrati∣on, the King (and with him, one may say,
England also) being thus bought and sold, the Parlamenteers insteed of bringing him to Westminster, which had put a Period to all distempers, toss'd him up and downe to pri∣vate houses, and kept the former Army still afoot: And truly I think there was never Prince so abus'd, or poor peeple so baffled, and no peeple but a purblind besotted pee∣ple wold have suffred themselves to be so baffled: for notwithstanding that no Enemy appeer'd in any corner of the Kingdome, yet above 20000. Tagaroones have bin kept together ever since to grind the faces of the poor, and exhaust the very vitall spirits of town and Countrey, and keep them all in a perfect slavery: Had the Parlament-men, when the Scots were gone, brought their King in a generous and frank way (as had well becom'd Englishmen) to sit among them, and trusted to him (which of necessity they must do at last) as they had gain▪d more honor far in the world abroad, so they had gain'd more upon his affections then I be∣leeve they will ever do hereafter. But to proceed, the King having bin a good while prisoner to the Parlement, the Army snatch'd him away from them, and som of the chiefest Commanders having
pawn'd their soules unto him to restore him speedily, in lieu thereof they tumbled him up and down to sundry places, till they jug∣gled him at last to that small Ile where now he is surrounded with a gard of strange faces; and if happly he beginns to take delight in any of those faces, he is quickly taken out of his sight. These harsh usages hath made him become all gray and oregrown with hair so that he lookes rather like som Silvan Sa∣tyr then a Soverain Prince: And truly my Lord the meanest slave in St. Marks gallies or the abjects Captif in Algier bannier is not so miserable as he in divers kinds, for they have the comfort of their wifes, children and frends, they can convey and receive Letters, send Messengers upon their errands, and have privat discours with any; all which is denied to the King of great Britain, nay the young Princes his children are not permit∣ted as much as to ask him blessing in a letter. In so much that if he were not a great King of his passions, and had a heart cast in on ex∣traordinary Mould, these pressures and those base aspersions that have bin publiquely cast upon him by the Parlement it self, had bin enough to have sent him out of the world e're this, and indeed 'tis the main thing they
drive at, to torture his braine, and tear his very heart strings if they could: so that whereas this foolish ignorant peeple speak such horrid things of our Inquisition, truly my Lord 'tis a most gentle way of pro∣ceeding being compar'd to this Kings perse∣cutions. As the King himselfe is thus in quality of a captif, so are all his Subjects becom per∣fect slaves, they have fool'd themselfs into a worse slavery then Iew or Greek under the Ottomans, for they know the bottom of their servitude by paying so many Sultanesses for every head; but here, people are put to endless, unknown, tyrannical Taxes, besides plundering and Accize, which two words, and the practise of them (with storming of Towns) they have learnt of their pure Bre∣thren of Holland: and for plundrings, these Parliamenteer-Saints think they may robb any that adheres not to them as lawfully as the Iewes did the Egyptians: 'Tis an unsom∣mable masse of money these Reformers have squandred in few years, whereof they have often promis'd and solemnly voted a publick account to satisfie the Kingdom: but as in a hundred things more, so in this precious particular they have dispens'd with
their Votes: they have consumed more treasure with pretence to purge one King∣dom, then might have served to have pur∣chas'd two; more (as I am credibly told) then all the Kings of England spent of the public stock since the Saxon Conquest: Thus have they not only begger'd the whole Island, but they have hurld it into the most fearfull▪st Chaos of confusion that ever poor Countrey was in; they have torn in pieces the reines of all Government, trampled up∣on all Lawes of heaven and earth, and vio∣lated the very Dictamens of nature, by ma∣king Mothers to betray their Sons, and the Sons their Fathers, but specially that Great Charter, which is the Pandect of all the Laws and Liberties of the free-born Subject, which at their admission to the House they are solemnly sworn to maintain, is torn in flitters: besides those severall Oaths they forg'd themselfs, as the Protesta∣tion and Covenant, where they voluntarily swear to maintain the Kings Honour and Rights, together with the established Laws of the Land, &c. Now I am told, that all Acts of Parlement here are Lawes, and they carry that Majesty with them, that no power can suspend or repeal them, but the same
power that made them, which is the King sitting in full Parlement; these mongrell Polititians have bin so notoriously impudent as to make an inferiour Ordinance of theirs to do it, which is point-blanck against the very fundamentals of this Government, and their own Oaths, which makes me think that there was never such a perjur'd pack of wretches upon earth, never such Monsters of mankind. Yet this simple infatuated peeple have a Saint-like opinion of these Monsters, this foolish Citie gards them daily with Horse and Foot, whereby she may be sayd to kisse the very stones that are thrown at her, and the hand whence they came, which a dogg would not do: But she falls to recollect her self now that shee begins to be pinch'd in Trade, and that her Mint is starv'd, yet the leading'st men in her Common-Councell care not much for it, in regard most of them have left traffiquing abroad, finding it a more easie and gainefull way of trading at home, by purchasing Crown or Church lands, plun∣der'd goods, and debts upon the Publick Faith, with Soldiers debenters; thus the Saints of this Iland turne godlinesse into gaine. Truly my Lord, I give the English for a
lost Nation, if they continue long thus, ne∣ver was ther a more palpable oblaesion of the brain, and a more visible decay of Rea∣son in any race of men: It is a sore judg∣ment from heaven, that a people shold not be more sensible how they are become slaves to Rebells, and those, most of them the scumm of the Nation, which is the basest of miseries: how they suffer them to tyrannize by a meer arbitrary extrajudicial power o're their very souls and bodies▪ o're their very lifs and livelihoods; how their former free∣dom is turn'd to fetters, Molehills into Mountains of grievances, Ship-money into Accize, Justice into Tyranny: For nothing hath bin and is daily so common amongst them as imprisonment without charge, and a charge without an accuser, condemnation without apparance, and forfeitures without conviction. To speak a little more of the King, if all the infernal fiends had ligu'd against him, they could not have design'd or disgorged more malice: They wold have laid to his charge his Fathers death, as arrand a lie as ever was forg'd in hell: they wold make him fore-know the insurrection in Ireland, wheras the Spanish Ambassador here, and his
Confessor who is a very reverend Irish-man, told me, that he knew no more of it then the grand Mogor did: they charge him with all the bloud of this civil war, wheras they and their instruments were the first kindlers of it, and that first prohibited trade and shut him out of his own Town: They have inter∣cepted and printed his privat Letters to his Queen, and Hers to him, (Oh barbarous basenesse!) but therin they did him a plea∣sure, though the intent was malitious, their aim in all things being to envenom the hearts of his people towards him; and this was to render him a glorious and well-belov'd Prince, as likewise for making him rich, (all which they had vow'd to do upon passing the Act of Continuance,) But now they have made him poorer then the meanest of all his vas∣sals, they have made him to have no pro∣priety in house, goods, or Lands, or as one may say, in his wife and children: 'Twas u∣sual for the father to hunt in his Park while the son hunted for his life in the field, for the wife  lie in his bedds, while the hus∣band layed wait to murther him abroad; they have seiz'd upon and sold his privat Hang∣ings an Plate, yea his very Cabinets, Jew∣els, Pictures, Statues, and Books.
Nor are they the honorablest sort of pee∣ple, and men nobly extracted (as in Scotland) that do all this, (for then it were not so much to be wondred at) but they are the meanest sort of Subjects, many of them illiterat Me∣chaniques, wherof the lower House is full; specially the subordinat Committees, who domineer more o're Nobles and Gentry, then the Parliament Members themselfs their Masters use to do. Touching those few Peers that sit now voting in the upper House, they may be said to be but meer Cyphers, they are grown so degenerat as to suffer the Commons to give them the Law, to ride upon their backs, and do most things without them: Ther be many thousand Petitions that have bin recommended by these Lords to the lower House, which are scornfully thrown into corners and never read; their Messen∣gers have us'd to dance attendance divers hours and days before they were vouchsafed to be let in or heard, to the eternal dishonour of those Peers, and yet poor spirited things they resent it not: The Commons now com∣mand all, and though, as I am inform'd, they are summon'd thither by the Kings Original Writ but to consent to what the King and his
Great Counsel of Peers (which is the tru Court of Parlement) shall resolve upon; The Commons I say are now from Consenters become the chiefest Counsellors, yea Con∣troulers of all; nay som of this lower House fly so high as to term themselfs Conquerors, and though in all conferences with the Lords they stand bare before them, yet by a new way of mix'd Committees they carry them∣selfs as Collegues: These are the men that now have the vogue, and they have made their Priviledges so big swoln, that they seem to have quite swallowed up both the Kings Prerogatives, and those of the Lords: These are the Grandees, and Sages of the times, though most of them have but crack'd braines and crazy fortunes God wot; Nay som of them are such arrand Knaves and coxcombs, that 'tis questionable whether they more want common honesty, or com∣mon sense; nor know no more what be∣longs to tru policy then the left leg of a joynt-stool: They are grown so high a tip∣toes, that they seem to scorn an Act of Am∣nestia, or any grace from their King, wheras som of them deserve to be hang'd as oft as they have haires upon their heads; nor have they any more care of the common good of
England then they have of Lapland, so they may secure their own persons, and continue their Power now, Authority is sweet, though it be in Hell. Thus, my Lord, is England now govern'd, so that 'tis an easie thing to take a prospect of her ruine if she goes on this pace: The Scot is now the swaying man, who is the third time struck into her bowels with a nu∣merous Army: They say he hath vow'd never to return till he hath put the Crown on the Kings head, the Sceptr in his hand, and the sword by his side; if he do so, it will be the best thing that ever he did, though som think that he will never be able to do England as much good as he hath done her hurt; He hath extremely out-witted the English of late years: And they who were the causers of his first and last coming in, I hold to be the most pernicious Enemies that ever this Nation had; for tis probable that Germany (viz. Ponterland and Breme) will be sooner free of the Swed, then Eng∣land of the Scot, who will stick close unto him like a bur, that he cannot shake him off; He is becom already Master of the English∣mans soul, by imposing a Religion upon him, and he may hereafter be master of his body.
Your Eminence knows there is a periodi∣call fate hangs over all Kingdoms after such a revolution of time, and rotation of fortunes wheele; the cours of the world hath bin for one Nation, like so many nailes, to thrust out another; But for this Nation, I observe by conference with divers of the saddest and best weighdst men among them, that the same presages foretell their ruine as did the Israelites of old, which was a murmuring a∣gainst their Governors; It is a long time that both Iudges, Bishops and privy Coun∣sellors have bin mutter'd at, whereof the first shold be the oracles of the Law, the other of the Gospell, the last of State-affaires, and that our judgments shold acquiesce upon theirs; Here as I am inform'd; 'twas common for evry ignorant client to arraign his Iudg; for evry puny Curat to censure the Bishop; for evry shallow-brain home-bred fellow to descant upon the results of the Councell Table: and this spirit of contradiction and contumacy hath bin a long time fomenting in the minds of this peeple, infus'd into them principally, by the Puritanicall Faction. Touching the second of the three aforesaid (I mean Bishops) they are grown so odious (principally for their large demeanes) among
this peeple, as the Templers were of old, and one may say it is a just judgment fallen upon them, for they were most busy in demolish∣ing Convents and Monasteries, as these are in destroying Cathedralls and Ministers; But a∣bove all, it hath bin observ'd that this peeple hath bin a long time rotten-hearted towards the splendor of the Court, the glory of their King, and the old establish'd Government of the land: 'Tis true there were a few small leakes sprung in the great vessel of the Stte, (and what vessel was ever so ite but was subject to leakes?) but these wise-akers in stopping of one have made a hundred: Yet if this Kings raign were parallell'd to that of Queen Elizabeth's, who was the greatest Minion of a peeple that ever was, one will find that she stretch'd the Prerogative much further; In her time as I have read in the Latin Legend of her life, som had their hands cut off for only writing against her matching with the Duke of Aniou, others were hang'd at Tyburn for traducing her government; she pardon'd thrice as many Roman Priests as this King did, she pass'd divers Monopolies, she kept an Agent at Rome, she sent her Sergeant at Armes to pluck out a Member then sitting in the
House of Commons by the eares, and clapt him in prison; she call'd them sawcy fellowes to meddle with her Prerogative, or with the government of her houshold, she mannag'd all forren affaires, specially the warrs with Ireland soly by her privy Counsell; yet there was no murmuring at her raign, and the rea∣son I conceave to be, that there was neither Scot or Puritan had then any stroke in Eng∣land. Yet, for all their disobedience and grum∣blings against their Liege Lord the King, this peeple are exactly obedient to their new Masters of the House of Commons, though they sit there but as their Servants and en∣title themselfs so; and also though in lieu of the small scratches which England might happily have receiv'd before (all which the King had cur'd) these new masters have made such deep gashes in her, and given her such deadly wounds that I believe are in∣curable. My Lord, I find by my researches, that there are two great Idolls in this Kingdom, the greatest that ever were, they are the Par∣liament and the Pulpit; tis held High treson to speak against the one, and the whole body of Religion is nailed unto the other, for there
is no devotion here at all but preaching, which God wot is little better then prating. The abuse of these two hath bin the source of all the distempers which now raign: touching the latter, it hath serv'd as a subver∣vient Engin to prop up the power and po∣pularity of the first; these malicious Pulpit∣men breath out nothing thence but either sedition, schisme or blasphemy: poor shal∣low brain'd Sciolists, they wold question many things in the old Testament, and find Apocrypha in the New: And such is the violence wherewith the minds of men and women are transported towards these Preach∣men, and no other part of devotion besides, that in all probability they will in time take a surfet of them: so that give this giddy pee∣ple line enough ther will be no need of Catholique Arms to reduce them to the A∣postolick Church, they will in time pave the way to it themselves, and be glad to return to Rome to find out a Religion again. There was here before, as I am informed, a kind of a face of a Church, there were some solemnities, venerations and decencies us'd that a man might discover som piety in this peeple; there was a publick Lyturgie that in pithy Pathetical prayers reach'd all
occasions; the Sacraments were administred with som reverence, their Churches were kept neat and comly; but this nasty race of miscreants have nothing at all of sweetnesse, of piety and devotion in them; 'tis all turn'd to a fatuous kind of zeal after more learning, as if Christianity had no sobriety, consistence or end of knowledg at all: These silly things, to imitat the Apostles time, wold have the same form of discipline to govern whole Nations, as it did a chamberfull of men in the infancy of the Church, they wold make the same coat serve our Savious at 30. yeers, which fitted him at three: 'Tis incredible how many ugly sorts of heresies they daily hatch, but they are most of them old ones newly furbish'd; they all relate to Aerius, a perfect hater of Bishops, because he could not be one himself. The two Se∣ctaries which sway most, are the Pres∣byterians and Independents, the Presbyterian is a spawn of a Puritan, and the Independent a spawn of the Presbyterian: there's but one hop 'twixt the first and a Iew, and but half a hop 'twixt the other and an Infidell; they are both opposit to Monarchy and Hierarchy; and the latter wold have no Government at all, but a parity and promiscuous confusion, a race of creatures fit only to inhabit Hell:
and one of the fruits of this blessed Parle∣ment, and of these two Sectaries is, that they have made more Jewes and Athiests then I think there is in all Europe besides; but truly, my Lord, I think the judgments of Heaven were never so visible in any part of the Earth, as they are now here, for there is Rebell against Rebell, House a∣gainst House, Cittie against Army, Parle∣ment against Scot, but these two Sectaries, I mean the Presbyterian and Independent who were the fire-brands that put this poor I∣land first in a flame, are now in most deadly feud one against the other, though they both concur in this to destroy government: And if the King had time enough to look only upon them, they would quickly hang, draw, and destroy one another. But indeed all Christian Princes shold ob∣serve the motions and successes of these two unlucky Incendiaries, for if they shold ligue together again, (as they have often plaid fast and loose one with another) and prevail here, this Iland wold not terminat their designs, they wold puzzle all the world besides. Their Preachmen ordinarily cry out in the Pulpit, ther is a great work to be done up∣on earth, for the reforming all mankind, and They are appointed by Heaven to be the
chief Instruments of bringing it about▪ They have already bin so busie abroad, that (with vast sommes of money) they brought the Swed upon the Dane, and the very Sava∣ges upon the English Cavaliers in Virginia; and could they confederat with Turk, or Tartar, or Hell it self against them, they wold do it: they are monstrously puff'd up with pride, that they stick not to call them∣selfs Conquerors, and one of the chief ring∣leaders of them, an ignorant home bred kind of Brewer, was not ashamed to vant it publiquely in the Commons House, that if he had but 20000. men, he wold undertake to march to Constantinople, and pull the Ot∣toman Emperour out of the Seralio. Touching the other grand Idoll the Par∣lement, 'tis true that the primitive constitu∣tion of Parlement in this Iland was a wholesom piece of policy, because it kept a good correspondence, and clos'd all ruptures 'twixt the King and his peeple, but this thing they call Parlement now, may rather be term'd a cantle of one, or indeed a Con∣venticle of Schismatiques, rather than a great Counsell; 'tis like a kind of headless Mon∣ster, or som estropiated carkas; for ther is neither King nor Prelat, nor scarce the se∣venth
part of Peers and Commons, no not the twelfth part fairly elected; nevertheless they draw the peeple, specially this City, like so many stupid animalls, to adore them. Yet though this institution of Parlement be a wholsom thing in it self, there is in my judgment a great incongruity in one particu∣lar; and I believe it hath bin the cause of most distempers; it is, That the Burgesses are more in number than the Knights of the Shires; for the Knights of the Shires are commonly Gentlemen well born, and bred, and vers'd in the Laws of the Land, as well as forren Governments, (divers of them) but the Burgesses of Towns are commonly Tradesmen, and being bred in Corporations they are most of them inclining to Purita∣nism, and consequently to popular Govern∣ment; These Burgesses exceeding the Knights in number, carry all before them by plurality of Voices, and so puzzle all: And now that▪ I have mentioned Corporations, I must tell your Lordship, that the greatest soloecism in the policy of this Kingdom, is the number of them; especially this monstrous City, which is compos'd of nothing els but of Corporati∣ons; and the greatest errors that this King,
specially his Father, committed, was to suf∣fer this Town to spread her wings so wide▪ for she bears no proportion with the bignes of the Iland, but may fit a Kingdom thrice as spacious; she engrosseth and dreins all the wealth and strength of the Kingdom; so that I cannot compare England more pro∣perly than to one of our Cremona geese, where the custom is to fatten only the heart, but in doing so the whole body growes lank. To draw to a conclusion, This Nation is in a most sad and desperat condition, that they deserve to be pittied, and preserved from sinking, and having cast the present state of things and all interests into an equal balance, I find, my Lord, ther be three ways to do it, one good, and two bad. 1. The first of the bad ones is the Sword▪ which is one of the scourges of heaven, e∣specially the Civill sword. 2. The second bad one is the Treaty, which they now offer the King in that small Island wher he hath bin kept Captif so long, ( which quality the world will account him still while he is detain'd there) and by tha Treaty to bind him as fast as they can, an not trust him at all.
3. The good way is, in a free confiding brave way (Englishmen-like) to send for their King to London, where City and Country shold Petition him to summon a new and free full Parlement, which he may do as justly as ever he did thing in his life, these men having infring'd as well all the essentiall Priviledges of Parlement, as eve∣ry puntillio of it, for they have often risen up in a confusion without adjournment, they had two Speakers at once, they have most perjuriously and beyond all imagination be∣trayed the trust both King and Country re∣pos'd in them, subverted the very sunda∣mentals of all Law, and plung'd the whole Kingdom in this bottomless gulf of cala∣mities: another Parlement may haply do som good to this languishing Island, and cure her convulsions, but for these men that ar∣rogat to themselfs the name of Parlement (by a local puntillio only because they never stir'd from the place where they have bin kept together by meer force) I find them by their actions to be so pervers, so irratio∣nal and refractory, so far given over to a re∣probat sense, so fraught with rancor, with an irreconcileable malice and thirst of bloud, that England may well despaire to be heal'd
by such Phlebotomists, or Quack-salvers; be sides they are so full of scruples, apprehensi∣ons, and jealousies proceeding from blac guilty souls, and gawl'd consciences, that they will do nothing but chop Logic with their King, and spin out time to continue their power, and evade punishment, which they think is unavoidable if ther shold be a free-Parlement. Touching the King he comports himself with an admired temper'd equanimity, he invades and o're-masters them more and more in all his answers by strength of reson, though he have no soul breathing to con∣sult withall, but his own Genius: he gains wonderfully upon the hearts and opinion of his peeple, and as the Sun useth to appear bigger in winter, and at his declension in regard of the interposition of certain mete∣ors 'twixt the eye of the beholder and the object, so this King being thus o're-cloud∣ed and declined, shines far more glorious in the eyes of his people; and certainly these high morall vertues of constancy, courage and wisdom come from above; and no won∣der, for Kings as they are elevated above all other peeple and stand upon higher ground, they sooner receive the inspirations of hea∣ven;
nor doth he only by strength of reason out  them, but he wooes them by gen∣tlenesse and mansuetude; as the Gentleman of Paris who having an Ape in his house that had taken his only child out of the cradle, and dragged him up to the ridge of the house, the parent with ruthful he art charm∣ed the Ape by fair words and other bland∣ments to bring him softly down, which he did; England may be said to be now just upon such a precipice, ready to have her braines dash'd out, and I hope these men will not be worse natur'd then that brute animal, but will save her. Thus have I given your Eminence a rough account of the state of this poor and pittiful∣ly deluded peeple, which I will perfect when I shall come to your presence, which I hope will be before this Autumnal Equinox; I thought to have sojourn'd here longer, but that I am grown weary of the clime, for I fear there's the other two scourges of hea∣ven that menace this Island, I mean the fa∣min and pestilence, especially this City, for their prophanness, rebellion, and sacriledge▪ It hath bin a talk a great while whether An∣ti-Christ be come to the world or no, I am sure Anti-Iesus, which is worse, is among
this people, for they hold all veneration, though voluntary proceeding from the in∣ward motions of a sweet devoted soul, and causing an outward genuflection, to be su∣perstitious, insomuch that one of the Syno∣dical Saints here printed and published a Book entitling it against Iesu Worship. So in the profoundest posture of reve∣rence I kisse your vest, as being, London this 12, of August, 1647. My Lord, Your Eminences most humbly devoted, I. H.
A NOCTURNAL PROGRES, OR A PERAMBULATION Of most COUNTREYS IN CHRISTENDOM, Perform'd in one night by strength of the Imagination; Which progresse terminats in these North-West Iles, And declares the woful Confusions They are involv'd at present.
The progress of the Soul by an usuall DREAM. IT was in the dead of a long Win∣ter night, when no eyes were o∣pen but Watchmens and Centi∣nels, that I was fallen soundly a∣sleep, the Cinq-out-Ports were shut up closer then usually, for my senses were so trebly lock'd, that the Moon, had she descended from her watry Orb, might have done much more to me then she did to Endymion when he lay snoaring upon the brow of Latmus Hill; nay, (be it spoken without prophanenesse) if a rib had bin taken out of me that night, to have made a new mo of a woman, I shold hardly have felt it. Yet, though the Cousin German of death had so strongly seiz'd thus upon the exterior parts of this poor Tabernacle of flesh, my in∣ward parts were never more actif, and fuller
of employments then they were that night. Pictus imaginibus, formis{que} fugacib adstat Morpheus, & variis fingit nova vultibus ora. Methought my soul made a sally abroad into the world, and fetch'd a vast compas; she seem'd to soar up and slice the air to cross seas, to clammer up huge Hills, and ne∣ver rested till she had arriv'd at the Antipo∣des: Now som of the most judicious Geo∣metricians and Chorographers hold that the whole Mass of the Earth being round like the rest of her fellow Elements, ther be pla∣ces, and poizing parts of the Continent, ther be Peninsulas, Promontories and Ilands upon the other face of the Earth that correspond and concenter with all those Regions and Iles that are upon this superficies which we read, Countries that symbolize with them in qua∣lities, in temperature of air and clime, as well as in nature of soil; The Inhabitants al∣so of those places which are so perpendicu∣larly opposit, do sympathize one with ano∣ther in disposition, complexions and humors, though the Astronomers wold have their East to be our West, and so all things vice versa in point of position, which division of the
Heaven is onely mans institution. But to give an account of the strange pro∣gresse my soul made that night; the first Country she lighted on was a very low flat Country, and it was such an odde amphibi∣ous Country, being so indented up and down with Rivers and arms of the sea, that I made a question whether I shold call it Water or Land; yet though the Sea be invited and u∣sher'd in into som places, he is churlistly pen'd out in som other, so that though he foam and swell, and appear as high Walls hard-by, yet they keep him out, maugre all his roaring and swelling. As I wandred up and down in this Watry Region, I might behold from a streight long Dike wheron I stood, a strange kind of For∣rest, for the trees mov'd up and down; they look'd afar off as if they had bin blasted by thunder; for they had no leafs at all; but making a nearer approach unto them, I found they were a nomberlesse company of Ship-Masts, and before them appear'd a great Town (Amsterdam) incorporated up and down with Water; As I mus'd with my self upon the sight of all this, I concluded, that the Inhabitants of that Country were notable industrious people, who could give Law so
to the angry Ocean, and occupie those places where the great Leviathan shold tumble and take his pastime in; As my thought ran thus, I met with a man, whom I conjectur'd to be 'twixt a Marchant and a Mariner, his saluta∣tion was so homely; the air also was so fog∣gy, that methought it stuck like cobwebs in his Mustachos; and he was so dull in point of motion, as if the bloud in his veines had bin half frozen: I began to mingle words with him, and to expostulat somthing about that Country and people; and then I found a great deal of down-right civilities in him: He told me that they were the only men who did miracles of late years; Those innumerable piles of stones you see before you in such comly neat frabriques, is a place (said he) that from a Fish-Market in effect is come to be one of the greatest Marts in this part of the world, which hath made her swel thrice bigger the she was 50. years ago; and as you behold this floating Forrest of Masts before her mole, so if you could see the foundations of her houses, you shold see another great Forrest, being rear'd from un∣der-ground upon fair piles of timber, which if they chance to sink in this Marshy soil, we have an art to scrue them up again. We
have for 70. years and above without any in∣termission, except a short-liv'd truce that once was made, wrastled with one of the greatest Potentates upon Earth, and born up stoutly against him, gramercy our two next neighbour Kings, and their Reason of State, with the advantage of our situation. We have fought our selfs into a free-State, and now quite out of that ancient allegeance we ow'd him; and though we pay twenty times more in taxes of all sorts then we did to him, yet we are contented: We have turn'd war into a Trade, and that which useth to beggar others, hath benefited us: Besides, we have bin and are still the rendevous of most dis∣contented Subjects, when by the motions of unquiet consciences in points of Religion, or by the fury of the sword, they are forc'd to quit their own Countreys, who bring their arts of Manufacture, and moveables, hither; Insomuch that our Lombards are full of their goods, and our banks superabound with their gold and silver which they bring hither in specie. To secure our selfs, and cut the Enemy more work, and to engage our Confederats in a war with him, we have kindled fires in every corner, and now that they are to∣gether
by the Eares, we have bin content lately, being long woo'd thereunto, to make a peace with that King to whom we once ac∣knowledged vassalage; which King out of a height of spirit, hath spent 500. times more upon us for our reduction, then all our Country is worth; But now he hath bin well contented to renounce and abjure all claimes and rights of Soverainity over us; In so much, that being now without an ene∣my, we hope in a short time to be masters of all the comerce in this part of the world, and to eat our Neighbours out of trade in their own Commodities: We fear nothing but that exces of Wealth, and a surfet of ease may make us careles and breed quarrells a∣mong our selfs, and that our Generall, be∣ing married to a great Kings daughter may—. Here he suddenly broke the threed of his discourse, and got hastily away, being haul'd by a ship that was sailing hard by▪ Hereupon my soul took wing again, and cut her way through that foggy condens'd aire, till she lighted on a fair spacious, cleare Continent, a generous and rich Soile mant∣led up and downe with large woods, where, as I rang'd to and fro, I might see divers
faire Houses, Townes, Palaces and Castles, looking like so many Carkases, for no hu∣mane soul appear'd in them; methought I felt my he art melting within me in a soft resentment of the case of so gallant a Coun∣trey, and as I stood at amaze, and in a kind of astonishment, a goodly personage makes towards me, whom both for his comport∣ment, and countenance, I perceiv'd to be of a finer mould then that companion I had met withall before: by the trace of his looks I guessed he might be som Nobleman that had bin ruin'd by som disaster: having aco∣sted him with a fitting distance, he began in a masculin strong winded language full of aspirations and tough collision of Conso∣nants, to tell me as followeth: Sir, I find you are a stranger in this Countrey, because you stand so agast at the devastations of such a fair piece of the Continent, then know Sir, because I beleeve you are curious to carry away with you the causes thereof, that these ruthfull objects which you behold, are the effects of a long lingring war, and of the fury of the Sword, a cruentous civill War that hath rag'd here above thirty yeares: one of the grounds of it was the infortunate undertaking of a Prince, who liv'd not far
off in an affluence of all earthly felicity; he had the greatest Lady to his wife, the bes purse of money, the fairest Stable of horse▪ and choicest Library of books of any other of his neighbour Princes. But being by desperat and aspiring counsells put upon a Kingdom, while he was catching at the sha∣dow of a Crown, he lost the substance of all his own ancient possessions: by the many powerfull alliances he had (which was the cause he was pitched upon) the fewd con∣tinued long; for among others a Northern King took advantage to rush in, who did a world of mischiefs, but in a few yeers that King and Hee found their graves in their own ruins neer upon the same time; but now, may heaven have due thanks for it, there is a peace concluded, a peace which hath bin 14. long yeers a moulding, and will I hope, be shortly put in execution; yet 'tis with this fatall disadvantage, that the said Northern people, besides a masse of ready money we are to give them, are to have firme footing, and a warm nest ever in this Countrey hereafter, so that I fear we shall hear from them too often: upon these words this noble personage fetch'd a deep sigh, but in such a generous manner that he
seem'd to break and check it before it came halfe forth. Thence my soul taking her flight o're di∣vers huge and horrid cacuminous moun∣taines (the Alpes) at last I found my self in a great populous Town (Naples) but her buildings were miserably battered up and down, she had a world of Palaces, Castles, Convents and goodly Churches: as I step∣ped out of curiosity into one of them, upon the West side there was a huge Grate, where a creature all in white beckned at me, ma∣king my approach to the Grate, I found her to be a Nun, a lovely creature she was, for I could not distinguish which was whiter, her hue or her habit, which made me remember (though in a dream my self) that saying, If Dreams and wishes had been tru, there had not been found a tru maid to make a Nun of, ever since a Cloyster'd life began first among women; I asked her the reason how so many ugly devastations shold befall so beautifull a Ci∣ty, she in a dolorous gentle tone, and ruth∣full accents, the teares trickling down her cheeks like so many pearles, (such pearly teares that wold have dissolv'd a Diamond) sobb'd out unto me this speech: Gentle Sir, 'tis far beyond any expressions of mine,
and indeed beyond humane imagination to conceive the late calamities which have be∣fallen this faire though infortunat City, a pernicious popular Rebellion broke out here upon a sudden into most horrid barbarismes, a Fate that hangs over most rich popular places that swim in luxe and plenty; but touching the grounds thereof, one may say that rebellion entred into this City, as sin first entred into the world by an apple: For our King now in his great extremities having almost halfe the world banding against him; and putting but a small tax upon a basket of fruit to last only for a time, this fruit∣tax did put the peeples teeth so on edge, that it made them gnash against the Govern∣ment, and rush into Armes; but they are sensible now of their own follies, for I think never any place suffered more in so short a time: the civill combustions abroad in other Kingdomes may be said to be but small squibs compar'd to those horrid flakes of fire which have rag'd here, and much adoe we had to keep our Vest all fire free from the fu∣ry of it: in lesse then the revolution of a yeer it consum'd above fourscore thousand soules within the walls of this City; But 'tis not the first time of forty, that this lu∣xurious
foolish peeple hath smarted for their insurrections and insolencies, and that this mad horse hath o'rethrown his Rider, and drawn a worse upon his back; who instead of a saddle, put a pack-saddle and Panniers upon him: but indeed the voluptuousnesse of this peeple was grown ripe for the judge∣ment of heaven. She was then beginning to expostulat with me about the state of my Country, and I had a mighty mind to satisfie her, for I could have corresponded with her in the re∣ation of as strange things, but the Lady A∣adesse calling her away, she departed in an nstant, obedience seem'd to be ther so pre∣cise and punctual. I steer'd my course thence through a most delicious Country to another City that lay in the very bosom of the Sea, (Venice) she was at first nothing els but a kind of posie made up of dainty green Hillocks, tied to∣gether by above 400. bridges, and so coa∣gulated into a curious City; though she be espous'd to Neptune very solemnly once evry eer, yet she still reserves her maydenhead, ad bears the title of the Virgin City in that part of the world; But I found her tugging mainly with a huge Giant that wold ravish
her; He hath shrewdly set on her skirts, and a great shame it is, that she is not now assist∣ed by her Neighbours, and that they shold be together by the ears when they shold do so necessary a work, considering how that great Giant is their common Enemy; and hath lately vow'd seven yeers wars against her; specially considering, that if he comes once to ravish her, he will quickly ruin her said Neighbours, She (to her high honor be it spoken) being their only rampart against the incursion of the said Giant, and by conse∣quence their greatest security. From this Maiden City, mee thought, I was in a trice carried over a long gulf, and so through a Midland Sea, into another King∣dom, (Spain) where I felt the Clime hotter by some Degrees; a rough-hew'n soile, for the most part, it was full of craggy barren hills; but where there were valleys and wa∣ter enough, the country was extraordinarily fruitful, whereby nature (it seems) made her a compensation for the sterility of the rest. Yet notwithstanding the hardship of the soyl, I found her full of Abbeys, Monaste∣ries, Hermitages, Convents, Churches, and other places of devotion; as I rov'd there a while, I encountred a grave man in a long
black cloak, by the fashion whereof, and by the brimms of his hat, I perceived him to be a Iesuit; I clos'd with him, and question'd him about that Country: He told me the King of that Country was the greatest Po∣tentat of that part of the world; and, to draw power to a greater unity, they of our Order could be well contented, that he were universall Head over Temporalls, because 'tis most probable to be effected by him, as we have already one universall Head over Spiri∣tualls: This is the Monark of the Mines, I mean of Gold and Silver, who furnishes all the world, but most of all his own enemies with mony, which mony foments all the wars in this part of the world: Never did any earthly monark thrive so much in so short a tract of time, But of late yeers he hath been ill-favouredly shaken by the revolt and utter defection of two sorts of Subjects, who are now in actual arms against him on both sides of him at his own doors. Ther hath bin also a long deadly feud 'twixt the next tramontan Kingdom (France) and him, though the Q. that rules there be his own sister, an unnatu∣rall odious thing: But it seems God Al∣mighty hath a quarrel of late yeers with all earthly Potentats; for in so short a time
ther never happen'd such strange shocks and revolutions: The great Emperour of Ethi∣opia hath bin outed, he and all his children by a petty companion: The King of China, a greater Emperour than he, hath lost al∣most all that huge Monarchy by the incursi∣on of the Tartar, who broke ore the wall upon him: The grand Turk hath bin stran∣gled, with 30. of his Concubines; The Em∣perour of Muscovy hath bin content to beg his life of his own vassals, and to see before his face divers of his chief Officers hack'd to pieces, and their heads cut off and steep'd in strong water, to make them burn more bright in the market place. Besides the a∣bove mentioned, this King hath also divers enemies more, yet he bears up against them all indifferently well, though with infinit expence of treasure, and the Church, speci∣ally our Society, hath stuck close unto him in these his exigents: whence may be inferr'd, that let men repine as long as they will at the possessions of the Church, they are the best anchors to a State in a storm, and in time of need to preserve it from sinking; besides, acts of charity wold be quite lost among men, did not the wealth of the Church keep life in them: Hereupon drawing a huge pair
of Beads from under his cloak, he began to ask me of my Religion; I told him I had a long journy to go, so that I could not stay to wait on him longer; so we parted, and me thought I was very glad to be rid of him so well. My soul then made another flight over an Assembly of hideous high hills, (Pyreneys) and lighted under another Clime, on a rich and copious Country (France) resembling the form of a Lozenge, but me thought, I never saw so many poor peeple in my life; I encountred a Pesan, and asked him what the reason was, that ther shold be so much poverly in a Country wher ther was so much plenty: Sir, they keep the Commonalty poor in pure policy here, for being a peeple, as the world observes us to be, that are more humerous than others, and that love variety and change, if we were suffered to be pamper'd with wealth, we wold ever and anon rise up in tumults, and so this Kingdom shold ne∣ver be quiet, but subject to intestine broils, and so to the hazard of any invasion: But ther was of late a devillish Cardinal, whose humour being as sanguin as his habit, and working upon the weaknes of his Master, hath made us not only poor, but stark beg∣gars,
and we are like to continue so by an e∣ternal war, wherein he hath plung'd this poor Kingdom, which war must be maintained with our very vital spirits: but as dejected and indigent as we are, yet upon the death of that ambitious Cardinal, we had risen up against This, who hath the Vogue now, (with whom he hath left his principles) had not the fearful example of our next transmarin Western neighbours (the English) and the knowledg we have of a worse kind of slave∣ry, of those endles arbitrary taxes, and hor∣rid confusions they have fool'd themselfs lately into, utterly deterr'd us, though we have twenty times more reason to rise then ever they had: yet our great City (Paris) hath shew'd her teeth, and gnash'd them ill∣favouredly of late, but we find she hath drawn water only for her own Mill, we fare little the better, yet we hope it will con∣duce to peace, which hath bin so long in a∣gitation. I cannot remember how I parted with that Peasan, but in an instant I was landed upon a large Island, and methought, 'twas the temperat'st Region I had bin in all the while (England;) the heat of the Sun ther is as harmless as his light, the evening serene
are as wholsom ther as the morning dew; the Dog-daies as innocuous as any of the two Equinoxes. As I rang'd to and fro that fair Island, I spyed a huge City (London) whose length did far exceed her latitude, but ne∣ther for length or latitude did she seem to bear any politicall proportion with that Island: she look'd, methought, like the Ie∣suits hat whom I had met withall before, whose brimms were bigger then the crown, or like a peticoat, whose fringe was longer then the body. As I did cast my eyes up∣wards, methought I discern'd a strange in∣scription in the aire which hung just over the midst of that City written in such huge vi∣sible characters, that any one might have read it, which was this: Woe be to the bloudy City. Hereupon a reverend Bishop presented himself to my view, his gray haires, and grave aspect struck in me an extraordinary reverence of him: so performing those com∣plements which were fitting, I asked him of the condition of the place, he in a sub∣miss sad tone, with clouds of melancholy waving up and down his looks, told me; Sir this Island was reputed few years since to have bin in the completest condition of hap∣piness
of any part on earth, insomuch that she was repin'd a for her prosperity and peace by all her neighbours who were plung'd in war round about her, but now she is fallen into as deep a gulf of misery, and servitude, as she was in a height of felicity & freedom before: Touching the grounds of this change, I cannot impute it to any other then to a surfet of happiness; now, there is no surfet so dangerous as that of happinesse: Ther are such horrid divisions here, that if they were a foot in hell, they were able to destroy the Kingdom of Satan: truly Sir, ther are crep'd in more opinions among us about matters or Religion, then the Pagans had of old of the Summum bonum, which Varro saith were 300. the understandings of poor men were never so puzzled and di∣stracted; a great while there were two op∣posit powers (King and Parlement) who swayed here in a kind of equality that peeple knew not whom to obey, many thousands complyed with both, as the men of Calecut who adore God and the Devil, Tantum Squantum, as it is in the Indian language) They adore the one for love, the other for fear: ther is a monstrous kind of wild liber∣ty here that ever was upon earth; That
which was complained of as a stalking horse to draw on our miseries at first, is now only in practice, which is meer arbitrary rule; for now both Law, Religion and Allegiance are here arbitrary: Touching the last, 'tis quite lost, 'tis permitted that any may prate, preach or print what they will in derogati∣on of their annointed King: which word King was once a Monosyllable of som weight in this Ile, but 'tis as little regarded now as the word Pope (among som) which was also a mighty Monosyllable once a∣mong us: the rule of the Law is, that the King can do no wrong, ther is a contrary rule now crept in, that the King can receive no wrong; and truly Sir, 'tis a great judge∣ment both upon Prince and peeple; upon the one, that the love of so many of his vassals shold be so alienated from him; upon the other, that their hearts shold be so poyson'd, and certainly 'tis the effect of an ill spirit; both the one and the other in all probability tend to the ruine of this Kingdom. But now Sir, (because I see you are so at∣tentive, and seem to be much mov'd at this Discourse) as I have discover'd unto you the general cause of our calamities, which was not only a satiety but a surfet of happinesse,
so I will descend now to a particular cause of them; it was a Northern Nation (Scot) that brought these cataracts of mis∣chiefs upon us; and you know the old say∣ing, Out of the North All ill comes forth. Far be it from me to charge the whole Na∣tion herewith; no, but onely som pernicious Instruments that had insinuated themselfs, and incorporated among us, and sway'd both in our Court and Counsels: They had a hand in every Monopoly; they had out of our Exchequer, and Customs near upon 400000. Crowns in yearly Pensions, viis & modis; yet they could not be content, but they must puzzle the peace and policy of this Church and State: and though they are a peeple of a differing Genius, differing Laws, Customs, and Manners unto us, yet for mat∣ter of conscience they wold bring our necks into their yoak, as if they had a greater ta∣lent of reason, and clearer illuminations, as if they understood Scripture better, and were better acquainted with God Almighty then we, who brought them first from Pa∣ganisme to Christianity, and also to be re∣formed Christians: but it seems, matters
have little thriven with them; nay the visi∣ble hand of heaven hath bin heavily upon them divers waies since they did lift their hands against their native King; For not∣withstanding the vast summs they had hence, yet is the generality of them as beg∣garly as ever they were; besides, the Civil Sword hath rag'd ther as furiously as here, and did as much execution among them. Moreover the Pestilence hath bin more vio∣lent, and sweeping in their chief Town (E∣denburgh) then ever it was since they were a peeple. And now lately ther's the nota∣blest dishonour befaln them that possibly could light upon a Nation, in that 7000. of ours shold upon even ground encounter, kill, slay, rout and utterly discomfit thrice as many of theirs, though as well appointed and arm'd as men could be: And truly Sir, the advantages that accrue to this Nation are not a few by that exploit; For of late years that Nation was cryed up abroad to be a more Martial peeple then we, and to have baffled us in open field in divers traver∣ses: besides, I hope a small matter will pay now their Arrerages here, and elsewhere; but principally, I hope they will not be so busie hereafter in our Court and Counsel, as they have bin formerly.
Another cause of our calamity is a strange race of peeple (the Puritans) sprung up a∣mong our selfs, who were confederat with those of the North; they wold make Gods House cleane, and by putting out the candle of all ancient learning and knowledge, they would sweep it only by the light of an Ignis fatuus: but 'tis visibly found that they have brought much more rubbage into it, and wheras in reforming this house, they shold rather find out the groat that is lost, they go about to take away the mite that's left, and so put Christs Spouse to live on meer almes: True it is, there is a kind of zeal that burns in them, (and I could wish there were so much piety) but this zeal burns with too much violence and presumption, which is no good symptom of spirituall health, it be∣ing a rule, that as the naturall heat, so the spirituall shold be moderat, els it commonly turns to a frenzy, and that is the thing which causeth such a giddinesse and distraction in their braines; This (proceeding from the suggestions of an ill spirit) puffs them up with so much spirituall pride; for the Devill is so cunning a Wrastler, that he oftentimes lifts men up to give them the greater fall: they think they have an inerring spirit, and
that their Diall must needs go tru, howso∣ever the Sun goes: they wold make the Gospell, as the Caddies make the Alchoran, to decide all civill temporall matters under the large notion of slander, whereof they for∣sooth to be the Judges, and so in time to hook in all things to their Classis: I believe if these men were dissected when they are dead, they would be a great deale of Quick∣silver found in their braines. Proh Superi, quantum mortalia pectora coecae Noctis habent!— But I could pitty the giddinesse of their braines, had they not so much gaul in their breasts, were they not so thirsting after blood, so full of poison and irreconcileable malice; in so much that it may be very well thought, these men are a kin to that race which sprung out of the Serpents teeth: these are they which have seduced our great Counsell, and led this foolish City by the nose to begin and foment this ugly War, insomuch that if those numberless bodies which have perish'd in these commotions, were cast into her streets, and before her doores, many thou∣sand Citizens noses would bleed of pure guilt.
Not to hold you long, these are the men who have baffled common sence, blasted the beams of nature, and offered violence to rea∣son it self; these are they who have infa∣tuated most of the peeple of this Iland; so that whereas in times past, som call'd her the Ile of Angels, she may be term'd now the Ile of Gulls, or more properly the Ile of Doggs, or rather indeed he Ile of Wolfs, there is such a true Lycanthrepy com in a∣mong us: I am loth to call her the Iland of Devills, though she hath bin branded so a∣broad. To conclude Sir, the glory of this Isle is quite blasted; 'tis tru they speak of peace, but while the King speakes to them of it, they make themselves ready for battle; I much fear, that Ixion-like we imbrace a cloud for peace, out of which there will issue out Cen∣taures, and Monsters, as sprung out of that cloud. Touching that ancient'st holy Order whereof you see me to be; I well hoped, that in regard they pretended to reforme things only, they wold not have quite extir∣pated, but regulated only this Order: it had bin enough to brayle our wings, not to have ear'd them: to have lopp'd and prun'd, not
to have destroyed root and branch of that ancient tree which was planted by the hands of the Apostles themselfs: In fine Sir, we are a lost peeple, 'tis no other Dedalus, but the high Deity of heaven can clue us out of this labyrinth of confusions, can extricat us out of this maze of miseries: the Philosopher saith, 'tis impossible for man to quadrat a Circle; so 'tis not in the power of man, but of God alone, to make a loyall Subject of a Round head: Among other things that strangers report of this Iland, they say that Winter here hath too many teares in his eyes: Helas Sir, 'tis impossible he shold have too many now, to bewaile the lamentable base slavery, that a free-born peeple is com to: and though they are grown so tame as to kisse the rod that whips them, yet their Taskmasters will not throw it into the fire. Truly Sir, as my tongue is too feeble to expresse our miseries, so the plummet of the best understanding is too short to fadom the depth of them. With this, the grave Venerable Bishop giving me his benediction, fetcht such a sigh, that would have rended a rock asun∣der; and suddenly vanish'd (methought) out
out of my sight up towards Heaven. I pre∣sently after awoke about the dawnings of the day, when one could hardly discern Dog from Wolf; and my soul, my Arimu∣la vagula blandula, being re-entred through the Horn gate of sleep into her former man∣sion, half tyr'd after so long a Peregrinati∣on; and having rub'd my eyes, distended my limms, and return'd to a full experge∣faction, I began to call my self to account touching those world of objects my fancy had represented unto me that night; and when by way of reminiscence I fel to examin and ruminate upon them; Lord, what a masse of Ideas ran in my head! but when I call'd to mind the last Countrey my soul wandred in, methought I felt my heart like a lump of lead within me, when I considered how pat every circumstance might be apply∣ed to the present condition of England: I was meditating with my self what kind of dream this might be; wherupon I thought upon the common division that Philoso∣phers make of dreams, that they are either
Divine, Diabolicall, Naturall, or Humane. For the first, they are Visions more pro∣perly or Revelations, wherof ther are divers examples in the holy Oracles of God, but the puddled cranies of my brain are not rooms clean enough to entertain such: Touching the second kind, which come by the impulses of the Devil, I have heard of divers of them, as when one did rise up out of his sleep, and fetcht a poyniard to stab his bed-fellow, which he had done, had he not bin awake; Another went to the next chamber abed to his mother, and wold have ravish'd her; but I thank God this dream of mine was not of that kind. Touching the third species of dreams; which are naturall dreams, they are accor∣ding to the humor which predominats; if Melancholy sway, we dream of black dark∣som devious places; if Phlegm, of waters; if Choler, of frayes, fightings, and troubles; if Sanguin predominat, we dream of green fields, gardens, and other pleasant represen∣tations;
and the Physitian comes often to know the quality of a disease by the noctur∣nal objects of the patients fancy. Humane dreams the last sort relate to the actions of the day past, or of the day follow∣ing, and som representations are clear and even; others are amphibious, mongrell, distorted and squalid objects, (according to the species of trees over troubled waters:) and the object is clear or otherwise, accor∣ning to the tenuity or grossenesse of the va∣pors which ascend from the ventricle up to the brain. Touching my Dream, I think it was of this last kind; for I was discoursing of, and con∣doling the sad distempers of our times the day before: I pray God som part of it prove not propheticall; for, although the French∣man sayeth, Songes sont Mensonges, dreames are delusions, and that they turn to contra∣ries, yet the Spaniard hath a saying, Et ciego sonnava que via Yera lo que querria. The blind man dreamt he did see light, The thing he wish'd for happen'd right. Insomuch that some Dreams oftentimes
prove tru; as S. Austin makes mention of a rich Merchant in Milan, who being dead, one of his Creditors comes to his son to demand such a sum of money which he had lent his father; the son was confident 'twas paid, but not finding the Creditors Receipt, he was impleaded and like to be cast in the Sute, had not his fathers Ghost appeared to him, and directed him to the place where the Acquittance was, which he found the next day accordingly. Galen speaks of one that dreamt he had a wooden leg, and the next day he was taken with a dead Palsie in one whole side. Such a Dream was that of William Rufus, when he thought he had felt a cold gust passing through his bowels; and the next day he was slain in the guts, by the glance of an arrow, in new Forrest, a place where he and his Father had committed so many Sacrileges. I have read in Artime∣dorus, of a woman that dreamt she had seen the pictures of three faces in the Moone like her self, and she was brought to bed of three daughters a little after, who all died with∣in the compas of a moneth. Another dreamt, that Xanthus water ran red, and the next day he fell a spitting of blood. To this I will add another fore-telling
Dream, whereof I have read, which was thus: two young Gentlemen being travelling a∣broad in strange Countreyes, and being come to a great towne, the one lay far in the Citie, the other in an Hostry without the wall in the Suburbs: he in the City did dream in the dead of night, that his friend which he had left in the Suburbs rush'd into his chamber panting and blowing, being pur∣sued by others; he dreamt so againe, and the third time he might see his friends Ghost appearing at his beds side with bloud trickling down his throat, and a Poyniard in his brest, telling him, Dear friend, I am come now to take my last farewell of thee, and if thou rise betimes, thou shalt meet me in the way going to be buryed; the next morning his friend going with his Host to∣wards the Inn in the Suburbs wher he left his friend, they met with a Cart laden with dung in the way, which being staid and search'd, the dead body was found naked in the dung. I will conclude with a notable Dream that Osman the Great Turk had not many years since, a few days before he was mur∣thered by his Janizaries, 1623. He dreamt, that being mounted upon a huge Camel, he
could not make him go, though he switch'd and spur'd him never so much; at last the Camel overthrew him, and being upon the ground, only the bridle was left in his hand, but the body of the Camel was vanished: the Mufti not being illuminated enough to interpret this Dream, a Santon who was a kind of Idiot, told him, the Camel represen∣ted the Ottoman Empire, which he not being able to govern, he shold be o'rethrown, which two dayes after proved tru. By these, and a cloud of examples more, we may conclude, that Dreams are not alto∣gether impertinent, but somthing may be gathered out of them; though the applicati∣on and meaning of them be denyed to man, unless by special illumination. Somnia venturi sunt praescia saepe diei. By Dreams we oft may guesse At the next dayes successe. THus have you a rough account of a ram∣bling Noctivagation up and down the world: I may boldly say, that neither Sir Iohn Mandevile, or Coryat himself travell'd more in so short a time: whence you see what nimble Postillions the Animal Spirits
are; and with what incredible celerity the imagination can crosse the Line, cut the Tro∣piques, and pass to the other Hemisphere of the world; which shews that humane souls have somthing in them of the Almighty, that their faculties have a kind of ubiquita∣ry freedom, though the body be never so under restraint, as the Authors is. They erre as much who think all Dreams false, As They who think Them alwayes tru. In the prison of the Fleet 3. Idus Decembris 1645. I. H.
A VINDICATION OF HIS MAJESTY, Touching a Letter He writ to Rome from the Court of Spain, in Answer to a Letter which Pope Gregory the 15th. had sent Him upon passing the Dispensation for concluding the Match with the Ifanta. Which Letter Mr. Pryn mention's in his Book call'd the Popish Royal Favorit, wherby the World is apt to beleeve that His Majesty had Inclinations to Popey. Ther goe's also herewith, A clearing of som Aspersions that the said Mr. Pryn cast's upon the Author hereof in the same Pamphlet, viz. That he was a Ma∣lignant, and no friend to Parlements. WHERBY, He takes occasion to speak somthing of the first Rise, And also of the Duty as well as the Authority of Parlements.
To my worthily honor'd friend Sir W. S. Knight. SIR, I Have many thanks to give you for the Book you pleased to send me, called the Popish Royal Favorite; and ac∣cording to your advice (which I value in a high degree) I did put pen to paper, and somthing you may see I have done (though in a poor pamphleting way) to clear my self of those aspersions that seem to be cast upon His Majesty; But truly Sir, I was never so unfit for such a task; all my Papers, Manuscripts, and Notes having bin long since seized upon and kept from me: Adde hereunto, that besides this long pres∣sure and languishment of close restraint (the sense wherof I find hath much stupified my spi∣rits) it pleased God to visit me lately with a dan∣gerous fit of sickness, a high burning fever, with the new disease, wherof my Body as well as my Mind is yet somwhat crazie: so that (take all
afflictions together) I may truly say, I have pas∣sed the Ordeal, the fiery Tryal. But it hath pleased God to reprieve me to see better daies I hope; for out of this fatal black Cloud, which now ore-sets this poor Island, I hope ther will break a glorious Sun-shine of peace and firm happinesse: To effect which, had I a Jury, a grand-Jury of lives, I wold sacrifice them all, and triumph in the oblation. So I most affectionately kiss your hands, and rest Your faithfull (though afflicted) Servant, From the Prison of the Fleet. I. H.
The Pre-eminence, and Duty OF PARLEMENT. Sectio Prima. I Am a Free-born Subject of the Realm of England; wherby I claim as my native Inheritance, an undoubted right, propriety, and portion in the Laws of the Land: And this distinguisheth me from a slave. I claim likewise protection from my Soverain Prince, who as He is my Liege Lord is obliged to protect me, and I being one of His Liege peeple am obliged to obey Him by way of Reciprocation; I claim also an in∣terest and common right in the High Na∣tional Court of Parlement, and in the power, the priviledges and jurisdiction therof, which
I put in equal ballance with the Laws, in re∣gard it is the fountain whence they spring; and this I hold also to be a principall part of my Birth-right; which Great Councell I honour, respect, value, and love in as high a degree as can be, as being the Bulwark of our liber∣ties, the main boundary and bank which keeps us from slavery, from the inundations of tyran∣nicall Rule, and unbounded Will-government. And I hold my self obliged in a tye of indis∣pensable obedience, to conform and submit my self to whatsoever shall be transacted, concluded, and constituted by its authority in Church or State with the Royal assent, whether it be by making, enlarging, alte∣ring, diminishing, disanulling, repealing, or reviving of any Law, Statute, Act, or Ordi∣nance whatsoever, either touching matters Ecclesiastical, civil, common, capital, crimi∣nall, martial, maritime, municipall, or any other; of all which the transcendent and uncontrollable jurisdiction of that Court is capable to take cognizance. Amongst the three things which the A∣thenian Captain thank'd the gods for, one was, That he was born a Grecian, and not a Barbarian; For such was the vanity of the Greeks, and after them of the Romans in the
flourish of their Monarchy, to arrogat all civility to themselves, and to terme all the world besides Barbarians: so I may say to rejoyce, that I was born a vassall to the Crown of England; that I was born under so well-moulded and tempered a Govern∣ment, which endows the subject with such Liberties and infranchisements that bear up his naturall courage, and keep him still in heart; such Liberties that fence and secure him eternally from the gripes and tallons of Tyranny: And all this may be imputed to the Authority and wisedome of this High Court of Parlement, wherein there is such a rare co-ordination of power (though the Soveraignty remain still entire, and untrans∣ferrable in the person of the Prince) there is such a wholsom mixture 'twixt Monarchy, Optimacy, and Democracy, 'twixt Prince, Peers, and Commonalty, during the time of consultation, that of so many distinct parts, by a rare co-operation and unanimity they make but one Body Politick, (like that sheae of arrows in the Emblem) one entire concentricall peece, the King being still the Head, and the results of their deliberations but as so many harmonious diapasons arising from different strings. And what greater
immunity and happinesse can there be to a Peeple, than to be liable to no Laws but what they make themselves? to be subject to no contribution, assessement, or any pecuniary erogations whatsoever, but what they Vote, and voluntarily yeeld unto themselves? For in this compacted Politick Body, there be all degrees of peeple represented; both the Mechanick, Tradesman, Merchant, and Yeo∣man have their inclusive Vote, as well as the Gentry, in the persons of their Trustees, their Knights and Burgesses, in passing of all things. Nor is this Soveraign Surintendent Coun∣cell an Epitome of this Kingdom only, but it may be said to have a representation of the whole Universe; as I heard a fluent well∣worded Knight deliver the last Parliameut, who compared the beautifull composure of that High Court to the great work of God, the World it self: The King is as the Sun, the Nobles the fixed Stars, the Itineant jud∣ges and other Officers (that go upon Messa∣ges 'twixt both Houses) to the Planets; the Clergy, to the Element of fire; the Com∣mons, to the solid Body of Earth, and the rest of the Elements. And to pursue this com∣parison a little farther; as the heavenly Bo∣dies, when three of them meet in Conjuncti∣on,
do use to produce some admirable effects in the Elementary World; So when these three States convene and assemble in one so∣lemne great Iunta, some notable and extra∣ordinary things are brought forth, tending to the welfare of the whole Kingdom our Microcosme. HE that is never so little versed in the Annals of this Ile, will find that it hath bin her fate to be four times conquered, I ex∣clude the Scot for the scituation of his Coun∣try, and the Quality of the Clime hath been such an advantage and security to him, that neither the Roman Eagles would fly thither for fear of freezing their wings, nor any other Nation attempt the work. These so many Conquests must needs bring with them many tumblings and tos∣sings, many disturbances and changes in Government; yet I have observed, that not∣withstanding these tumblings, it retained still the forme of a Monarchy, and something there was always that had an Analogy with the great Assembly of Parlement. The first Conquest I find was made by Claudius Caesar, at which time (as some well observe) the Roman Ensignes, and the Stan∣dard of Christ came in together: It is well
known what Lawes the Roman had; He had his Comitia, which bore a resemblance with our Convention in Parlement; the place of their meeting was called Praetorum, and the Laws which they enacted, Plebiscita. The Saxon Conquest succeeded next, which were the English, there being no name in Welsh or Irish for an English man, but Saxon, to this day; They also governed by Parlement, though it were under other names, as Michel Sinoth, Michel Gemote, and Witenage Mote. There are Records above a thousand years old of these Parlements in the Reigns of King Ina, Offa, Ethelbert, and the rest of the seven Kings during the Heptarchy: The British Kings also, who retain'd a great while some part of the Isle unconquered, gover∣ned and made Laws by a kind of Parlemen∣tary way; witnesse the famous Laws of Prince Howell, called Howell Dha, (the good Prince Howell) whereof there are yet extant some British Records: Parlements were also used after the Heptarchy by King Kenulphus, Alphred, and others; witnesse that renow∣ned Parliament held at Grately by King Athelstan. The third Conquest was by the Danes,
and they govern'd also by such generall As∣semblies, (as they do to this day) witnesse that great and so much celebrated Parle∣ment held by that mighty Monarch Canutus, who was King of England, Denmark, Nor∣way, and other Regions 150 years before the compiling of Magna Charta; and this the learned in the Laws do hold to be one of the specialst, and most authentick peeces of an∣tiquity we have extant. Edward the Con∣fessor made all his Laws thus, (and he was a great Legis-lator,) which the Norman Con∣querour (who liking none of his sons, made God Almighty his heir by bequeathing unto him this Island for a legacy) did ratifie and e∣stablish, and digested them into one entire methodicall Systeme, which being violated by Rufus, (who came to such a disastrous end as to be shot to death in lieu of a Buck for his sacriledges) were restor'd by Henry the first, and so they continued in force till King Iohn; whose Reign is renowned for first confirming Magna Charta, the founda∣tion of our Liberties ever since: which may be compar'd to divers outlandish graffes set up∣on one English stock; or to a posie of sundry fragrant flowers; for the choicest of the Bri∣tish, the Roman, Saxon, Danish, and Norman
Laws, being cull'd and pick'd out and gathered as it were into one bundle, out of them the foresaid Grand Charter was extracted; And the establishment of this great Charter was the work of a Parlia∣ment. Nor are the Lawes of this Island only, and the freedome of the Subject conserved by Parlement, but all the best policed Coun∣tries of Europe have the like. The Ger∣manes have their Diets, the Danes and Swedes their Rijcks Dachs; the Spaniard calls his Parlement las Cortes; and the French have, (or should have at least) their Assembly of three States, though it be growne now in a manner obsolete, because the Au∣thority thereof was (by accident) devolv'd to the King. And very remarkable it is, how this happened; for when the English had taken such large footing in most parts of France, having advanced as far as Orleans and driven their then King Charles the se∣venth, to Bourges in Berry the Assembly of the three States in these pressures, being not able to meet after the usuall manner in full Par∣lement because the Countrey was unpassa∣ble, the Enemy having made such firme in∣vasions up and down through the very bow∣els
of the Kingdom; That power which formerly was inhaerent in the Parlementary Assembly, of making Laws, of assessing the Subject with Taxes, subsidiary levies, and o∣ther impositions, was transmitted to the King during the war; which continueth ma∣ny years, that entrusted power by length of time grew as it were habitual in him, and could never after be re-assumed and taken from him; so that ever since, his Edicts countervaile Acts of Parlement. And that which made the businesse more feasable for the King, was, that the burthen fell most upon the Communalty (the Clergy and No∣bility not feeling the weight of it) who were willing to see the Peasan pull'd down a little, because not many years before, in that no∣table Rebellion, call'd la jaquerie de Beau∣voisin, which was suppressed by Charles the wise, the Common people put themselves boldly in Arms against the Nobility and Gentry, to lessen their power. Adde here∣unto as an advantage to the work, that the next succeeding King Lewis the eleventh, was a close cunning Prince, and could well tell how to play his game, and draw water to his own mill; For amongst all the rest, he was said to be the first that put the Kings
of France, Hors de page, out of their minority, or from being Pages any more, though therby he brought the poor peasans to be worse than Lacquays, and they may thank themselfs for it. Neverthelesse, as that King hath an ad∣vantage hereby one way, to Monarchize more absolutely, and never to want money, but to ballast his purse when he will; so ther is another mighty inconvenience ariseth to him and his whole Kingdom another way; for this peeling of the Peasan hath so deject∣ed him, and cowed his native courage so much by the sense of poverty (which brings along with it a narrownesse of ) that he is little usefull for the war: which put's the French King to make other Nations merce∣nary to him, to fill up his Infantery: Inso∣much, that the Kingdom of France may be not unfitly compared to a body that hath all it's bloud drawn up into the arms, breast and back, and scarce any let from the girdle downwards, to cherish and bear up the lower parts, and keep them from star∣ving. All this seriously considered, ther cannot be a more proper and pregnant example than this of our next Neighbours, to prove
how infinitly necessary the Parlement is to assert, to prop up and preserve the publick liberty, and national rights of a peeple, with the incolumity and well-fare of a Coun∣trey. Nor doth the Subject only reap benefit thus by Parlement, but the Prince, (if it be well consider'd) hath equal advantage ther∣by; It rendreth him a King of free and able men, which is far more glorious than to be a King of Cowards, Beggars, and Bankrupts; Men that by their freedom, and competency of wealth, are kept still in heart to do him service against any forrain force. And it is a tru maxime in all States, that 'tis lesse dan∣ger and dishonour for the Prince to be poor, than his people: Rich Subjects can make their King rich when they please, if he gain their hearts, he will quickly get their purses. Parlement encreaseth love and good intelli∣gence 'twixt him and his peeple, it acquaints him with the reality of things, and with the tru state and diseases of his Kingdom, it brings him to the knowledg of his better sort of Subjects, and of their abilities, which he may employ accordingly upon all occa∣sions; It provides for his Royal Issue, pays his debts, finds means to fill his Coffers:
and it is no ill observation, That Parlement∣moneys (the great Aid) have prospered best with the Kings of England; It exceedingly raiseth his repute abroad, and enableth him to keep his foes in fear, his Subjects in awe, his Neighbours and Confederates in security, the three main things which go to aggrandize a Prince, and render him glorious. In summe, it is the Parlement that supports, and bears up the honour of his Crown, and settles his Throne in safety, which is the chief end of all their consultations: For whosoever is entrusted to be a Member of this High Court, carryeth with him a double capa∣city; he sits ther as a Patriot, and as a Sub∣ject: as he is the one, the Country is his ob∣ject, his duty being to vindicat the publick liberty, to make wholsom Lawes, to put his hand to the pump, and stop the leaks of the great vessel of the State, to pry into, and punish corruption and oppression, to im∣prove and advance trade, to have the grie∣vances of the place he serves for redressed, and cast about how to find somthing that may tend to the advantage of it. But he must not forget that he sits ther also as a Subject, and according to that capacity, he must apply himself to do his Soveraignt
businesse, to provide not only for his publick, but his personall wants; to bear up the lustre and glory of his Court; To consider what occasions of extraordinary expences he may have, by encrease of Royal Issue, or mainte∣nance of any of them abroad; To enable him to vindicat any affront or indignity that might be offered to his Person, Crown, or Dignity, by any forrain State or Kingdom, or intestin Rebellion; To consult what may enlarge his honour, contentment, and pleasure. And as the French Tacitus (Comines) hath t, the English Nation was used to be more orward and zealous in this particular than ny other; according that to ancient eloquent speech of a great Lawyer, Domus Regis vigi∣a defendit omnium, otium illius labor omni∣m, deliciae illius industria omnium, vacatio lius occupatio omnium, salus illius periculum nium, honor illius objectum omnium. Eve∣ one shold stand Centinell to defend the Kings house, his safety shold be the danger of , his pleasures the industry of all, his ease old be the labour of all, his honour the ob∣ct of all. Out of these premisses this conclusion ay be easily deduced, That, the principall ntain whence the King derives his happiness
and safety, is his Parlement; It is that great Conduit-pipe which conveighes unto him his peoples bounty and gratitude; The tru∣est Looking-glasse wherin he discernes their loves; (now the Subjects love hath been always accounted the prime Cittadell of a Prince.) In his Parlement he appears as the Sun in the Meridian, in the altitude of his glory, in his highest State Royal, as the Law tells us. Therfore whosoever is averse or disaf∣fected to his Soveraign Law-making Court▪ cannot have his heart well planted within him, he can be neither good Subject, no good Patriot, and therfore unworthy to breath English aire, or have any benefit, ad∣vantage, or protection from the Laws.
Sectio Secunda. BY that which hath bin spo∣ken, which is the language of my heart, I hope no indif∣ferent judicious Reader will doubt of the cordiall affection, of the high re∣spects and due reverence I bear to Parlement, as being the wholsomest constitution, (and done by the highest and happiest reach of policy that ever was esta∣blished in this Island) to perpetuate the hap∣pinesse therof. Therfore I must tell that Gen∣tleman, who was Author of a Book entituled the Popish Royal Favorite, (lately printed and exposed to the world) that he offers me ve∣ry hard measure; nay, he doth me apparent wrong, to term me therin, No friend to Par∣lement, and a Malignant▪ A character, which as I deserve it not, so I disdain it. For the first part of his charge, I wold have him know, that I am as much a friend and as reall an affectionat humble servant and
Votary to the Parlement as possibly he can be, and will live and die with these affections about me: And I could wish, that he were Secretary of my thoughts a while, or if I may take the boldnesse to apply that com∣parison his late Majesty used in a famous speech to one of his Parlements, I could wish ther were a Chrystal window in my breast, through which the world might espye the inward motions and palpitations of my heart, then would he be certified of the sincerity of this protestation. For the second part of his Charge, to be a Malignant, I must confesse to have som Malignity that lurks within me much against my will; but it is no malignity of mind, it is amongst the humors, not in my intellectuals; And I believe, ther is no naturall man, let him have his humors never so well ballanced, but hath som of this Malignity reigning with∣in him; For as long as we are composed of the four Elements, whence these humors are derived, and with whom they symbolize in qualities; which Elements the Philoso∣phers hold to be in a restlesse contention a∣mongst themselves (and the Stoick thought that the world subsisted by this innated mu∣tual strise) as long I say, as the four humors, in
imitation of their principles (the Elements) are in perpetual reluctancy and combate for praedominancy, ther must be som malignity lodg'd within us, as adusted choler, and the like; wherof I had late experience, in a dan∣gerous fit of sicknesse it pleased God to lay upon me, which the Physitians told me pro∣ceeded from the malignant hypocondriacall effects of melancholy; having bin so long in this Saturnine black condition of close im∣prisonment, and buryed alive between the walls of this fatal Fleet: These kinds of malignities, I confesse are very rife in me, and they are not only incident, but connatu∣rall to every man according to his complexi∣on; And were it not for this incessant strugling and enmity amongst the humors for mastery, which produceth such malignant effects in us, our souls wold be loth ever to depart from our bodies, or to abandon this mansion of clay. Now what malignity my Accuser means, I know not; if he means malignity of spirit, as som antipathy or ill impression upon the mind, arising from disaffection, hatred, or rancor, with a desire of som destructive re∣venge, he is mightily deceived in me; I maligne or hate no Creature that ever God
made but the Devill, who is the Author of all malignity; and therfore is most com∣monly called in French le Malin Esprit, the malignant spirit. Every night before I go to bed, I have the grace, I thank God for it, to forgive all the world, and not to harbour, or let roost in my bosom the least malignant thought; yet none can deny, but the pub∣lick aspersions which this my Accuser casts upon me, were enough to make me a ma∣lignant towards him; yet it could never have the power to do it: For I have prevail'd with my self to forgive him this his wrong censure of me, issuing rather from his not∣knowledge of me, than from malice, for we never mingled speech, or saw one another in our lives to my remembrance; which makes me wonder the more, that a Profes∣sor of the Law, as he is, shold pronounce such a positive sentence against me so slight∣ly. But methinks I over-hear him say, that my precedent discourse of Parlement is in∣vol'd in generals, and the Topique Axiome tells us, that Dolus versatur in universalibus, ther is double dealing in universals: His meaning is, that I am no friend to this pre∣sent Parlement (though he speaks in the plu∣rall number Parlements) and consequently,
he concludes me a Malignant; Therin I must tell him also, that I am traduc'd, and I am confident it will be never prov'd against me, from any actions, words, or letters (though divers of mine have bin intercepted) or any other misdemeanor, though som things are father'd upon me which never drop'd from my quill. Alas, how unworthy and uncapa∣ble am I to censure the proceedings of that great Senate, that high Synedrion, wherin the wisdom of the whole State is epitomized? It were a presumption in me, of the highest nature that could be: It is enough for me to pray for the prosperous successe of their con∣sultations: And as I hold it my duty, so I have good reason so to do, in regard I am to have my share in the happinesse; And could the utmost of my poor endeavours, by any ministerial humble office (and somtimes the meanest Boat-swain may help to preserve the Ship from sinking) be so happy, as to con∣tribut any thing to advance that great work (which I am in despair to do, while I am thus under hatches in this Fleet,) I wold esteem it the greatest honor that possibly could befall me, as I hold it now to be my greatest disa∣ster, to have fallen so heavily under an af∣fliction of this nature, and to be made a sacri∣fice
to publick fame, than which there is no other proof, nor that yet urg'd against me, or any thing else produc'd after so long, so long captivity which hath brought me to suck a low ebbe, and put me so far behind in the course of my poor fortunes, and in∣deed more than halfe undone me. For al∣though my whole life (since I was left to my self to swim, as they say, without Blad∣ders) has bin nothing else but a continued succession of crosses, and that there are but few red letters found (God wot) in the Al∣manack of my Age, (for which I account not my self a whit the lesse happy) yet this crosse has carried with it a greater weight, it hath bin of a larger extent, longer continu∣ance, and lighted heavier upon me than any other; and as I have present patience to beare it, so I hope for subsequent grace to make use of it accordingly, that my old Motto may be still confirmed, . HE produceth my attestation for some passages in Spaine at his Majesties being there, and he quotes me right, which obli∣geth me to him; and I hope all his quotations wherein he is so extraordinarily copious and elaborate in all his workes, are so; yet I
must tel him, that those interchangeable let∣ters which pass'd between His Majesty & the Pope, which were originally couch'd in Latin, the language wherin all Nations treat with Rome, and the Empire with all the Princes thereof, those letters I say are adulterated in many places, which I impute not to him, but to the French Chronicler, from whom he took them in trust. The truth of that businesse is this; The world knows there was a tedious treaty of an Alliance 'twixt the Infanta Dona Maria (who now is Em∣presse) and His Majesty, which in regard of the slow affected pace of the Spaniard, lasted above ten yeares, as that in Henry the se∣venths time, 'twixt Prince Arthur, and (af∣terwards) Queen Katherine, was spun out above seven: To quicken, or rather to con∣summate the work, his Majesty made that adventurous journey through the whole Continent of France into Spaine; which voyage, though there was a great deale of gallantry in it (wherof all posterity will ring untill it turne at last to a Romance) yet it prov'd the bane of the businesse, which 'tis not the errand of so poor a Pamphlet as this to unfold. His Majesty being there arriv'd, the ignorant common people cried out, the
Prince of Wales came thither to make him∣self a Christian; The Pope writ to the In∣quisitor Generall, and others, to use all industry they could to reduce him to the Romane Re∣ligion; And one of Olivares first comple∣ments to him, was, That he doubted not but that his Highnesse came thither to change His Religion: whereunto he made a short answer, That He came not thither for a Religion but for a Wife: There were extraordinary processi∣ons made, and other artifices us'd by pro∣traction of things, to make him stay ther of purpose till the Spring following, to work upon him the better; And the Infan∣ta her self desir'd him (which was esteem'd the greatest favour he received from her all the while) to visit the Nunne of Carton, ho∣ping that the say'd Nunne, who was so much cried up for miracles, might have wrought one upon him; but her art failed her, nor was His Highness so weak a subject to work upon according to His late Majesties speech to Doctor Mawe and Wren, who when they came to kisse his hands before they went to Spaine to attend the Prince their Master, He wish ed them to have a care of Buckinham; as touching his Sonne Charles, he apprehended no feare at all of him; for he knew him to be so
well grounded a Protestant, that nothing could shake him in his Religion. The Arabian proverb is, That the Sun never soiles in his passage, though his beams reverberate never so strongly, and dwell never so long upon the myry lake of Maeotis, the black turf'd moores of Holland, the aguish woose of Kent and Essex, or any other place, be it never so dirty; Though Spaine be a hot Countrey, yet one may passe and repasse through the very Center of it, and never be Sun-burnt, if he carry with him a Bongrace, and such a one His Maje∣sty had. Well, after his Majesties arrivall to Ma∣drid, the treaty of Marriage went on still, (though he told them at his first comming, that he came not thither like an Ambassador to treat of a Marriage, but as a Prince, to fetch home a Wife;) and in regard they were of different Religions, it could not be done without a dispensation from the Pope, and the Pope would grant none, unlesse some Capitulations were stipulated in favour of the Romish Catholikes in England, (the same in substance were agreed on with France.) Well, when the dispensation came, which was negotiated solely by the
King of Spains Ministers (because His Ma∣jesty would have as little to do as might be with Rome) Pope Gregory the fifteenth, who died a little after, sent His Majesty a Letter, which was delivered by the Nuncio, whereof an answer was sent a while after: Which Letters were imprinted and exposed to the view of the world, because His Ma∣jesty would not have people whisper, that the businesse was carried in a clandestine manner. And truly besides this, I do not know of any Letter, or Message, or Com∣plement, that ever pass'd twixt His Majesty and the Pope afore or after; some addres∣ses peradventure might be made to the Cardinalls, to whom the drawing of those matrimoniall dispatches was referred to quicken the work, but this was only by way of civil negotiation. Now touching that responsory Letter from His Majesty, it was no other than a Com∣plement in the severest interpretation; and such formalities passe 'twixt the Crown of England, the great Turke, the Mogor and divers Heathen Princes. The Pope writ first, and no man can deny, but by all morall rules, and in common humane civili∣ty His Majesty was bound to answer it, spe∣cially
considering how punctual they are in those Countries to correspond in this kind, how exact they are repaying visits, with the performance of such Ceremonies; And had this compliance bin omitted, it might have made very ill impressions, as the posture of things stood then; for it had prejudiced the great work in hand, I mean, the Match, which was then in the heat and height of agi∣tation, His Majesties person was ther enga∣ged, besides, and so it was no time to give the least offence: They that are never so little vers'd in businesse abroad, do know that ther must be addresses, compliances, and formalities of this nature us'd in the car∣riage of matters of State, as this great busi∣nesse was, wheron the eyes of all Christen∣dom were so greedily fix'd; A businesse which was like to bring with it such an uni∣versal good, as the restitution of the Palati∣nat, the quenching of those hideous fires in Germany, and the establishing of a peace throughout all the Christian World. I hope none will take offence, that in this particular which comes within the compasse of my knowledg (being upon the Stage when his Scene was acted) I do this right to the King my Master, in displaying the Truth,
and putting her forth in her own colours, a rare thing in these days. TOuching the Vocall Forrest, an Allego∣rical Discourse, that goes abroad under my name, a good while before the beginning of this Parlement, which this Gentleman cites (and that very faithfully,) I understand ther be som that mutter at certain passages therin, by putting ill glosses upon the Text, and taking with the left hand, what I offer with the right, (Nor is it a wonder for trees which ly open, and stand exposed to all wea∣thers to be nipt.) But I desire this favour, which in common justice, I am sure in the Court of Chancery cannot be denyed me, it being the priviledge of every Author, and a received maxime through the World, Cujus est condere, ejus est interpretari; I say, I crave this favour, to have leave to expound my own Text, and I doubt not then but to rectifie any one in his opinion of me, and that in lieu of the Plums which I give him from those Trees, he will not throw the stones at me. Moreover, I desire those that are over criticall Censuers of that peece, to know, that as in Divinity it is a rule, Scriptur a para∣bolica
non est argumentativa, so it is in all o∣ther kind of knowledg; Parables (wherof that Discourse is composed) though pressed never so hard, prove nothing. The is ano∣ther Rule also, That Parables must be gent∣ly used, like a Nurses breast; which if you presse too hard, you shall have bloud in stead of milk. But as the Author of the Vocall Forrest thinks he hath done, neither his Countrey, nor the Common wealth of Learning any prejudice therby (That maiden fancy ha∣ving received so good entertainment and respect abroad, as to be translated into di∣vers Languages, and to gain the publick approbation of som famous Universities) So he makes this humble protest unto all the World, that though the designe of that Discourse was partly Satyricall (which peradventure induc'd the Author to shrowd it of purpose under the shadowes of trees, and where should Satyres be but amongst Trees?) yet it never entred into his ima∣gination to let fall from him the least thing that might give any offence to the High and Honourable Court of Parlement, whereof he had the honour to be once a Member, and hopes he may be thought worthy again:
And were he guilty of such an offence, or piacle rather, he thinks he shold never for∣give himself, though he were appointed his own Judge. If ther occur any passages ther∣in, that may admit a hard construction, let the Reader observe, That the Author doth not positively assert, or passe a judge∣ment on any thing in that Discourse, which consists principally of concise, cursory nar∣rations of the choisest▪ Occurrences and Criticismes of State, according as the pulse of time did beat then: And matters of State, as all other sublunary things, are subject to alterations, contingencies and change, which makes the opinions and minds of men vary accordingly. I will conclude with this modest request to that Gentleman of the long Robe; That ha∣ving unpassionately perus'd what I have writ∣ten in this small Discourse, in penning wherof, my conscience guided my quill all along as well as my hand, he wold please to be so charitable and just, as to reverse that harsh sentence upon me, To be no Friend to Parle∣ments and a Malignant.
A GLANCE UPON THE ILE of WIGHT, AND Upon the unparallell'd Con∣cessions of GRACE HIS MAJESTY pass'd in that Trety, &c. Concluding with the horrid Murther committed afterwards upon His Sacred Person. Cui dabit partes scelus expiant Iupiter?
A GLANCE UPON THE ILE of WIGHT, OR AN INQUISITION AFTER TRUTH. WHo vindicats Truth doth a good office not onely to his own Country, but to all Mankind; It is the scope of this short dis∣course, viz. to make som re∣searches after Truth, and to rectifie the world accordingly in point of opinion, specially touching the first Author and Aggressor of the late ugly war in England, which brought with it such an inundation of bloud, and so
did let in so huge a torrent of mischiefs to rush upon us. Ther be many, and they not only Presbyterians and Independents, but Cavaliers also, who think that the King had taken the guilt of all this bloud upon himself, in regard of that Concession he passed in the preamble of the late Treaty at the Isle of Wight; The aim of this Paper is to clear that point, but in so temperat a way, that I hope 'twill give no cause of exception, much lesse of offence to any: the bloud that's sought after here, shall not be min∣gled with gaule, much lesse with any venom at all. We know ther is no Principle either in Divinity, Law or Philosophy, but may be wrested to a wrong sense; ther is no truth so demonstrative and clear, but may be subject to cavillations; no Tenet so plain, but per∣verse inferences may be drawn out of it; such a fate befell that preambular Concession His Majesty passed at the Transactions of the late Treaty, in that he acknowledg'd ther∣in that the two Houses of Parlement were neces∣sitated to undertake a war in their own just and lawful defence, &c. and that therfore all Oaths, Declarations, or other public Instruments a∣gainst the Houses of Parlement, or any for ad∣hering
to them, &c. be declared null, suppressed, and forbidden. 'Tis true, His Majesty passed this grant, but with this weighty consideration as it had reference to two ends. First, to smoothen and facilitate things thereby to open a passage, and pave the way to a happy peace, which this poor Iland did so thirst after, having bin so long glutted with civil blood. Secondly, that it might conduce to the further security, and the indemnifying of the two Houses of Parlement, with all their instruments, assistants, and adherents, and so rid them of all jealousies, and fear of future dangers which still lodg'd within them. Now touching the expressions and words of this Grant, they were not his own, nor did he give order for the dictating or penning thereof; the King was not the Author of them, but an Assentor only unto them: nor was He or his Party accus'd, or as much as mentioned in any of them, to draw the least guilt upon themselves. Besides, He pass'd them as he doth all Lawes and Acts of Parlement, which in case of absence another may do for him in his politic capacity, therfore they can∣not prejudice his person any way. I am loth
to say that he condescended to this Grant, —Cum strict a novacula supra, When the razor was as it were at his throat, when ther was an Army of about thirty thousand effectif Horse and Foot that were in motion against him, when his Person had continued under a black long lingring restraint, and dangerous menacing Petitions and Papers daily obruded against him. Moreover, His Majesty pass'd this Concession with these two provisos and reservations, First, that it should be of no vertu or va∣lidity at all, till the whole Treaty were in∣tirely consummated; Secondly, that he might when he pleas'd inlarge and cleer the truth with the reserved∣nesse of his meaning herein, by public De∣claration: Now the Treaty being confused∣ly huddled up, without discussing, or as much as receiving any Proposition from himself as was capitulated, (and reciprocall proposalls are of the essence of all Treaties) it could nei∣ther bind him, or turne any way to his dis∣advantage: Therfore under favour, ther was too much hast us'd by the Parlement, to draw that hipothetick or provisional Con∣cession to the form of an Act so suddenly af∣ter
in the very heat of the Treaty, without His Majesties knowledg, or the least intima∣tion of his pleasure. Add hereunto, that this Grant was but a meer preambular Proposition, 'twas not of the essence of the Treaty it self: And as the Philosophers and Schoolemen tell us, there is no valid proof can be drawn out of Proemes, Introductions or Corollaries in any science, but out of the positive assertions and body of the Text, which is only argument-proof; so in the Constitutions and Laws of England, as also in all accusations and charges, forerun∣ning prefaces & preambles (which common∣ly weak causes want most) are not pleadable: and though they use to be first in place, like gentlemen-Ushers, yet are they last in digni∣ty, as also in framing, nor had they ever the force of Laws, but may be term'd their at∣tendants to make way for them. Besides, ther's not a syllable in this preface which repeals or connives at any former Law of the Land, therefore those Laws that so strictly inhibit English Subjects to raise armes against their Liege Lord the King, and those Lawes è contrario which exempt from all dan∣gers, penalties or molestation, any Subject that adheres to the person of the King in any cause or
buarrell whatsoever, are still in force. Furthermore, this introductory Concession of the Kings, wherein he is contented to de∣clare, That the two Houses were necessitated to take Armes for their defence, may be said to have relation to the necessity, à parte pòst, not à parte antè: self-defence is the universall Law of Nature, and it extends to all other cretures, as well as to the Rationall: As the fluent Roman Orator in that sentence of his, which is accounted among the Critiques the excellentest that ever drop'd from Cicero; Est enim haec non scripta, sed nata Lex quam non didicimus, accepimus, legimus, verum ex natura ipsa arripuimus, hausimus, expressimus, ad quam non docti, sed facti, non instituti, sed imbuti sums, ut si vita nostra in &c. For this (meaning self-defence) is not a written, but a Law born with us; A Law which we have not learnt, receiv'd or read, but that which we have suck'd, drawn forth, and wrung out of the very brests of Nature her self; A Law to which we are not taught, but made unto, wherwith we are not instructed, but indued withall, that if our lifes be in jeopardy, &c. we may repel force by force. Therfore when the House of Parliament had drawn upon them a necessity of self defence (And I could
have wish'd it had bin against any other but their own Soverain Prince) His Majesty was contented to acknowledge that necessity. As for example: A man of war meets with a Marchant man at Sea, he makes towards him, and assaults him; The Marchant man having a good stout vessell under him, and resolute, generous Seamen, bears up against him, gives him a whole broad∣side, and shoots him 'twixt wind and wa∣ter; so there happens a furious fight betwixt them, which being ended, the Marchant cannot deny but that the man of war, though the first Assailant, was necessitated to fight, and that justly in his own defence, which necessity he drew upon himself, and so was excusable, à posteriori, not à priori; As the Ci∣vilians speak of a clandestine marriage, Fieri non debuit, sed factum valet; It ought not to have been, but being done 'tis valid: wherun∣to relates another saying, Multa sunt quae non nisi per acta approbantur. Ther are many things which are not allowable til they are pass'd. The Kings of France have had sundry ci∣vil wars, They have had many bloudy en∣counters and clashes with their Subjects, specially the last King Lewis the thirteenth, which turn'd all at last to his advantage; Among other Treaties in that of Loudun, he
was by force of Article to publish an Edict, Dont lequel le Roy approuvoit tout le passé com∣me ayant esté fait pour son service, &c. Wherin the King approv'd of all that ws pass'd, as done for his service, &c. and these concessions and extenuations are usu∣all at the close of most civil wars, but ther was never any further advantage made of them, then to make the adverse party more capable of grace and pardon, as also to enable them to bear up against the brunt of Laws, and secure them more firmly from all after∣claps; They were pass'd in order to an Act of Abolition, to a generall pardon, and con∣sequently to a re-establishment of Peace; now, Peace and War (we know) are like Wa∣ter and Ice, they engender one another: But I do not remember to have read either in the French History, or any other, that such Royal Concessions at the period of any intestin war were ever wrung so hard, as to draw a∣ny inference from them, to cast therby the guilt of bloud, or indeed the least stain of dishonour upon the King; For Royal In∣dulgences and grants of this nature are like nurses breasts, if you presse them gently ther will milk come forth, if you wring them too hard you will draw forth bloud in lieu of
milk: And I have observed that the con∣clusion of such Treaties in France, both par∣ties wold hugg and mutually embrace one another in a gallant way of national huma∣nity; all rancor, all plundrings, sequestra∣tion, and imprisonment wold cease, nor wold any be prosecuted, much lesse made away afterwards in cold bloud. Touching the Comencer of this mon∣strous war of ours, the world knows too well, that the first man of bloud was Blew∣cap, who shew'd Subjects the way, how to present their King with Petitions upon the Pikes point, and what visible judge∣ments have fallen upon him since, by such confusions of discord and pesti∣lence at home, and irreparable dishonour abroad, let the world judge. The Irish took his rise from him: and wheras it hath bin often suggested, that His Majesty had fore∣knowledge therof, among a world of con∣vincing arguments which may clear him in this particular, the Lord Maguair upon the ladder, and another upon the Scaffold, when they were ready to breath their last, and to appear before the Tribunall of heaven, did absolutely acquit the King, and that spon∣taneously of their own accord, being unsought
unto, but only out of a love to truth, and discharge of a good conscience: but touch∣ing those cruentous Irish wars, in regard ther was nothing wherof more advantage was made against His late Majesty, to imbitter and poyson the hearts of his Subjects against him then that Rebellion, I will take leave to wind up the main causes of them upon a small bottom as was spoken elsewhere. 1. They who kept intelligence and com∣plyed with the Scot, in his first and second insurrection. 2. They who dismiss'd the first Irish Commissioners (who came of purpose to attend our Parlement with som grievances) with such a short unpolitic harsh answer. 3. They who took off Straffords head, (which had it stood on, that Rebellion had never been) and afterwards retarded the dis∣patch of the Earl of Leicester from going over to be Lord-Lievtenant. 4. Lastly, they, who hindred part of that disbanded Army of 8000 men rais'd there by the Earl of Strafford, which His Majesty, in regard they were souldiers of fortune, and loose casheer'd men, to prevent the mischiefs that might befall that Kingdome, by their insolencies, had promised the two Spanish
Ambassadors, the Marquesses of Veloda and Malvezzi, then resident in this Court; which souldiers rise up first of any, and put fire to the tumult to find somthing to do. They, I say, who did all this, may be justly said to have bin the tru causes of that horrid Insurrection in Ireland; and consequently 'tis easie to judge upon the account of whose souls must be laid the bloud of those hun∣dred and odd thousand poor Christians who perished in that war▪ and had it bin possible to have brought o're their bodies unputrified to England, and to have cast them at the lower House door, and in the presence of som Members, which are now either seclu∣ded, or gone to give an account in another world, I believe their noses wold have gush'd out with bloud for discovery of the tru mur∣therers. Touching this last fire-brand of war, which was thrown into England, who they were that kindled it first, the consciences of those indifferent and unbiassed men are sit∣test to be judges, who have bin curious to observe with impartial eyes, the carriage of things from the beginning. I confesse, 'twas a fatal unfortunat thing,
that the King shold put such a distance 'twixt his Person and his Parlement, but a more fatal and barbarous thing it was, that he should be driven away from it, that there should be a desperate designe to sur∣prize His Person, that Ven with his Myrmi∣dons, and Bourges with his Bandogs, (for so▪ they calld the riffraff of the City they brought along with them) should rabble him away, with above four parts in five of the Lords, and near upon two parts in three of the Commons: Yet 'tis fit it should be remembred, what reiterated Messages His Majesty sent from time to time after∣ward, That he was alwaies ready to return, provided there might be a course taken to secure his Person, with those Peers and other who were rioted away from the Hou∣ses, 'Tis fit it should be remembred, that there was not the least motion of war at all, till Hotham kept His Majesty out of His own Town Kingston upon Hull, (for the Name whereof shew'd whose Town it was) where being attended by a few of His meniall Servants, he came onely to visit her, having peaceably sent the Duke of York, and the Palsgrave thi∣ther the day before) which act of Hotham's
by shutting the gates against him was vo∣ted warrantable by the House of Com∣mons, and it may be call'd the first thun∣derbolt of War: 'Tis fit it should be re∣membred, that a while after there was a compleate Army of 16000. effectif Horse and Foot inrolled in and about London to fetch him to his Parliament by force, and remove ill Counsellours from about him, (long before he put up his Royal Standard) and the Generall then nam'd was to live and die with them: and very observable it is, how that Generalls Father was exe∣cuted for a Traytor, for but attempting such a thing upon Queen Elizabeth, I mean to remove ill Counsellors from about her by force. 'Tis also to be observed, that the same Army which was rais'd to bring him to his Parliament, was continued to a clean contrary end two years after∣wards to keep him from his Parliament. 'Tis fit it should be remembred, who in∣terdicted Trade first, and brought in For∣raigners to help them, and whose Com∣missions of War were neere upon two moneths date before the Kings. 'Tis fit it should be remembred how His Maje∣sty in all His Declarations and publick
Instruments made alwaies deep Protestati∣ons, that 'twas not against his Parliament he raised Armes, but against some seditious Members, against whom he had onely de∣sired the common benefit of the Law, but could not obtain it; 'Tis fit to remember, that after any good successes and advanta∣ges of his, he still Courted both Parlia∣ment and City to an Accommodation; how upon the Treaty at Uxbridge, with much importunity for the generall advan∣tage and comfort of his peeple, and to pre∣pare matters more fitly for a peace, he de∣sired there might be freedom of Trade from Town to Town, and a Cessation of all Acts of Hostility for the time, that the inflammation being allayed, the wound might be curd the sooner; all which was denyed him. 'Tis fit to remember how a Noble Lord (The Earl of Southampton) at that time told the Parliaments Com∣missioners in His Majesties Name, at the most unhappy rupture of the said Trea∣ty, That when he was at the highest he would be ready to treat with them, and fight them when he was at the lowest: 'Tis fit the present Army should remember how of∣ten both in their Proposalls, and publick
Declarations they have inform'd the world, and deeply protested that their principall aime was to restore His Maje∣sty to honour, freedom and safety, where∣unto they were formerly bound, both by their own Protestation and Covenant, that the two Commanders in chief pawn'd un∣to him their soules thereupon. Let them remember, that since he was first snatch'd away to the custody of the Army by Cromwells plot, who said, that if they had the Person of the King in their power, they had the Parliament in their pockets. I say being kept by the Army, He never displeas'd them in the least particular, but in all his Overtures for Peace, and in all his Proposi∣tions he had regard still that the Army should be satisfied: let it be remembred, that to settle a blessed Peace, to preserve his Subjects from rapine and ruine, and to give contentment to his Parliament, He did in effect freely part with His Sword, Scepter, and Crown, and ev'ry thing that was proprietary to him: Let it be remem∣bred with what an admired temper, with what prudence and constancy, with what moderation and mansuetude he compor∣ted himself since his deep afflictions, inso∣much
that those Commissioners and o∣thers who resorted unto him, and had had their hearts so averse unto him before, return'd his Converts, crying him up to be one of the sanctifiedst persons upon earth: and will not the bloud of such a Prince cry loud for vengeance? Bloud is a crying sin, but that of Kings Cryes loudest for revenge, and ruine brings. Let it be remembred, that though there be some Precedents of deposing Kings in his Kingdom, and elsewhere, when there was a competition for the right Title to the Crown by some other of the bloud Royall, yet 'tis a thing not onely unsampled, but unheard of in any age, that a King of Eng∣land whose Title was without the least scruple, should be summon'd and arraign'd, tryed, condemned, and executed in His own Kingdom, by His own Subjects, and by the name of their own King, to whom they had sworn Alleagiance. The meanest Student that hath but ta∣sted the Laws of the Land can tell you, that it is an unquestionable fundamentall Maxime, The King can do no wrong, be∣cause he acts by the mediation of his Agents and Ministers, he heares with
other mens eares, he sees with other mens eyes, he consults with other mens braines, he executes with other mens hands, and judges with other mens con∣sciences; therefore his Officers Coun∣sellors or favorites are punishable, not He: and I know not one yet whom he hath spar'd, but sacrificed to Justice. The Crown of England is of so coruscant and pure a mettall▪ that it cannot receive the least taint or blemish; and if there were any before in the person of the Prince, it takes them all away and makes him to be Rectus in curia. This as in many o∣thers may be exemplified in Henry the Seventh, and the late Queen Elizabeth: when she first came to the Crown 'twas mention'd in Parlement, that the attain∣der might be taken off him, under which he lay all the time he liv'd an Exile in France; it was then by the whole house of Parlement resolv'd upon the question, that it was unnecessary, because the Crown purg'd all. So likewise when Queen E∣lizabeth was brought as it were from the Scaffold to the Throne; though she was under a former attainder, yet 'twas thought superfluous to take it off, for the
Crown washeth away all spots, and dar∣teth such a brightnesse, such resplendent beams of Majesty, that quite dispell all for∣mer clouds: so that put case King Iames died a violent death, and his Son had been accessary to it, (which is as base a lie as ever the devil belch'd out) yet his accesse to the Crown had purged all. This businesse about the playster which was applyed to King Iames, was sifted and winnow'd as narrowly as possibly a thing could be in former Parlements, yet when it was exhibited as an Article against the Duke of Buckingham, 'twas term'd but a presumption or misdemeanure of a high na∣ture: And 'tis strange that these new ac∣cusers shold make that a parricide in the King, which was found but a presum∣ption in the Duke, who in case it had been so, must needs have been the chiefest Ac∣cessary. And as the ancient Crown and Royall Diadem of England is made of such pure allay, and cast in so dainty a mould, that it can receive no taint, or contract the least speck of enormity and foulenesse in it self, so it doth endow the person of the Prince that weares it with such high Pre∣rogatives;
that it exempts him from all sorts of publique blemishes; from all At∣tainders, Empeachments, Summons, Ar∣raignments and Tryalls; nor is there or ever was any Law or Precedent in this Land, to lay any Crime or capitall charge against him, though touching civill mat∣ters: touching propertie of meum and tu∣um, he may be impleaded by the meanest vassall that hath sworn fealty to him; as the Subjects of France and Spaine may a∣gainst their Kings, though never so absolute Monarchs. In the Constitutions of England, there are two incontroulable Maximes, whereof the meanest mootman that hath but salu∣ted Littleton cannot be ignorant: the first is, Rex in suis Dominiis neque habet parem, nec superiorem. The King in his own Do∣minions hath neither Peer, or Superior. The other is Satis habet Rex ad poenam quod Deum expectet ultorem: 'tis punishment enough for a King that God will take re∣venge of him: Therefore if it be the Fun∣damentall Constitution of the Land, that all just Tryalls must be by Teers, and that the Law proclaimes the King to have no peer in his own Dominions, I leave the
world to judg, what capacity or power those men had to arraign their late King, to be in effect his Accusers and Iudges; and that an exorbitant unsampled Tribu∣nall should be erected, with power and purpose to condemn All to cleer none, and that sentence of death should passe without conviction or Law upon Him that was the heard and protector of all the Lawes. Lastly, that They who by their own con∣fession represent but the Common people, should assume power to cut off Him who immediately represented God, Cui dabit partes scelus expiandi Iupiter?— Well, we have seen such portentous things, that former Ages never beheld, nor will future Ages ever be witnesse of the like: Nay, posterity, after a Century or two of yeers will hold what is now really acted to be but Romances. And now with thoughts full of consterna∣tion and horror, And a heart trembling with amazement and sorrow for the crying fla∣grant sins of this forlorn Nation, specially for that fresh Infandous murther committed up∣on
the sacred Person of his Majesty, I con∣clude with this Hepastick, wherein all cretures (though irrationall) that have sence, yea the very vegetalls seeme to abhor so damnable a fact. So fell the Royal Oake by a wild crew Of mongrel shrubs which underneath Him grew; So fell the Lion by a pack of Currs; So the Rose witherd 'twixt a knot of Burrs. So fell the Eagle by a swarme of Gnatts, So the Whale perish'd by a Shoale of Spratts. In the prison of the Fleet 25. Febr. 1648. I. H.
ADVICE Sent from the prime Statesmen OF FLORENCE, HOW ENGLAND may come to HERSELF again, Which is, To call in the KING, Not upon ARTICLES, But in a Free confident way: Which Advice came immediatly upon the Readmission of the Secluded Members, And Coppies therof being delivered to the Chiefest of Them. It produc'd happy Effects.
A Letter sent from the City of Florence, Written by a Great Counsellor there, touching the present Distempers of Eng∣land; wherein He, with som of the Prime Statesmen in Florence passe their Iudge∣ments which is the onely way to compose the said Distem∣pers. To my Honored, and most Endeared Patron. IT is no small diminution to my former happinesse that I have not receiv'd your commands a∣ny time these two moneths, which makes me lodg within me cer∣tain
apprehensions of fear that som disaste might befall you in those new Distra∣ctions, therefore I pray be pleased to pull this thorn out of my thoughts as speedily as it may stand with your conveni∣ency. We are not here so barren of Intelligence, but we have weekly advice of your present Confusions, and truly the seve∣rest sort of speculative persons here who use to observe the method of Provi∣dence, do not stick to say, that the hand of Heaven doth visibly stirre therein, and that those Distractions in Army, State, and City are apparent judgements from above, for if one revolve the Stories of former Times, as I have done many (but you more) he will find that it hath been alwaies an inevitable Fate which useth to hang over all popular Insurrections to end in confusion and disorders among the chief actors themselfs at last; And we have had divers examples thereof here among us, which hath caus'd us to be so long in quiet∣nesse and peace. But truly Sir, give me leave to tell you that your Nation hath lost much of their Repute abroad all the World over
in statu quo nunc; Som do laugh at you; O∣thers do scorn, and hate you; And som do pitty and comiserat you. They who laugh at you, think you are no better than Mand men▪ having strange Magots in your brains bred out of the fat of so long wanton plenty, and peace. They who scorn and hate you, do it for your Sacriledge, your horrendous Sacrile∣ges, the like whereof was never committed on Earth since Christianity had first a hole to put her head in. They who pitty you are few, and We are of the nomber of Them, as well in the common sense of Humanity, as for the ad∣vantages, and improvement of Wealth which this State hath receiv'd by your Tra∣ding at Ligorne, for that Town doth ac∣knowledge her prosperity, and that she is arrived to this flourishing Estate of Ri∣ches, of Buildings and bravery by the correspondence she hath had this latter Age with England in point of Commerce, which yet we find doth insensibly im∣pair every day, and I believe you feel it more; Therefore out of the well∣wishes,
and true affections we bear un∣to England, some of the most serious, and soberest Persons of this place who are well seasoned in the World, and have studyed men under divers Climes, and conversed also much with Heavenly Bo∣dies, had lately a private Junto, or meeting, whereunto I was admitted for one, and two of us had been in Eng∣land where we received sundry free Civili∣ties; Our main businesse was to discourse, and descant upon these sad confusions, and calamitous condition wherein Eng∣land with the adjoyning Kingdomes are at present involved, and what might ex∣tricate Her out of this Labyrinth of Di∣stractions, and reduce Her to a setled Government; Having long canvased the businesse, and banded arguments pro & con with much earnestnesse, all our opinious did concenter at last in this point, That there was no probable way under Heaven to settle a fast, and firm Government among you, then for the Men that are now upon the Stage of power to make a speedy application to their own King, their own Liege
Lord and Soveraigne, whom God, and Nature hath put over them; Let them beat their brains, scrue up their witts, and put all the policy they have upon the tenterhooks as farre as possibly they can, yet they will never be able to establish a durable standing Government otherwise, They do but dance in a circle all this while, for the Government will turn at last to the same point it was before▪ viz. to Monarchy, and this King will be restored to His Royall Inheritances, maugre all the Cacodaemons of Hell: Our Astrologers here, specially the fa∣mous Antonio Fiselli hath had notes to look into the horoscope of his Na∣tivity, and what predictions he hath made hitherto of him have proved true to my knowledge, He now confidently averrs, with the concurrence of the rest, that the aspect of all the starrs, and conjunction of the Planetts much favour him the next two yeares; Nam Medium coeli in Genitura Caroli Se∣cundi Regis Angliae juxta axiomata Astro∣logiae Genethliacae dirigitur ad radios Sex∣tiles Lun Anno Domini 1660. & signi∣ficat
accssum ad Dominum, For the Me∣dium coeli in the Geniture of Charles the Second according to the axiomes of Genethliacall Astrology is directed to the Sextile rayes of the Moon, and signi∣fies an accesse to Dominion. Adde here∣unto that a most lucky conjunction fol∣lowes the same year, in the very Cen∣tre of the said Kings horoscope be∣twixt Iupiter and Sol in the moneth of Sep∣tember. When I was employed by this State in Paris not many years agoe, I had oc∣casion to make my addresse to your young King, and when I observed His Physiognomy, and the Lineaments of his face, I seemed to discern in it something extraordinary above vulgar countenan∣ces, and that he carryed a Majesty in His very looks, and noting besides the goodly procerity, and constitution of His body, he seemed to be cut out for a King. Now, in point of extraction, and line∣age, it cannot be denyed but he is one of the greatest born Princes that ever was in the world; for whereas His Grand-Fa∣ther,
and Father were allyed onely if you regard Forraigne Consanguinity, to the House of Denmark and the Guyses, this King bears in his veines not onely that bloud, but also the blouds of all the great Princes of Christendom, being nearly linked to the House of Bourbon and France, to the House of Austria, and consequently to the Emperour, and Spaine, as also to the Duke of Savoy, and our Grand-Duke: Moreover he is nearly allyed to all the greatest Princes of Germany, as the Saxe, Brandenburg, Bavaria, the Palsgrave, and to the Duke of Lorain who descends in the directest line from Charlemain; Adde hereunto that the young Prince of Orenge is his Nephew, and which is considerable he is a pure Englishman born, whereas your two former Kings were Forreigners. The Queen His Mother is of as Glorious an Extraction, which makes me admire the frontlesse impudence of some of your poor Pamphletors who call Her ever and anon the Little Queen, notwithstand∣ing that the World knowes Her to be the Daughter of Henry the Great, and Queen
of Great Britain, which Title and Cha∣racter is indelible, and must die with Her. Hereunto may be adjoyn'd, that this young King is now mounted to the Me∣ridian of his Age, and maturity of judge∣ment to govern, and doubtlesse hee is like to make a rare Governour, having this ad∣vantage of all other Soverain Princes in the world to have been bredd up in the Schoole of Affliction so long, to have Travelled so many strange Countreys and observed the humors of so many Na∣tions. But to come to the Cardinall point of our Communication, after divers debates, and alterations how England might be brought to a stable condition of tranquili∣ty and perfect peace, to her former lustre, and glory, the finall result of all, ended in this, that there was no other imaginable meanes to do it then for you to make a timely and fitting humble addresse unto your own King, and without question it is in his power to grant you such an absolute pardon, such an abolition of all things pass'd, such a gracious Amnestia, such Royall con∣cessions
that may extend to the security of every person for the future that was engaged in these your revolutions, both touching his life and fortunes; Unlesse their guilt of Conscience be such that like Cain or Iudas they thinke their Sinne is greater then can be forgiven them. Now the mode of your application to Him may avail much, for if you chopp Logique with him too farr, and stand upon Puntillios, and too rigid termes, if you shew your selfs full of feares, jealousies, and distrusts, it will intangle, and quite marr the businesse, for in a Soveraign Prince ther must be an Implicit, unavoid∣able necessary trust repos'd by his peeple, which all the Laws that mans brain can possibly invent cannot provide against; Therefore if you proceed in a frank, and confident tru English way you may work upon his affections more powerfully, and overcome him sooner so, then by any outward Arms, This way will make such tender impressions, upon that he will grant more then you can possibly ex∣pect.
Some Forein Historians as the French Comines and our Guicciardin do cry up the English Nation for using to love their King in a more intense degree then other pee∣ple, and to regard his honour in a higher strain, to support which they have bin al∣wayes so ready, and cheerful both with their persons and purses; There is now a fair opportunity offered to rake up the embers of these old affections, and to reco∣ver the Reputation of tru Englishmen; There is no peeple but may sometimes stand in their own light, go astray, and err, for Error was one of the first frailties that were entayled upon man (and his posterity) as soon as he was thrust out of Paradis; 'Tis a human thing to err, but to persevere in an error is diabolicall; You shall do well and wisely to follow the example of the Spa∣nish Mule, who out of a kind of wantonesse being gone out of the high beaten road in∣to a by path, which led her to a dirty nar∣row lane full of pitts and holes, at last she came to the top of a huge hideous Rock where she could go no farther, for before her ther was inevitable destruction, and the lane was so narrow that she could not turn
her body back, therupon in this extremity she put one foot gently after an other, and Crablike went backward untill she came a∣gain to the common road; This must be your course, by a gentle retrogradation to come into the Kings high road again, and ther is no question but he will meet you more than three parts of the way: If you do not, truly in our opinions you will pre∣cipitat your selfs down a Rock of inevitable destruction; For Heaven and Earth are conspir'd to restore him, and though all the Spirits of the Air shold joyn with you, you shall not be able to oppose it. I presume you are not ignorant how he two great Monarks of Spain and France (which may be said to be the main Poles wheron Europe doth move) have comprehended him with∣in the private capitulations of peace, The Emperour hath promised to wed his quar∣rell, and there is no Prince or State in Chri∣stendom but would gladly reach a frendly hand to restore him, being depriv'd of his birth-right, and his Royal indubitable Inhe∣ritance (as you your felfs confesse) for obser∣ving the fifth commandement, for obeying his Father and Mother; From which Birth∣right
he may be said to have been thrust out when he was in the state of Innocency, being but in a manner a Child, and very young then. Now touching your selfs I will not flatter you, but plainly tell you that you have not one friend any where beyond the Seas, nay your great Confederate the Swed (as I had good intelligence) could upbraid one of your Ambassadors that are now there, that He had not washed his hands clean since they had been embrued in His Princes bloud. The time that I sojourned in England I was curious to read your Annals, and to make some inspections into your Laws, and Method of Government; as also into the Genius of the peeple, and I find there is no species of Government that suits bet∣ter with the nature of the Inhabitants, the quality of the Clime, and relates more di∣rectly to the civil Constitutions, Laws, and Customs of the Land then Monarchal; The Ile of Great Britain hath been alwaies a Royall Island from her very Creation, from her Infancy, she may be said to have worn a Crown in her Cradle, and although she
had four or five Revolutions and changes of Masters, yet she still continued Royal, whereunto alludes a saying that I observed in your old Records, Britannia ab initio mundi semper fuit Regia, & Regimen Illiu simile illi caelorum: Great Britain hath been from the beginning of the World Royall, and Her Government like that of the Hea∣vens. Therefore, all these premises being weighed in the balance of true judge∣ment you shall do well, and wisely to re∣collect your selfs, and call in your hope∣full young King, whose Title your con∣sciences do acknowledge to be unquestio∣nable, otherwise it is not onely improbable but impossible for England to be Her self again, and to be setled in any stable Go∣vernment which may reach to posterity; you may wind up your wits as high as you can, you may consult with your first, se∣cond, and third thoughts, but will never be able to settle a fixed Government, you will be still at a losse, your Debates will be like a skeyn of ravell'd threed, you will be in a labyrinth of confusions, and the end of one, will be still the beginning of ano∣ther.
To conclude, the current and concur∣rent opinion of all Ministers of State here both Forren and Florentine is, that if you do not make a timely application to your King, you will have all the Princes of Christen∣dom about your ears, and what a sad cala∣mitous Country, what an Aceldama will England be then? Therefore if there be a true Patriot, and publick soul amongst you, if there be ever any drops of true English bloud running in your veins, or the least spark of nationall fire and affections glow∣ing in your bosoms toward your own dear Country, prevent these imminent dangers, and invite your King by discreet and mode∣rate proposals; The gallant Samnit General could tell the Romans who had over pow∣red them, that if they gave them easie and gentle capitulations they would perform them, but if they would tye them to too high and strict terms, they would observe them no longer then they cold have oppor∣tunity to break them. Touching the affairs of Italy, we are like to have a general blessed peace this side the Alpes, and Lombardy who hath been so pit∣tifully harass'd a long time, and hath had
her face so often scratch'd, is in a fair way to recover her former beauty; Signor Giovanni Palavicino, and D. Lorenzo Minuccio convey their most affectionate respects unto you, and so doth Your Entire, and Faithfull Servant. Florence this 12th. of March, 1659. Ther are divers other large Peeces tending to the same Subject, which shall be published in the second Tome. FINIS.
